<title>Workshop on Maintenance and Development of the Rangeland</title>
<section>1</section>
Executive summary
Back to contents - Next file
The workshop was held in Amman, Jordan from 3 to 6 April 1993, in response to the kind invitation of the Jordanian Ministry of Municipal, Rural and Environmental Affairs. It was jointly organized by the Secretariat General of the League of Arab States and the. FAO Regional Office for the Near East. The objective of the workshop was to explore national and regional efforts for the conservation and sustainable development of rangelands in the Arab Region and to highlight its role in combating desertification.
The workshop programme comprised regional papers prepared by ACSAD and FAO/RNEA, sub-regional papers covering North Africa, the Middle East and the Horn of Africa, and country papers presented by participants from member countries. A field trip was organized by the Jordanian Ministry of Municipal, Rural and Environmental Affairs to Ma'in Pilot Grazing Perimeter to witness a viable example of range rehabilitation and management in collaboration with beneficiary communities.
The participants of the workshop achieved consensus on several recommendations the most prominent of which were the need to:
* give priority to develop high potential areas;
* give additional attention to socio-economic and resource surveys and research programmes pertinent to grazing lands;
* promote regional cooperation to conserve and develop rangelands;
* revive, document and utilize Arabic heritage in the fields of range resource conservation and development; and
* settle land tenure and grazing rights issues.
Specifically the workshop recommended:
* preparation of appropriate methodologies for vegetation mapping. measurement and regular monitoring. Concurrently, this should be supported by the formation of a regional task force to prepare guidelines and requirements for achieving this goal;
* organization of an expert consultation on the utilization of remote-sensing techniques to monitor and evaluate range conditions and to assess the state of desertification in the Arab Region: and
* implementation of a comprehensive project on conservation of biological diversity and its utilization for development and protection of various ecosystems in the Region
1. Introduction
Background and Objectives
The Workshop on Maintenance and Development of Rangelandand its Role in Combating Desertification in the Arab Region was held from 3 to 6 April 1993 in Amman, Jordan. It was jointly organized, within the framework of the programme of the Council of Arab Ministers of Environment, by the Secretariat General League of Arab States {LAS} and the Regional Office for the Near East of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO/RNEA). Both the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the Arab Centre for Studies of Arid Zones and Drylands (ACSAD) collaborated in the planning and implementation of this activity. The workshop was hosted by Jordanian Ministry of Municipal, Rural and Environmental Affairs.
Background and Objectives
Rangeland is an important resource in most Arab countries in view of its social, economic and environmental roles. A good proportion of the population in these countries traditionally subsist on, or derive most of their income from, various range-based livestock production systems. Recently, rangeland has been subjected to increasing grazing pressure, encroachment of other land use types and adverse effects of ill-conceived interventions with the result that rangeland degradation and desertification became common features of large stretches of land.
The workshop provided a forum for exchanging views and sharing experiences among experts and officials from countries of the Region, regional organizations and centres, facilitated identification of common problems and constraints, and provided the opportunity to discuss possible solutions and pertinent interventions for areas with similar socio-economic and environmental conditions.
The purpose of organizing the workshop was to explore regional and national efforts for the conservation and sustainable development of rangelands in the Arab Region and highlight their role in combating desertification. Specifically, the workshop aimed:
* facilitating the exchange of views on the theme of the workshop among experts representing their countries and various organizations and centres operating in the Region;
* initiating viable discussions between national and international experts so for reaching an agreement on policies and prompt actions to adopt an integrated approach for rangeland development; and
* promoting the establishment of an Arab cooperative network on sustainable rangeland development and desertification control.
2. Opening ceremony
The meeting was addressed by the representative of the League of Arab States, Mr. 1. Ben Barka, who drew attention to the fact that the workshop was being held under this year programme of the Council of Arab Ministers of Environment, and provided an excellent opportunity for bringing together distinguished Arab Experts representing their countries, regional and international organizations, for exchanging views and experiences in combating desertification, and rangeland degradation, as well as on possible interventions to arrest this phenomenon and enhance sustainable development of rangelands.
The representative of FAO Regional Office for the Near East, Dr. N. E. Gaddes, emphasized FAO's leading role in the field of sustainable development of drylands. He stressed on the need for enhancing cooperation among countries and between them and various organizations operating in the Region in order to implement comprehensive and sustainable rangelands development programmes that would also check rangeland degradation and reduce the rate of desertification.
In his speech, His Excellency Dr. A. Tabeeshat, Minister of Municipalities, Rural and Environmental Affairs, welcomed the participants and outlined efforts of the Jordanian Government in the fields of environmental conservation and for combating desertification. He hoped that the workshop would propose practical and effective measures to enhance present programmes and pave the way for further actions that would assist countries of the Region in their untiring efforts to check desertification and rehabilitate degraded rangelands.
<section>2</section>
3. The workshop
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A) Regional Papers
B) Sub-regional papers
C) Country papers
D) Field trip
A) Regional Papers
Two regional papers on "Rangelands in the Arab Region: Their Condition and Means for Maintenance and Development" and "A Systems Perspective for Sustainable Dryland Development in the Near East Region" were presented by Dr. M. A. Shourbagi, Director of Plant Studies, ACSAD and Dr. N. E. Gaddes, Regional Range Management and Fodder Production Officer FAO/RNEA, respectively. The first paper summarized factors that caused desertification of rangelands, the most important of which being excessive utilization and irrational use of land resources. Realizing the seriousness of the situation and the adverse efforts of rangeland degradation, countries of the Region directed more effects towards rangelands development, desertification control and environmental conservation However, decertified areas were increasing, as causative factors remained unchecked. Productivity of range and crop lands declined with serious consequences on agricultural output, soil and water resources, and on
Arab Food Security Programme. The paper proposed a strategy for combating desertification of rangelands based on increasing their primary production, maintaining optimum rangelivestock population and development of other feed resources. It emphasized the need to adopt comprehensive and flexible range conservation and desertification control activities within the context of an overall environmental conservation and management programme. The paper attached great importance to the development and implementation of effective extension-education programmes and strengthening national institutions.
The second paper indicated that the dryland development approach was intended to guide and stimulate the adoption of sustainable agricultural development in the drylands of the Near East, with the aim of encouraging forms of land use and resources utilization that were both sustainable and capable of alleviating poverty and arresting the process of land degradation. It stressed on the need to meet certain conditions as pre-requisite for orderly dryland development. These included political will, marketing and infra-structure, settlement of land tenure and grazing rights; and community participation in decision making. Population growth was expected to increase pressure on drylands to produce more agricultural output to meet a rising demand, hence the pressing need for promoting appropriate technologies to enhance dryland productivity without causing deterioration to land resources.
B) Sub-regional papers
The Workshop reviewed three sub-regional papers on the maintenance and development of rangelands in North Africa, the Middle East and the Horn of Africa.
The first paper reviewed the causes of disruption of ecosystems and the resulting imbalance in resource utilization patterns. These were closely linked to the socio-economic changes experienced in Magreb Countries and to production means and technologies. Rangeland improvement was attempted through various interventions as seeding, fertilization, range protection, grazing management and creation of forage reserves. Attempts were also made and programmes initiated to promote afforestation, rangeland rehabilitation, and soil and water conservation. Several trials and studies on conservation and development have been completed in North Africa and the Arab Region. Future prospects for natural resources development and for combating desertification require adoption of holistic approach and of practices that can ensure achievement of goals at both national and Arab Region levels. The paper emphasized the need to give more attention to range utilization practices. and recognizing
community rights.
The second paper reviewed the situation in the Middle East Countries. Increased human and livestock population and the lack of improved range productivity accentuated competition for land and resulted in a decline in available grazing. Rising demand for animal products led to excessive utilization of the grazing resources, and consequently triggered degeneration and desertification. This critical situation in the countries of the Region calls for sound socio-economic planning that would take into consideration all projections for population, economic growth and in per capita income. Consideration should be given to prevailing competition for land used for agriculture. grazing and forestry and water resources. The paper emphasized that pastoral activities are traditional with very little investment in flocks arid practically no investment in grazing resources. Hence. reviving hema and adoption of other systems that would require investment should be preceded by sufficient
efforts of extension-education and close consultation with bedouins.
The third paper drew attention to land degradation due to the cultivation of marginal lands and misuse of land resources, leading to accelerated desertification. This has been reflected as economic loss, disruption of social structure and threatening of biological diversity in affected areas. Environmental factors, human activities, political decisions and ill-conceived development programmes have resulted in disturbing the balance between available resources and traditional land uses. They also weakened traditional systems of use and control of community resources. Many of the programmes and interventions aiming at the sound management and improvement of grazing resources have failed or have limited impact as they were introduced without sufficient understanding of the needs and aspirations of pastoral groups, and irrespective of their concurrence with plans. The paper emphasized the need to formulate an acceptable and practical land tenure policy that would take into
consideration traditional grazing rights and recent environmental and socio-economic changes and would give pastoral groups and rural communities some title to the land. The paper concluded that although rangelands will continue to be an important resource, purely pastoral populations will continue to decline due to migration induced by droughts, desertification, security reasons and due to the tendency of young generations of pastoral origin to look for jobs outside their traditional areas.
C) Country papers
The Jordanian paper reviewed forms of rangeland misuse, resulting in deterioration of the vegetation cover and triggering soil erosion leading to the desertification of large stretches of land. The paper also reviewed the factors of rangeland degradation, including ploughing to re-institute right of land or for growing a barley crop, early grazing, collection of firewood and mining activities. Constraints to rangeland development included the lack of range legislation enforcement the erroneous understanding that communal grazing is an un-owned resource, and shortage of funds. Government efforts were geared to reforestation, rangelands conservation and management, surface water resources development and establishment of nature reserves. In conclusion, the paper called for the adoption of an integrated approach to rangeland development.
In United Arab Emirates, increasing attention, has been given to irrigated fodder production to supply livestock needs. The use of brackish water in a hot and arid environment accelerated land salinization. Areas affected by salinity were devoted to grow salt-tolerant forages such as Rhodes grass.
The representative of Tunisia summarized his country's achievements in the area of rangeland development. including the introduction of legislation authorizing the Forestry Administration to conserve, improve and manage grazing land. Some areas were planted to fodder shrubs for increasing forage production and creating grazing reserves.
The representative of the Sudan reviewed the major factors behind rangeland degradation. These included fire, cultivation of marginal lands, overgrazing, drought and desertification. Reference was made to feed deficit if livestock depend only on rangelands - a situation corrected by the utilization of other sources of feed. The paper drew attention to the constraint imposed by policies that do not allow government agencies to be involved in fields of production that should be handled by the private sector. An interesting and relevant project in the country is "Integrated Resource Management for Desertification Control" which has the objective of developing a selfsustained locally-organized natural resource management system.
The Syrian representative gave an account of the status of the steppes and the organization of cooperatives for sheep production and rangelands improvement based on traditional hema system. This would ensure rangeland conservation, application of proper grazing practices, and range improvement by planting fodder shrubs. This system has been supported by suitable legislation and financing organization. The paper described environmental degradation resulting from destruction of forests and grazingland that led to soil erosion and creation of mobile sand dunes. Efforts are being made to regenerate vegetation cover in order to stabilize soil in affected areas. Steps for establishing wildlife reserves have also been initiated to protect endangered animal and plant species. The hema system should be expanded as a measure to protect and manage grazingland, prohibit ploughing of marginal lands, establish range reserves; and provide alternative sources of energy for domestic use.
In Oman, range and woodland resources are threatened by early grazing, overgrazing, destruction of vegetation cover by off-road driving of vehicles, excessive lopping of woody species and encroachment by other land uses including urban and rural settlement. Activities to conserve Dhofar mountain vegetation and to rehabilitate degraded sites are conducted through both popular participation and direct government efforts. A trial to encourage grassland protection and deferment from grazing during the monsoon was carried out in collaboration with herders. Range extension-education campaigns targeting herders and other land users were organized to assist in harnessing degradation of land resources. The paper emphasized the need to enact appropriate legislation on range and forest resources. It proposed that use should be made of traditional management systems and herders experience in natural resource conservation for the implementation of environmental protection programme and
adoption of viable land use policies.
In Egypt ploughing of grazing land to grow cereals. overgrazing and wind erosion that results in sand dune formation are prominent factors of rangelands degradation. However, an additional adverse phenomenon is the rising water table leading to salinization of irrigated land. An agricultural development and environment protection project is being executed in the north western coast of Egypt for checking desertification and initiating community development programme for the conservation and rational use of land resources. The project would also assist bedouins by creating economic activities that can encourage them to stick to their areas and refrain from migration to urban centre.
In Yemen, range resource conservation and development programmes were isolated attempts that covered very limited areas. Land degradation and desertification were caused by sand dune encroachment into productive land, salinization, and vegetation removal resulting in soil erosion particularly on slopes. The implications of these processes on the range resource are reduced productivity. increasing cost of maintaining livestock, poor livestock condition and reduced animal production. The paper categorized the major problems that confront rangeland development as follow: environmental (reflected in aridity}, insufficient efforts and resources, lack of wellconceived extension-education programmes, and uncoordinated activities of the concerned departments that waste resources and dilute efforts. The paper recommended several actions to improve and increase rangelands productivity through specialized programmes or as components of projects.
D) Field trip
Participants had the opportunity to visit Ma'in Pilot Grazing Perimeter, where a holistic resource management approach was adopted. Participants have been able to witness a viable trial of how a degraded site was rehabilitated and managed in close collaboration with bedouins and settled communities who have traditional right of use of the area. The officer-in-charge of the cooperative described the various interventions undertaken in the area, i.e. controlled grazing, planting of fodder shrubs, reseeding and water resource development.
Several positive indicators were recognized as improvement of the plant cover and forage productivity, reduced erosion hazard and enhancement of biological diversity in the area. This favourable condition was also reflected on improved animal production and bedouins income. These positive results encouraged other livestock owners to apply for membership of the cooperative. This pilot trial has underlined that rangeland development would be possible and could be economically viable if a holistic approach is adopted. It should be based on popular participation and the application of practices and techniques acceptable to beneficiaries and in harmony with local traditions and experience.
<section>3</section>
4. The issues
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Deliberations and comments during the workshop resulted in the identification of several issues of common concern to participating countries and organizations. Prominent among these are the following:
1. Land tenure and grazing rights are recognized as important issues requiring immediate attention. These two related issues should be discussed and settled to the satisfaction of users according to national policies, prior to embarking on large scale rangeland development and improvement programmes. The different changes affecting land use and living conditions in rural areas, as a result of environmental and socio-political factors, have their impact on the range resource and the traditional rules and controls that regulate the utilization of this resource and determine the relation between the land and groups of users that subsist on it. Hastily adopted and implemented policies that ignored traditional tenure rights without providing effective alternatives lead to further complications, namely encroachment of other uses on rangelands, increased grazing pressure, accelerated misuse of resources and ultimately land degradation. All these changes, conflicting land uses and
the complex nature of grazingland tenure necessitate consideration of this issue with a view to formulating modified tenure rights that can cope with the new realities, satisfy national policies and meet pastoral groups requirements.
2. Traditional pastoral institutions and readerships have an important role to play in land resources conservation and rational use. However, for the continuation of their role and in order that they can constitute officially recognized organizations, they may require modification to cope with the changes and new realities imposed by local conflicts, environmental hazards and socio-political changes. Such organizations can make the voice of pastoralists heard and assist in well-conceived pastoral development programmes and in social and cultural promotion.
3. The occurrence of drought and other environmental hazards aggravate the suffering and harsh conditions to which pastoral groups are exposed. Those who own small herds are most vulnerable. Planning departments and relevant institutions should develop their abilities of early warning action against drought and other hazards. In order to reduce the negative impacts of such phenomena, development plans should provide more assistance and give sufficient attention to the creation of non-pastoral employment opportunities and alternative sources of income that will enable devastated pastoralists to obtain food, shelter and energy.
4. Involvement of pastoralists and bedouins and their full participation in conservation and development programmes are absolutely crucial for the ultimate achievement of goals. Overlooking these groups during the preparation of development plans and implementation of top-down type of interventions are regarded as prominent causes of failure of such programmes.
5. Land degradation has taken place and is increasing in magnitude, inspite of efforts exerted by the governments of the Region to rehabilitate and restore affected areas. Although factors such as cultivation of marginal lands and destruction of vegetative cover are widely accused as causative factors. yet the weakening or abolition of traditional institutions that guard and control land utilization. and the poor demarcation of land responsibility have encouraged misuse and accelerated degradation
6. Coordination of activities of the different government bodies dealing with rangelands, livestock anti natural resources conservation and development is regarded essential. Resources and efforts are effectively utilized by adopting the integrated approach, where various interrelated disciplines collaborate to implement specific programmes or tasks. To achieve this modalities a betterenabling framework should be developed to ensure close and effective links and coordinated efforts.
7. The danger of losing forage species germplasm and biological diversity due to rapid land degradation and the large scale destruction of vegetative cover are matters of concern. Reports of disappearance and scarcity of several plant and animal species indicate the alarming magnitude of losses in genetic resources. Although awareness about endangered species and the need to give more attention to the conservation of biological diversity and plant genetic resources is increasing yet efforts done to date are meager.
8. Countries of the Region utilize different methodologies for rangeland monitoring and vegetation mapping - a reflection of the influence of various schools. Because of this resulting data and maps do not lend themselves for comparison or development purposes. This situation confirms the need for immediate action to rectify this disparity and to enhance standardization of methodologies.
9. Space and time differences have resulted in wide variability in local names of plants in the Arab countries. Unfortunately, erosion of traditional knowledge lead to new generations of pastoralists and bedouins becoming ignorant about the names of plants in their environment including those essential for the survival of their stock. A thorough review of these names and adoption of an acceptable system of nomenclature seems appropriate.
10. In many countries, legal framework for range conservation and development is lacking. In recognition of this important issue adoption of appropriate legislation to protect and develop rangelands and control encroachment by other uses is required.
11. Marginal lands, one of the most fragile ecosystems, have been subjected to ploughing and indiscriminate vegetation removal resulting in large scale degradation. Pressure on this fragile ecosystem is accentuated by rapid growth of both human and livestock populations. Development of integrated crop-livestock systems, encouraging the use of shallow soil cultivation and considering other non-destructive uses of land, as wildlife and natural reserves have all been highlighted as rational uses of marginal lands.
<section>4</section>
5. Major conclusions and recommendations
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The workshop confirmed the need to confront the prevailing rangeland degradation due to irrational human activities, environmental factors, limited results generated by various programmes, lack of funds and insufficient attention devoted to this resource in the past few decades.
Range resource development programmes have been limited to production aspects without giving adequate consideration to socio-economic and human development. This very same element is also a major cause of deterioration either due to the high rate of population growth or the illconceived programmes that concentrated on meeting immediate demands without sufficient planning and efforts to accommodate future requirements.
Accordingly, sustainable rangeland development can only be achieved through comprehensive remedial programmes planned and implemented through collaborative efforts of all parties concerned within the framework of clearly defined policy and well-designed methodology.
The Workshop recommended that:
1. Efforts for rangelands maintenance and development should concentrate on high potential areas that are more responsive to investment. Development of such areas ensures better and quicker environmental and socio-economic returns on both natural resources base and dependent communities;
2. More attention should be directed to socio-economic and resource surveys, and research programmes that deal with grazinglands; their potential and state of degradation;
3. The collection, preservation of their germplasm and re-introduction of endangered plant species should be given priority;
4. Policies, interventions and introduced technologies should be tailored to suit local conditions and realities of pastoral areas without ignoring their effects on the environment and local communities;
5. Universities, research institutions, researchers and graduate students should be encouraged and motivated to give greater attention to rangeland maintenance and management. Initiation of joint and collaborative programmes among such institutions should be encouraged;
6. More attention should be given to the rational use of grazing resources taking into account environmental conditions. Grazing should be controlled and regulated according to actual rangelands productivity. Such efforts should also comprise settlement and regulation of land tenure and grazing rights and creation of local institutions that can ensure collective commitment towards development and conservation of these areas. In addition, complementarily between range, cultivated lands forests and other forage resources will be achieved within agro-silvi-pastoral systems consistent with conservation and rational utilization of resources in the different agro-ecological zones;
7. Close supervision and regular monitoring of she range ecosystem should he exercized in order to protect it from dumping of dangerous and toxic refuse or radio-active materials which can ultimately result in the transfer of such materials through the food chain to human beings;
8. Appropriate measures and precautions should be taken to enhance contribution and participation of all sectors of the society in environmental, developmental, socio-economic and cultural programmes as well as services and activities designed to benefit pastoral areas;
9. More attention should be given to institutions, staff and community leaders involved in all aspects of development of grazing areas to upgrade their knowledge by organizing suitable training courses on conservation and sustainable development of rangelands. They should also be allowed appropriate access to relevant technologies;
10. Marginal lands should be used for mixed farming, using progressive and environmentally-sound practices so that forages and fodder shrubs can be an integral component of this agricultural system. This will facilitate establishment of an efficient agro-pastoral system in which animal production becomes a major component;
11. Integration of livestock and fodder in crop rotations should be promoted in both irrigated and dryland farming areas in a way that will ensure production of additional forage and accommodation of part of the range livestock to reduce grazing pressure on rangelands and to improve the efficiency of agricultural production;
12. Bilateral, sub-regional, regional and international cooperation programmes should be encouraged and use should be made of their favourable impacts to enhance rangeland conservation and development; and
13. Ways and means should be explored to strengthen efforts done within the framework of UNEP in the occupied Arab areas of West Bank and Ghaza for the evaluation of environmental conditions and in order to arrest further deterioration.
Participants of the workshop recognize the need to support local and national efforts through the adaption of coordinated regional and international activities that are planned and implemented in collaboration with concerned institutions and regional Arab as well international organizations particularly those participating in the workshop. This should begin by:
a) Preparation of appropriate methodologies for rangeland conservation and development in the Arab countries. This should comprise vegetation measurement methodologies, vegetation mapping, regular monitoring and evaluation of components of range development plans. This will ultimately form the basis for national and international efforts regarding this issue.
Within this context, the workshop strongly support the formation of a task force consisting of FAO/RNEA, the Technical Secretariat of the Council of Arab Ministers of Environment, ACSAD and other interested parties. This group should be assigned the responsibility of preparing the general features, guidelines and requirements for achieving the above mentioned goal. It will also advise on ways and means for putting into action the recommended programme and propose sources of funding and supervision.
b) Organization of an expert consultation with the objective of utilizing remote sensing techniques to monitor and evaluate the condition of rangelands and to assess the status of desertification in the Arab countries on regular basis.
This consultation should also advise on relevant ways to establish an Arab network for utilization of remote-sensing techniques for the above mentioned activities taking into account operational units and programmes that commenced in some member countries, The workshop recommends the formation of preparatory committee from the Technical Secretariat of 