<title>Desertification and drought - extent and consequences proposal for a </title>
<section>1</section>
I. Desertification, drought and their consequences
Back to contents - Next file
Abstract
Features and factors of desertification and drought
Consequences at the local and national level
Consequences at the global level
Abstract
Desertification is a global phenomenon of land degradation which reduces the natural potential of the ecosystems and renders rural populations vulnerable to food shortages, the vagaries of weather and natural disasters. Desertification control must form an integral part of the socioeconomic development programmes, taking account of the short-term needs and long-term aspirations of the populations affected by it.
To implement these programmes, a comprehensive and participatory approach is needed, for which the keywords are: integration, concertation, land use planning, decentralisation, and lasting and flexible technical and financial assistance. The effectiveness of combating desertification depends on carefully interlocking the aspirations of the affected populations with the policy concerns of governments and technical services. This excludes both top-down and paternalistic actions, as well as demagogic actions which leave the local communities alone to define and implement activities. For a good interconnection, the local community must have sound liaison persons who are able to express their points of view and represent them effectively. Programmes and projects with a participatory and integrated approach are becoming more and more numerous. The democratization and decentralization processes now beginning in a growing number of countries, the failure of classic development
projects, the improved circulation of information, and the increase in the number of grass roots organizations - NGOs - are but a few of the factors that have helped this type of approach to emerge.
Features and factors of desertification and drought
1. Desertification, as defined in Chapter 12 of Agenda 21 and in the International Convention on Desertification, is the degradation of the land in arid, semi-arid and dry sub- humid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities. It is accompanied by a reduction in the natural potential of the land and a decrease in surface and ground water resources. But, above all, it has negative repercussions on the living conditions and economic development of the people affected by it.
2. Desertification is a worldwide phenomenon: it affects about two-thirds of the countries of the world and one-third of the earth's land surface, on which approximately one billion people live. Desertification does not concern natural deserts, and can only occur on land which is vulnerable to the desertification process.
3. The vulnerability of land to desertification is mainly due to the climate, the topography, the state of the soil, the natural vegetation, and the ways in which these resources are used.
4. Climate affects the chemical and biological deterioration of the soil and conditions water and wind erosion. The state of the soil (texture, structure and chemical and biological properties) is the major vulnerability factor, particularly in the dry sub-humid zones where the influence of climatic factors is less predominant. Natural and cultivated vegetation plays an essential role in protecting the soil, particularly trees and bushes which, due to their long life and their capacity to develop powerful root systems, guarantee effective protection against soil degradation. Their disappearance considerably increases the vulnerability of the land to desertification. Lastly, even under the same climatic conditions, topography, soils, vegetation, and cover status, and with the same population density, the vulnerability of the land to desertification could vary widely depending on the land-use system and human activities.
5. Droughts occur frequently in the areas affected by desertification, and are generally a natural feature of the climate of such regions. The relations between desertification and drought on the one hand, and human influence on the other, are unknown and complex. Occasional droughts (due to seasonal or inter-year variations in rainfall) and long-term severe droughts can both be caused or aggravated by the influence of man on the environment (the reduction in vegetation cover, the change in the Albedo effect, changes in the local climate, the greenhouse effect, etc.). Human activities can, therefore, accelerate desertification and aggravate its negative consequences on people. Furthermore, land degradation can hasten the effects of drought by reducing the chances of local people to face difficult, dry periods.
6. Climatic disturbances may be both a consequence and a cause of desertification. The destruction of the natural grass and woody vegetation cover in dry lands affects the topsoil temperature and air humidity, and thus influences the movements of atmospheric masses and rainfall. Furthermore, the destruction of soil cover encourages wind erosion.
7. Although the cycles of drought and climatic disturbances can contribute to the development of desertification, it is mainly caused by overgrazing, land clearance, over-exploitation of cultivated and natural lands, and by generally using land in a way that is inappropriate to local conditions. Human activities connected with agriculture, livestock and forestry production vary widely according to the country, type of society, land-use strategies, and the production and conservation technologies employed. In many cases, traditional and sustainable rainfed agricultural methods (food crops and alternating fallow periods) and pastoral practices are no longer suitable for present-day conditions. Strong demographic pressure has increased the demand on land resources, which is aggravated when cash-crop farming takes over lands used for subsistence farming and pastures used by nomadic peoples. However, the impact of human societies on natural resources does not depend solely on the
demographic density, and the notions of "carrying capacity" and "critical threshold" must be handled with care. There are many examples to demonstrate that these criteria can vary enormously, depending on the strategies and the technologies used by the people.
8. The severeness of desertification depends on factors which vary from one region, country, or year to another. These include:
(i) the severity of the climatic conditions during the period considered (particularly in terms of annual rainfall);
(ii) population pressure and the standard of living of the people involved;
(iii) the level of the country's development, and the quality of the preventive measures taken.
Consequences at the local and national level
9. By impoverishing the natural potential of ecosystems, desertification also reduces agricultural yields and make them less predictable. It therefore has a bearing on the food security of people living in affected areas. In order to attend to their most urgent needs, the people develop a survival strategy which, in turn, aggravates desertification and impedes development.
Major Climates
World soil resources
10. The most immediate and frequent consequence of these survival attitudes is the increased overexploitation of accessible natural resources. This strategy is often accompanied by a breakdown in solidarity within the community and within families, which encourages individualism and exclusion. It often leads to conflicts between different ethnic groups, families and individuals.
11. Lastly, desertification considerably heightens the effects of climatic crises (droughts) and political crises (wars), regularly leading to migration, suffering and even death to hundreds of thousands of people worldwide.
12. These consequences, in turn, weaken the economies of the developing countries affected by desertification, particularly when they have no other resources than their agriculture. This is particularly true in the case of African countries in the dry zones: their economies are unable to offset the increasingly serious effects of desertification, and they have to deal with emergency situations created by drought and desertification. The increasing debt burden also reduces their possibility of making productive investment in order to break the spiral of underdevelopment.
LES DEUX FACES DE LA DESERTIFICATION
Selon qu'on privilegie les dimensions physiques (climat, sols...) ou humaines (environnement economique et evolution des societes) de la desertification, on mettra en avant des faisceaux de cause, et de solutions, radicalement differents.
Ainsi, interpreter la desertification comme un phenomene climatique conduit a stinterroger sur les causes des secheresses puis sur le role des evolutions globales ou regionales du climat, enfin sur les causes anthropiques de ces evolutions. La desertification n'apparaitra que comme un épiphénomène des changements climatiques globaux.
Symétriquement, si l' on est attentif aux mutations des sociétés et des économies, les crises répétées que traversent les zones sèches apparaitront comme un résumé frappant des situations, des contradictions et des impasses rencontrées dans bien des pays en développement. Des lors, la question de la desertification risque de se diluer dans la problématique du développement durable.
On peut analyser ainsi l'échec de la première conférence des Nations unies sur la desertification, a Nairobi, en 1977. En affirmant avoir pour objectif immédiat de "prévenir et d'arrêter l'avancée du désert et, la ou il est possible, remettre en état les terres désertifiées pour les rendre a la production", en privilégiant les aménagements hydrauliques, les mesures de conservation des sols ou de réhahilitation des parcours de pâturage, en créant des "ceintures vertes" , son Plan d'action commettait une erreur de perspective en identifiant la desertification a l"'avancee du désert", en négligeant de nombreux aspects socio-économiques et en mettant trop l'accent sur la restauration des zones désertifiées au détriment de la gestion des zones sèches.
Il s'agit donc de faire reconnaître la desertification comme un phénomène complexe et spécifique, bien que non isole, ou l'action de l'homme le dispute aux causes climatiques.
Extrait du Courrier de la Planete
No.20. dec janv. 1994-95
Countries affected by drought in Africa.
13. But desertification can also lead to some changes in certain behaviour patterns. These include, in particular, the attitude of the women who have to cope with the problems caused by the absence of the men, who have left to seek work elsewhere. The extra burden of work and responsibility which the women have to bear have two consequences:
(i) women are now demanding greater rights to the land, particularly the land they manage themselves. Women are gradually gaining the approval of their communities and are forcing land title rules to change. The combat against desertification should not ignore or under-estimate this new power relationship;
(ii) women are becoming increasingly aware of the need to space childbirth. In many places in the world, however, they frequently come up against cultural and religious taboos, the disapproval of the men, and reluctance on the part of their governments to support them.
14. While the survival attitudes caused by desertification have often led to a decline in traditional agricultural know-how, they have conversely encouraged the development of consciousness, particularly relating to the environment and its conservation. The microprojects that have been implemented in many places over the past 15 years have made it possible to build up a store of knowledge allowing for the implementation of new approaches. At the same time, in many regions, the rural people's perception of their environment and the priority they give to a better relationship with it have changed. Increasingly, rural people are realizing that:
(i) the fragile environment on which they depend for their survival is being neglected or over-exploited, and it is now necessary to rehabilitate it and manage it sustainably; and
(ii) the environment belongs primarily to them, and they must take the responsibility for the land and organize themselves (in groups, cooperatives, village development associations and other local associations).
15. Greater awareness at the highest level of governments has made possible the adoption of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and the commitment by the Heads of State of most countries in the world to enter a partnership contract to effectively combat desertification by taking a participatory approach.
Consequences at the global level
16. Desertification also has consequences at the global level, primarily because of the influence on carbon exchange. The large amount of carbon stored in the vegetation in the dry zones, averaging about 30 tonnes per hectare, decreases when the vegetation is depleted or disappears. Carbon-rich soils, frequently found in dry zones, store a substantial amount of this element (nearly half the total quantity of carbon is stored in the organic matter in the soil, much more than is found in the world's vegetation): the destruction of these soils has a very powerful effect on the carbon cycle and boosts the greenhouse effect as a result of the release of carbon.
17. Another consequence of desertification at both local and global levels is the reduction in biodiversity, as it contributes to the destruction of the habitats of animal and vegetal species and micro-organisms. It furthers the genetic erosion of plant varieties and species living in fragile ecosystems. It is extremely difficult to assess this loss because of our incomplete knowledge of the features, location and economic importance of the biodiversity of dry zones. A substantial part of this is still largely unknown to scientists, although local populations are very familiar with it. Reducing biodiversity directly affects the food and health of the local people who rely on a large number of animal and plant species. It is also a loss to the whole of mankind. Since many genetic strains of cultivated plants which form the basis of the food and health of the world's population originate in dry zones, their disappearance can jeopardize the possibility of combating specific
diseases or epidemics.
The twelve megacentres of cultivated plants
18. Lastly, desertification directly reduces the world's fresh water reserves. It has a direct impact on river flow and the level of ground water tables. The reduction of river flow rates and the lowering of ground water levels leads to the silting up of estuaries, the encroachment of salt water into water tables, and the pollution of water by suspended particles and salinization, which, in turn, decreases the biodiversity of fresh and brackish water, reduces fish interferes with the operation of reservoirs and irrigation canals, increases coastal erosion and adversely affects human and animal health. Lastly, desertification leads to the accelerated and often uncontrolled exploitation of underground fossil water reserves, and their gradual depletion.
<section>2</section>
II. The extent of desertification
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
19. The complexity of the causes of desertification and the diversity of its effects make it difficult to evaluate its magnitude with any degree of acuracy, and estimates of the areas affected or threatened by it are a matter of controversy. The different notions of irreversibility in terms of the timescale are also a matter of disagreement among scientists.
20. Despite the modernization of observation methods using satellite imagery and of data analysis using computers, there are still many uncertainties at the global, regional and national level about the causes, the extent, and the seriousness of desertification. For those who manage natural resources, these uncertainties are a handicap to proper planning. They also limit the effectiveness of early warning systems with regard to agricultural production and disasters such as locust infestations.
21. It is above all at the national and local level that information is urgently needed. The results of analyses of high spatial and spectrum resolution satellite imagery, such as Spot or Landsat images, combined with high-frequency low resolution satellite, data such as Meteosat and NOAA data, can be developed by geographic information systems and completed by results obtained from new methods of data collection on the ground using navigation satellites (GPS). These methods, the development of which is supported by FAO, make it possible to observe, evaluate and monitor both the big-physical and the socioeconomic aspects of desertification.
<section>3</section>
III. An integrated participatory approach to combating desertiflcation
Back to contents - Previous file
Underlying principles
Underlying principles
22. Combating desertification is a battle for life which must form an integral part of the socio-economic development programmes for the affected areas. The key aspect is to seek the full participation of the local people. This approach, which is often called global and participatory, is based on five main principles:
(i) The principle of integration affirms the need to better provide for solidarity between generations and between local users of natural resources and other inhabitants on our planet. It is necessary to harmonize the satisfaction of the short- and medium-term needs of the local people with their long-term aspirations. The former are often expressed quite clearly: food, health, education, incomes. Meeting the second set of needs, generally less clearly identified and more confusedly expressed, include the protection, rehabilitation and sound use of existing natural resources. The responses to both sets of needs are interdependent. Meeting immediate needs will prove futile and short-lived if the resources of the local area are not improved and protected; conversely, developing the land and its resources will be obstructed if immediate needs are not being met. This principle of integration also provides for combining traditional knowledge with recent experimental knowledge
of comparable ecological and socio-economic environments.
(ii) The principle of concertation involves the participation of local people in decision-making, and is expressed at several levels:
* internal concertation within the local community enables them to work out their own decisions, organize actions, manage their land, and solve conflicts between members. This form of concertation requires a village organization. Local structures which are weak in terms of their ability to represent the population, their authority (for example for organizing land-use policy), and their resources (the size of the municipal budget) constitute a major obstacle to controlling desertification;
* concertation among communities is necessary when they belong to the same watershed or use the same space or the same resources. It makes it possible for them not only to settle disputes but also to organize mutual aid, exchange experiences, and set up joint organisations for providing credit or managing the land, etc. The implementation of these structures allows for concrete expression of solidarity among those who use the same area (for example, the solidarity between the upstream and downstream users of the same watershed). Their creation is facilitated when the grass roots communities, which form what could be the cells, have internal solidarity themselves; these structures can be set up more easily if there is an appropriate legal framework (cooperatives, offices, agencies, etc.) and if they have the possibility of obtaining financial aid;
* concertation between the local communities and regional and national institutions must be organized by the government. The quality of this concertation depends on the political organization of the State and the support services for development; if there is poor coordination between the work being carried out by different technical services, there will be a wastage of government resources and of the resources of the local communities involved, making it impossible to mobilize synergies between actions which, in principle, complement one another. If the situation is to improve, technical services must be better organized, and the working conditions and professional skills of its agents must also evolve;
* concertation among development aid organizations (government technical services, NGOs, etc.) makes it possible to avoid contradictions among programmes and to optimize the use of their facilities and the effects of the support they provide.
(iii) The principle of a spatial planning approach is of fundamental importance to ensure consistency of actions. Conceiving regional and national development as a mere juxtaposition of local land development programmes a dangerous approach, and for three reasons:
* it is not always possible to act on all the lands at one and the same time, mainly because of a lack of financial resources and personnel. It is necessary to proceed in stages within the framework of logical (and concerted) programming, beginning by test zones. The purpose of this approach is to enable the officials of technical organizations and the leaders of the communities concerned to accumulate experience. These pilot actions will then be exploited on other lands by a joint effort on the part of the technical services and the leaders of the people living on the test lands. Desertification control requires a set of innovations to be designed and disseminated, particularly with regard to natural resource management techniques. In this field, success depends on selected actions in space (designing innovation is facilitated by a judicious choice of pilot lands, making maximum use of local dynamics) and in time (the action must be envisaged for the long term, because a
society can only appropriate an innovation at the slow pace of their social dynamics);
* the dissemination of innovations designed under local pilot projects (test plans) makes it necessary to develop land management actions which are designed at the regional level. Actions must be defined to make it possible to better structure the space (for example, by capacity-building), encouraging exchanges (improving communications), removing regional economic or land tenure constraints, etc. Consistency must be ensured between these actions and those defined at the national level discussed below;
* every community also forms part of a broader community. It entertains relations with other communities, with regional and national organizations responsible for fostering development, and in more general terms with its technical, social and economic environment. The influence of and the pressure exercised by all these various elements which make up the environment of that community, may contradict the actions undertaken to control desertification.
(iv) The principle of decentralizing decision-making powers and the resources needed to exercise those powers is essential for the success of desertification control activities. At their respective levels, the local and regional structures must be able to play their respective technical and policy-making roles. If the "partners" at this level are weak, this leads the organizations responsible for combating desertification to work directly "on" the "local populations" and makes any talk of the vital need for participation rather theoretical. The participatory approach needs the existence of a balanced relationship of forces between the national, regional and local structures. Controlling desertification is, above all, a question of social dynamics, which implies the existence of a well-structured and coherent social fabric. But strengthening local and regional structures is a long-term action, while desertification control demands urgent responses. In this transitional
phase, regional and national services responsible for coordinating desertification control are needed. Their task will be to ensure that the initiatives and viewpoints of the local and regional structures are taken into account when working out the actions to be taken, monitoring them and coordinating them, and ensuring continuity of financial and technical support.
(v) The principle of sustainable aid and flexible intervention is important in the fields of rural development and desertification control. Sustainability requires that governments and international funding agencies be committed in the long term, and that they provide funds according to the phasing of national planning. Under the Convention, this principle is called the partnership agreement. The requirement of flexible intervention has two components:
* flexible technical assistance to be supplied to communities for adapting action programmes to changing needs and local contexts; and
* flexible financial and accounting procedures, which must specifically provide financial support for the requests and initiatives of the local communities for which provision was not initially made.
23. In the final analysis, the participatory approach is a global approach before being a codified method. Its primary aim is to encourage the participation of the people. Its key words are: integration, concertation, spatial development, decentralization, sustainability, and flexibility of technical and financial assistance. The evaluation of desertification control actions being conducted by numerous developing countries over the past ten years confirms the relevance of this approach.
Local Collective Action Conditions in the Sahel
... In many contemporary Sahelian communities, local political conditions render long term collective activities impossible...
... Implications for participatory renewable natural resource management on a collective basis are devastating. In such milieux, local political conditions dictate that villagers cannot, for lack of effective local political frameworks, jointly protect and culture village woodlots, live fencing or windbreaks during critical initial years until they become established. They cannot as a group police woodstock or pasture use on village lands. They cannot develop and systematically maintain watershed management by collective action over the lands of all holders in a single watershed. Joint soil conservation operations and the like are impossible where these depend on the capacity to enforce collective decisions, because that capacity does not exist...
Private Rights in Trees... The current system of national ownership and subsidiary usufructuary rights could be replaced by village, quarter or individual ownership of specific parts of the woodstock (woodlots, trees located on fields, common bushlands, state forests, etc.). Such a tree tenure system assumes the more direct property rights would give userowners a strong incentive to control exploitation and provide for adequate future supplies.
Is this assumption justified? The evidence suggests it is in some places, but not in others...
Localizing Tree Tenure Legal Process. Privatizing tree tenure rights implies as a practical corollary localizing legal recourse and enforcement. This would markedly reduce costs to tree owners of defending their woodstock rights. A villager can generally find his quarter head, village chief, earth priest, or local Muslim cleric much more easily than he can track down a roving forestry agent. Thus authorizing local notables to handle tree tenure disputes would encourage litigation in defense of tree property rights. Such proceeding would slowly clarify those rights in local moots open to all. Decisions would be publicly debated rather than being handled in administrative proceedings between forester and violator. The latter often exclude non-interested parties. Moot proceedings would help inform locals of the new system of tree tenure rights, as well as defining content of rights.
James T. Thomson, "Participation, Local Organization, Land and Tree Tenure; Future Directions for Sahellan Forestry," in Whose Trees?": Proprietary Dimensions of Forestry eds. L. Fortmann an dJ. W. Bruce (Boulder: Estview Press 1988) lmplementation modalities
24. The effectiveness of desertification control depends on the careful interlocking of the aspirations of the people involved and the concerns of governments and technical services in this field. It excludes both actions designed in an top-down or paternalistic way, and demagogic approaches which leave the local communities alone to define and implement actions. The empowerment of local communities and their access to information are needed for the expression of their views and effective representation in the decision-making process.
25. The participatory approach described here can be implemented only if governments comply with the prerogatives of the Convention on Desertification; and combating desertification will only have an impact at the local level if the global and participatory approach is adopted.
26. There is, however, no approach which suits every situation, and which takes account of every constraint. Every country and every community must fad the best possible way of moving ahead in desertification control. The analysis of a few experiences shows that this approach can take various forms. It may be very pragmatic or highly conceptualized; it may be more open-ended or more programmed, depending on the local situation and the people involved.
27. The territorial approach (gestion de terroir) is called for in combating desertification and in guaranteeing sustainable rural development. The living environment of the rural community is often identified with village land. The geographic framework makes it possible to understand the dynamic relations between different local factors of desertification and to design activities suitable to the local situation. This framework may be divided into microwatersheds or croplands, which are homogeneous areas on a smaller scale. Conversely, the framework may be enlarged to take into account factors affecting the territories of several communities, particularly hydrographic factors. This territorial approach makes it possible to understand the socio-economic factors. It is in this socio-economic framework that the community is able to organize and manage the defence and rehabilitation of the productive natural resources in its territory. It is also in this framework that one can
understand the position and role of the various members of the community, particularly the women and the children, and support their empowerment and meet their needs.
28. The capacity of rural communities to organize themselves for the sustainable management of their own territories must not be taken away from them by development projects. Assistance is necessary to provide technical proposals that can be reproduced and controlled by the people, and to help them implement those proposals. Assistance is also needed to develop the capacity of the community to design, organize and manage the actions needed. Lastly, this assistance may take the form of direct technical intervention when the financial resources and equipment which are beyond the capactiy of the local community are necessary to remedy certain types of land degradation. The decentralized technical services of competent government departments and agencies should then be able to act.
29. Examples of programmes and projects taking a participatory and integrated approach are becoming more numerous. The democratization and decentralization processes embarked upon by a growing number of countries, the failure of classic development projects, the improvement of the circulation of information, and the increase in the number of grass roots organizations, NGOs etc., are but a few of the factors that have contributed to the emergence of this type of approach. A wide-ranging food security programme, the implementation of an early warning system, the design and implementation of local land management in Africa, and the establishment of sustainable development plans in a number of countries are just some of the initiatives that FAO has taken in conjunction with other multilateral and bilateral partners and NGOs. These initiatives will enable local populations to better confront the problems of desertification and drought.
The Forests, Trees and People Programme
Forests, Trees and People is an innovative programme which is guided by the need to improve the livel