<title>Revegetation of degraded areas, seed production and procurement of indigenous </title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Back to contents - Next file
Protection plantations with indigenous species have increased considerably in the last few years in Brazil, mainly in degraded areas of the most densely populated states. Such reforestations for nonindustrial purposes assume the association of many species in the plantations, imitating the high diversity of species existing in natural tropical forests.
Results of experimentation on mixed protection plantations are presented, using the secondary succession to separate species into ecological groups. It is considered that mixed reforestation should be similar to natural forests, which consist of a mosaic of successional stages.
Following the patterns that characterize the natural occurrence of tree species in tropical forests, it is proposed to create mixed protection reforestation models, where the requirement of amount of seed per species and per hectare is minor, and differentiated by ecological group species.
Seed production of indigenous tree species for the purpose of revegetating degraded areas must comply with the high diversity of species of tropical forests, as well as the form in which the individuals of the species occur in the forest. The separation of species into ecological groups seems to be an adequate manner of solving the problem, since the different groups present very distinct characteristics with regard to seed production.
Résumé
Les plantations de protection avec des espèces indigenes ont été considérablement développées ces derriere années au Brésil surtout dans les regions détêriorées des Etats qui ont plus grandes densités de population. Ces reboissements qui n'ont pas d'interêt industrial, utilisent ['union des plusieurs specimens dans les plantations en imitant la grande diversité d'espèces existent dans les forêts naturelles tropicales.
On considère que la plantation mixte est similaire a la fores naturelle, qui est composée d'un mosaique de stades successifs. On présente ici des résultats d'expérimentation avec des plantations mixtes de protection qui utilisent la succession secondaire pour séparer les spécimens en groupes écologiques.
En suivant les modèles qui caractérisent l'occurence naturelle des spécimens d'arbres dans les forêts tropicales, on propose de devélopper des modèles de rehabilitation forestière mixte de protection où la nécessité de quantité de semences par espèce et par hectare est minimisée et différenciée par groupe écologique.
La production de semences de specimens d'arbres natifs dans le but de réhabiliter des zones détériorées a besoin de s'adapter a la grande diversité d'espèces de la fores tropicale et d'être organisée de la même manière pour que les arbres de chaque espèce qui se developpent dans la fores.
La séparation de specimens par groupes écologiques semble être une bonne manière de résoudre le problème, puisque les différents groupes présentent des caractéristiques très diverges par rapport a la production des sémences.
Resumen
Las plantaciones de protección con espécies natives hen sido incrementadas considerablemente en los ultimos anos en el Brasil, principalmente en areas degradadas en los estados con mayor densidad populacional. Estas reforestaciones non-industriales están utilizando la associación de muchas espécies en las plantaciones, imitando la alta diversidad existente en las selves tropicales.
Se presentan resultados de la experimentación con plantaciones mixtas de protección, usando la successión secundaria pare separar hs espécies en grupos ecológicos. Se está considerando que h reforestación mixta seria similar a la selva natural, que está compuesta de un mosaico de estadios de sucesión.
Seguiendo los padrones que caracterizan la ocurrencia natural de las espécies arbóreas en las selvas tropicales, x propone desarrollar modelos de reforestación mixto de protección, donde la necesidad de cantidad de semillas por especie y por hectárea sea minimizada y diferenciada por grupo ecológico de espécies.
La producción de semillas de espécies natives pare fines de revegatación de areas degradadas precise adequarse a la alta diversidad de espécies de la selva tropical, así como la forma en que los individuos de las espécies ocurren en la selva. La separación de las espécies en grupos ecológicos parece ser una forma adequada de resolver el problema, ya que los diferentes grupos presentan caracteristicas muy distintas en relación a la produción de semillas.
Introduction
The advance of present environmental legislation in Brazil, together with environmentalist actions and society pressure has demonstrated the need for protection plantations of indigenous species, with the aim of minimizing the advanced degree of disturbance involving large areas of permanent protection, mainly in the most densely populated regions of the country.
Towards this end, several universities, research institutions and even private enterprises are developing research projects with indigenous species, especially in the last 10 years, with the aim of revegetating degraded areas, notably those of permanent protection (riparian forests, slopes, reserves etc.). The Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) have also played an important role towards this objective.
Silviculture has evolved in Brazil as an activity directed, to a large extent, to the production of raw material for wood and fibre industries, especially exotic species of the genera Eucalyptus and Pinus. The concept of multiple use of planted forests has only recently emerged as a basic objective with recreational, soil protection, water resource and genetic conservation purposes. Such plantations for non-industrial purposes assume the association of many species in an attempt to imitate the high diversity of species existing in the tropical forests.
According to KAGEYAMA, CASTRO and CARPANEZZI (1989), the actions intended to establish protection forests, for example in degraded riparian forests, are undertaken for the following purposes:
a) recreate the vegetation existing in the past, maintaining the structure as well as the composition of original species; and
b) recompose a vegetation structure with a view to obtain benefits such as the containment of bank erosion, re-establishment of a hydric and nutrient regime, and the retention of fertilizers and agrotoxics.
The much demanded planting of indigenous species comes up against a number of operational difficulties for commercial scale production of seed, as well as in promoting the growth and development of many associated species together. To overcome such problems, we believe that much can be inferred from knowledge relating to the reproductive biology, secondary succession and genetic structure of tropical tree species.
Information on the major part of the species is still scanty due, mainly, to the large quantity of species existing in the tropics, as well as the complexity of the interactions involving such species, especially with animals.
The objective of this paper was to review the state of art in Brazil, with regard to the revegetation in degraded areas as well as the production and procurement of seed of indigenous species, discussing the main problems existing and pointing out solutions and research directions for them.
<section>2</section>
Revegetation in degraded areas with indigenous species
Back to contents - Prevoius file - Next file
The proposals for revegetation in degraded areas with indigenous tree species in Brazil has attempted to recuperate the high diversity of tropical forests and also to follow the natural regeneration processes of the species in these ecosystems. Thus, a discussion on how the individuals of the hundreds of tree species are distributed in a few hectares of a typical tropical forest seems to be essential, as well as the role of secondary succession in the renewal of these forests.
One of the main characteristics of tropical forests, which has direct implications with their diversities, refers to the high tree species richness of these ecosystems, and that also is correlated with the rarity (less than one individual per hectare) of the co-specific individuals in the forest. It is noteworthy that the high species diversity of tropical forests is given by the rare species and not by the common ones.
Analysing several botanical surveys on forests in the State of Sao Paulo, KAGEYAMA, NAMKOONG and ROBERDS (1992) found that while an average of 30% of the forests were shown to be rare, also about 30% of the individuals belonged to only three of the more common species.
On the other hand, pollinator foraging behaviour may be an evolutionary result of mutual adaptation between plants and pollinators which would be reflected in the tropical forest structure. KAGEYAMA (1989) have suggested that tree species pollinated by short-flying vectors may predominantly be clumped or common, while the species pollinated by animals with long distance flight may be highly dispersed or rare.
It is considered that the rarity or commonness of species results from their evolutionary history and, for that reason, it might be associated with other characteristics such as flight distance of pollinators and seed dispersers, regeneration strategies, herbivory patterns and associations with microorganisms. Thus, the spatial distribution patterns of species in the forest would, in a certain manner, be fixed, and should be followed in the planting schemes of the species in the field.
The concept of mixed reforestation with indigenous species involves criteria on how to associate the different species to be planted. Three criteria proposed for our conditions may be pointed out:
a. the one based on the randomness of the distribution of seedlings of the different species in the field (NOGUEIRA 1977);
b. the criterion based on the distribution indicated by phyto-sociological studies conducted in adjacent natural forests (JOLY 1987); and
c. the one based on the combination of groups of species characteristics of different stages of the secondary succession (KAGEYAMA and CASTRO 1989).
Secondary succession seems to be a concept that could be used to separate species into ecological groups with similar characteristics, especially with regard to the requirement or otherwise of small or large gaps in different development stages of the plants for their utilization in mixed plantings.
According to WHITMORE (1982), the gaps formed in the forest are reoccupied by different ecological groups of tree species adapted to regenerate in gaps of different sizes. Thus, the species could be separated based on their responses to gaps. Depending upon the criterion utilized, such groups are classified in different manners. The dichotomy between pioneer species (intolerant) and climax species (tolerant) is common in the literature. DENSLOW (1980) recognizes three groups: large gap species, small gap species and non gap species. WHITMORE (1975) identifies four groups, and he recognizes that each species is unique in its adaptive characteristics. In addition to those already cited, this author identifies the group of species that develop under closed forest, but benefit from gaps. BUDOWSKI (1965), using 21 characteristics of tropical forests which are modified through the serial stages, identifies four groups of species: pioneer, early secondary, late secondary and
climax. For mixed plantings, it is necessary to design systems in which the trees of different tolerance classes have equal opportunities, each in its appropriate niche, resulting in a better utilization of the environment above and below the soil.
Therefore, mixed reforestation should be composed of species of different stages of succession, similar to natural forests, which are composed of a mosaic of successional stages. According to WHITMORE (1982), forests consist of a mosaic of structural phases which are constantly changing as one phase changes into the next, and its floristics composition depends on the frequency and size of gaps. This interpretation shows that the high diversity of tropical forests would be much more a function of the diversity between gaps than within gaps.
Thus, a mixed plantation may be considered as an assemblage of large gaps with different compositions of species providing the high diversity of species in the forest. The common and rare species would be placed in the field in proportion to their natural densities.
The Forest Science Department of ESALQ, University of São Paulo, is carrying out studies with the major objective of establishing models of association of tree species, using secondary succession as a reference. This research programme was consolidated as of 1988 as a cooperation effort between ESALQ and Companhia Energetica do Estado de Sao Paulo-CESP.
For this experimentation BUDOWSKl's (1965) terminology was used with a silvicultural interpretation for the different groups of species, according to the secondary succession. The proposed model considered that the pioneer species gave shade, whereas the climax species grew in the shade, and they complemented each other in the consortium. The early secondary species, in turn, would play the role of tutoring the late secondary. The pioneer and early secondary species would be full sunlight species (large gaps), the first short living (5 to 15 years), with shade giving crown (dense) and the latter longer living (30 to 50 years), with a narrow crown (monopodial growth). The late scondary and climax species would be apt to develop in the shade, where the first would benefit from partial light (small gaps) and the latter grow in the shade of the canopy.
In four conditions of the State of São Paulo 20 species were chosen from the four ecological groups, where all possible combinations of these species were tested. Tests included from pure plots of the species to combinations of the four groups simultaneously, amounting to 23 treatments, with 1,000 m' plots and a total experimental area of 36.8 ha.
The experimental results revealed that the association of tree species, separating them into ecological groups according to secondary succession, is an efficient manner of orientating mixed plantings of indigenous species. The main conclusions drawn from this research up to four years of age, with regard to the different ecological groups of species, were as follows (Table 1):
a. the pioneer and early secondary species grew more than the other two groups, showing similar behaviour in all of the combinations with the other species;
b. the late secondary species benefitted in regard to growth by partial shading of the early secondary species, and were impaired by total shading of the pioneer species;
c. the climax species also benefitted from partial shading of the early secondary species and showed a neutral behaviour when totally shaded by the pioneer species; however, they presented a healthier aspect under shade;
d. pioneer thinning after two years in the field, to simulate small natural gaps, has benefitted the growth of late secondary and climax species;
e. crown size and form of the trees of the different groups of species were deeply changed by the association of the species, especially for the groups of the more advanced stages of succession.
Table 1: Results of consortium of indigenous tree species according to the secondary succession in São Paulo, Brazil.
Ecological groups Treatments Height in m Crown diameter in m
Pioneer (P)
Mean
F[Treat
]CV[Exp %] Pure
P + E
P + L
P + C
P + E + L
P + E + C
P + L + C
P + E + L + C 4.51^a
4.20^a
4.15^a
4.16^a
4.12^a
4.04^a
4.51^a
4.33^a
0.76^ns
7.94 1.71^a
1.60^a
1.80^a
1.76^a
1.71^a
1.78^a
1.59^a
1.95^a
0.36^ns
Early secondary (E)
Mean
F[Treat
]CV[Exp %] Pure
E + P
E + L
E + C
E + P + L
E+P+C
E + L + C
E + P + L + C 2.58^abc
1.87^d
2.83^a
2.72^ab
1.99^cd
2.11^bcd
2.56^abc
2.02^cd
11.22 1.74^ab
0.60^c
2.02^c
1.53^ab
0.69^c
0.87^c
1.53^ab
0.73^c
Late secondary (L)
Mean
F[Treat
]CV[Exp %] Pure
L + P
L + E
L + C
L + P + E
L+P+C
L + E + C
L + P + E + C 1.57^b
1.09^c
1.90^a
1.52^b
1.07^c
1.04^c
1.61^ab
1.11^c
8.71 0.66^a
0.36^b
0.82^a
0.67^a
0 39^b
0.32^b
0.73^b
0.34^b
Climax (C)
Mean
F[Treat
]CV[Exp %] Pure
C + P
C + E
C + L
C + P + E
C + P + L
C + E + L
C + P + E + L 1.94^a
1.58^a
1.91^a
1.66^a
1.60^a
1.50^a
1.85^a
1.56^a
18.13 1.58^a
0.90^a
1.30^ab
1.59^a
0.86^bc
0.58^d
1.46^ab
0.75^cd
Pioneer: Croton floribundus. Early secondary: Lonchocarpus spp.. Late secondary: Paratecoma peroba. Climax: Myroxylun peruiferum. Source: Adapted from KAGEYAMA et al. 1992.
<section>3</section>
Seed production and procurement of indigenous species for revegetation programs
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The diversity of species within each ecological group and the density in which they occur in the natural forest should be a guide for the mixed protection plantations, and this has a direct implication for the seed production programmes of these species.
Even though the studies on a tropical forest community in a broader area scale (hundreds of hectares) are still quite insufficient, based on the existing data it may be inferred that the different ecological groups have different patterns of spatial distribution for their individuals, with tendencies to be more common or rare in the population
Among the most common species, those of the initial phase of succession, the pioneer species, as well as those of the final stage of succession, the climax (or tolerant) species, are predominant. It should be stressed that the pioneer species are common in large gaps, whereas the climax species are common in mature forest sites, considering the tropical forest as a mosaic of gaps in different stages of succession. On the other hand, the rare species in the forest include the secondary (or opportunist) species, which have been subject to few studies and little understanding, exactly because they are rare and difficult to be captured in the sampling (KAGEYAMA, NAMKOONG and ROBERDS 1992).
Thus, the pioneer and climax species are found in the forest in a lower number and high density and require a high amount of seed per species and per unit of the area to be planted; the secondary species are found in a high number and occur in a rare form in the forest, requiring a small amount of seed per species.
In this manner, following the patterns that characterize the natural occurence of tree species in tropical forests, it is possible to create mixed protection reforestation models, where the requirement of amount of seed per species and per hectare is minor, and differentiated by group species. For example, in an area of one hectare, 1,000 individuals of pioneer species, represented by a low number of species (I to 5), 300 individuals of secondary species of a higher number of species (20 to 60) and 300 individuals of climax species, belonging to a low number of species (5 to 15), may be planted together, as suggested by KAGEYAMA, SOUZA and VIANA (1992).
This seed production strategy, considering the species jointly, and separated by groups of species with common characteristics, assumes that the commercialization of the seeds as well as of the seedlings, should be effected in the form of a technological package, including the common species with a large amount per species as well as the rare species, with a small amount. The reason for this is that the production of rare species is much more difficult and complex than that of the common species, as discussed below.
Associating the ecological groups of tropical tree species with the technological characteristics of their seeds, KAGEYAMA and VIANA (1991) presented the research priorities for the indigenous species, which are complemented with additional information:
a. The priority for the pioneer tree species is to understand the factors that restrict the germination of their seed; storage is of minor importance due to the natural longevity of the seed; seed production holds the least priority because these species are prolific and bear fruit at an early age during a long period of the year.
b. The secondary tree species presented good storage perspectives of their seed under controlled conditions; seed germination does not present dormancy, they germinate with no difficulty; seed collection for the species comprising this group is quite difficult due to their rarity in natural forests, the height of their trees (many are emergent) and, in addition, flowering is not regular every year.
c. The free species of the climax group presented seed storage problems, especially the recalcitrant ones; many species presented germination problems associated with seed dormancy; seed production for these species is facilitated in view of the fact that they are common in natural forests.
Even though many generalizations were made, it may be inferred that, in general, the major seed production problems relate to the rare secondary species, which is the most numerous group in the tropical forest and, therefore, may also be extrapolated to mixed protection plantations. However, if we consider the need for seed per individual species, the rare secondary group is the one presenting the least amount of seeds.
Considering the example mentioned above for mixed planting in degraded areas, with the utilization of 1,000, 300 and 300 trees per hectare for the groups of pioneer, secondary and climax species, respectively, and an average of 3, 40, and 10 species for the three groups, respectively, one may require 334 seedlings per hectare for each pioneer species, only 8 seedlings per hectare per secondary species and 30 seedlings per hectare for each climax species (Table 2).
Table 2: Necessity of seeds and seedlings for planting of indigenous tree species following the succession.
Ecological
groups Density
No trees/ha No species
/ha No seedlings
/species/ha Seeds/kg G. seeds/species/ha
Pioneer 1,000 5 200 50,000 50.0
Secondary 300 30 10 15,000 3.3
Climax 300 10 30 5,000 30.0
Source Adapted from WAGED SOUZA and VIANA (1992).
To illustrate how this strategy of seed and seedling production and procurement of indigenous species, involving all of the species to be planted in a unit of area, has very drastic implications, mainly for the rare species, the following real example under our condition may be cited. The Chorisia speciosa, a very rare species in natural forests in the State of São Paulo (I tree in 5 ha) produces about 100 fruit per tree per year, with 150 seed per fruit, or a total of 15,000 seed per tree. Considering a seed utilization rate of 20 %, we would have a production of 3,000 seedlings from the production of one tree, which would be sufficient to plant only about 2 hectares in the form of the traditional pure planting, and about 380 hectares in the form of mixed planting, separating the species into groups according to succession. Obviously, this implies the commercialization of a group of 40 secondary species which would be planted in a certain area.
<section>4</section>
Final considerations
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The ever increasing interest in protection forest plantations in Brazil for restoration of degraded areas imposes substantial changes in the form of dealing with tree species, as compared with the traditional plantations for industrial production. Important concepts relating to the structure and functioning of tropical forests are important for the establishment of mixed forests with indigenous species.
In this manner, seed production of indigenous species for the purpose of revegetating degraded areas must comply with the high diversity of species of the natural tropical forest, as well as the form in which the individuals of the species occur in the forest. The separation of species into ecological groups according to secondary succession seems to be an adequate manner of solving the problem, since the different groups present very distinct characteristics with regard to seed production.
A number of other aspects could be considered in discussing the revegetation and seed production theme, such as plant x animal interaction, sampling for seed collection in natural populations, seed technology, and many others not approached in this paper.
The lack of scientific information on the subject, resulting mainly from non-priority which the indigenous species held up to a short time ago under our conditions, as well as the high number of species which normally occur in tropical forests, result in that many gaps exist in this knowledge and urgent steps should be taken towards the advance of this area.
<section>5</section>
References
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
BUDOWSKI, G., 1965: Distribution of tropical American rain forest species in the light of successional progress. Turrialba, 15, 40-42.
DENSLOW, J.S., 1980: Gap partitioning among tropical forest trees. Biotropica, 12, 47-55.
JOLY, C.A., 1987: Projeto de recomposição de mate ciliar do Rio Jacare-Pepira-Mirim no municipio de Brotas, SP, unpublished.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y. and CASTRO, C.F.A., 1989: Sucessão Secundaria, Estrutura Genética e Plantações de Espécies Arboreas Navitas. IPEF, Piraciciba, 41/42.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y., CASTRO, C.F.A. and CARPANEZZI, A.A., 1989: Implantação de Matas Ciliares: Estratégias pare auxiliar a Sucessão Secundaria. In: BARBOSA, L.M. (Ed.): Simposio sobre Mata Ciliar. Anais. Fundação Cargill, 130-143.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y., 1990: Genetic structure of tropical tree species of Brazil. In: BAWA, K.S. and HARDLEY, M. (Eds.): Reproductive Ecology of Tropical Forest Plants. Man and Biosphere Series, V. 7, Paris, The Parthenon Publishing Group, 375-387.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y., FREIXEDAS, V.M., GERES, W.L.A., DIAS, J.H. and BORGES, A.S., 1992: Consorcio de espécies natives de diferentes grupos sucessionais. 20 Congresso de Essências Nativas. São Paulo, ANAIS, 527-533.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y., NAMKOONG, G. and ROBERDS, J., 1992: Genetic Diversity in Species of Tropical Forests in the State of São Paulo, Brazil, unpublished.
KAGEYAMA, P.Y., DE SOUZA, L.M.I. and VIANA, V.M., 1992: Perspectivas pare viabilização da produção de semntes de espécies arboreal natives. Presented at the 11. Congresso Nacional de Essencias Nativas. São Paulo, Brazil.
NOGUEIRA, J.C.B., 1977: Reflorestamento Heterogêneo com Essências Indigenas. Boletim Técnico. Instituto Florestal. São Paulo, Brazil, 24, 1-17.
WHITMORE, T.C., 1975: Tropical Rain Forests of the Far East. Oxford. Clarendon Press. 282 pp..
WHITMORE, T.C., 1982: On Pattern and Process in Forests. In: NEWMAN, E.l. (Ed.): The Plant Community as a Working Organism. Oxford, Blackwell, 45-59.
<section>6</section>
Discussion of the plenum with P. Kageyama:
Back to contents - Previous file
C. Palmberg-Lerche: Even rare, tropical species have been found to be outbreeding, to a very large extent, which is surprising. See e.g recent publications of Bawa (USA).
C. Palmberg-Lerche: FAO has over the past years carried out a study on mixed and pure plantations. There is a very great scarcity of scientific studies and information on this issue, however, one thing is clear: mixed planting is not a question of just mixing a number of species and throwing them out in the forest; it pre-supposes thorough knowledge of the species concerned and intensive management, based on solid knowledge of phonology and of the species involved, and their interactions. Very complex.
P. Krutzsch: Genetic consequences when collecting seed from wide spread individuals of rare species?
P. Kageyama: Some unkown (no studies) mechanism to counteract.
B. Krishnaypillay: Rare species have irregular seedling patterns. How do you go about monitoring these species so that seed collections from these species are not used?
P. Kageyama: The trees are marked and regularly monitored (phenologaical studies are carried out regularly). Hence seeds from all these species are carefully collected. There is no problem on this matter.
G. Sykes: Does the composition of "Seed Packages" change to reflect different site conditions?
P. Kageyama: Only one "Package" is being used at this time. Pioneer species are growing well on a variety of sites but climax species will be more site specific.
K. Kilpatrick: I would like to complement. This is very timely and can apply to African forestry very well.
- How was original deforestation accomplished?
- So are sources second growth or?
P. Kageyama: Original deforestation was due to coffee plantations and ranches etc., but there are plenty of small blocks of natural forest left so this is where the genetic research is going on and these are the sources for their seeds as well.
F. Esegu: What explanation do you give for pioneer species to have low genetic variation within populations and climax species have high genetic variation within populations.
P. Kageyama: Pioneer species occur in gaps with restricted populations thus restricted gene flow; therefore low genetic variation within populations. Climax species occur in continuous large populations thus high rate of gene flow within a population; therefore high genetic variation within populations.
G. Bonnis: What is the cost of the mixed plantation proposed in Brazil?
P. Kageyama: Cost is around US$ 300/ha, of which 50% is for seedling production.
J. Okonya: What steps is the country taking to make sure that past mistakes that have proved so expensive to redress forest destruction, are reduced and stopped altogether?
P. Kageyama: Good registration. Social pressure groups for environment protection; development projects planting forests as an input towards environmental protection; individual states raising up riperian forests.
D. Rudin: Why are the rare species rare? Natural selection or human interference?
P. Kageyama: Mostly natural selection, e.g. through insects attacking the seeds. Human interference in rare cases.
