<title>Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
On the occasion of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi, August 1981, FAO was anxious to draw attention to the other energy crisis: that of fuelwood., which affects the daily energy supplies of a great many rural people in the Third World. A study was therefore undertaken for the purpose of demonstrating, the dependence of Third World populations on fuelwood as a source of energy and identifying more precisely the mergence of ever more marked deficits, on the basis of up-to-date information. The results of this study were presented in the form of a map¹ published as a contribution to the Nairobi Conference. The present report sets out in more detail the methodology followed in the study and the main results, in particular with respect to each of the major regions concerned.
¹ Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries, FAO, Rome, 1981.
There is no need to insist on the dramatic nature of the problem of fuelwood supplies for people who have little or no access to any other source of energy. What is probably shown in a new and striking way is the dimension of the problem, the order of magnitude of the populations affected and the size of the deficits, and also the accelerating degradation of the situations identified. It seems clear, in fact, that the deficits are expanding and increasing rapidly under the combined effects of population growth, deterioration of the natural forest resources and the absence of possibilities for replacement by other sources of energy. Unless there is a radical change in present trends, the people affected by an energy shortage due to the scarcity of fuelwood will have more than doubled by the year 2000, exceeding 2 thousand million: the deficit might then correspond to half their energy needs. Such an energy gap can hardly be accepted sociologically, economically or
politically, concerning as it does the most elementary needs, such as cooking food and heating the home. To this is added the fact that the great majority of the people concerned are among the poorest. It can thus be imagined what a burden the necessity to organize emergency actions to guarantee a minimum energy supply and distribute it to people scattered over vast areas would represent for developing economies. But together with this energy gap, and even more serious, would be the often irreparable damage that the total destruction of the woody vegetation would wreak on the natural resources of vast areas with a usually fragile ecology; the desperate search for any and every kind of plant fuel to cook food might well endanger agricultural and food production capacity, owing to erosion and desertification.
The primary objective of the present report is to draw the attention of the governments concerned and of the international community to the seriousness of the problem before present trends become largely irreversible. Given the extent and diversity of the situations covered, this study is inevitably of a comparatively general nature, but it should serve to sound the alarm wherever symptoms of deficit have been detected. In many countries this should lead to governments and the public in general becoming alive to the problem of fuelwood supplies, a problem whose seriousness is often masked by its everyday and diffuse nature until the point of no return has been reached. The methodology devised for this study can be refined and used for sub - regional studies, such as the one carried out by FAO for the Sahelian region in 1982² or for national studies. In any event it will enable the specific characteristics of the problem to be more clearly identified and more concrete
indications obtained on the order of magnitude and the nature of the measures to be undertaken.
² "Les disponibilités de bois de feu an région sahélienne de l'Afrique occidentale - Situation et perspectives", par M.N. Keita, FAO, Rome 1982.
In the second place this report aims at promoting a realistic view of the energy problem of most of the people of the Third World: large resources are often mobilized to conduct research into substitute energies whose novelty may be attractive, but whose stage of technological and economic development puts them quite simply out of reach for many years to come of those who are suffering from a scarcity of their daily energy supplies. All too often there is a flagrant imbalance between the resources devoted to energies which it will take a long time to develop and those devoted to sources such as wood, where the technical solutions are known and tested and which require only adaptation to specific local conditions and popularization.
The final purpose of this study is to prompt a rapid mobilization of efforts and resources with a view to immediate and large-scale action. Technical forestry solutions exist, and can provide many benefits in addition to solving the problem of fuelwood supplies: stabilization of the environment, provision of fodder, food and other products useful to domestic and rural economies. The success of these technical solutions depends, however, on the ability to adapt them to the specific needs of the people concerned, to get the people actively involved, and to make these efforts an integral part of the management of the natural resources and of the land for the benefit of the people. This illustrates the development potential of forestry programmes, whose energy role constitutes an important, but not the only, aspect.
The development potential of the solutions to the fuelwood problem constitutes the most crucial aspect, on which FAO insists and to which it devotes prior attention in its assistance to the countries concerned. The role of the forest resources in supplying energy is, in fact, an important catalyst in reorienting forestry action more directly towards rural development and the needs of the people. The multiple and direct benefits that the people can derive from these actions, and the mobilization of collectively organized efforts to achieve self-sufficiency, constitute the basis for a dynamic development which does not accentuate dependence on abroad. The productive, protective and social functions of the forest vegetation, including even isolated trees, are thus integrated in a system in which advantages for the subsistence and development of the people concerned are evident to them. Recent successes are not limited to those in the Republic of Korea mentioned in this study;
but success is dependent on massive support for the diffusion of information, training and the strengthening of institutions in order to mobilize the people for actions which they realize are conducive to their own development. Mobilization of this essential support is the primary aim of the FAO Forestry and Rural Energy Programme, for which this study constitutes an important point of reference.
The study has been prepared essentially at the regional level, by the teams of the Preinvestment Survey of Forest Resources, Dehra Dun, India, and the Departamento de Manejo Forestal, Universidad Nacional Agraria, Lima, Peru, and by the following consultants: M. Baumer, J. Brookman Amissah and T. Gnrofoun. The work was devised and organized by M.R. de Montalembert, Coordinator of the study, and J. Clement, technical consultant, who prepared the final report.
M.A. Flores Rodas
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
Units and abbreviations commonly used in the text
GJ
= gigajoule = 10^9 joules
TJ
= térajoule = 10^12 joules
GJ/inhab./yr
= gigajoule/inhabitant/year
m³/inhab./yr
= cubic metre per inhabitant and per year
m³/yr
= cubic metre per year
m³/ha/yr
= cubic metre per hectare and per year
<section>2</section>
Chapter I - Introduction
1.1 Objectives of the study
1.2 Implementation of the study
Recent developments in the overall energy situation have not only highlighted the essential role played by fossil fuels in today's world, but have also led to a sudden awareness of the fact that the greater part of the population in Third World countries is not really concerned by the problem of sources of energy to which it has no access. The importance of the traditional fuels, foremost among them fuelwood and charcoal, and the serious consequences of shortage of these fuels in terms of energy supply and the over-cutting of wood resources, made it necessary to assess the fuelwood situation in the developing countries. When preparations were being made for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi, 1981, FAO took the initiative of carrying out this survey in order to make the international community and the countries concerned aware of how acute the problem is and how dangerous it would be to allow present trends to continue. The results
of the survey are set out in this report and also shown in a Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries.¹
¹ This Map was published by FAO, Home, in 1981 and distributed as a contribution to the Nairobi Conference
Fuelwood and charcoal have been the subject of continuous attention by FAO for more than thirty years. The Organization regularly publishes statistical information on production, in the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, and technical studies. The three editions of the World Forest Inventory, of 1953, 1958 and 1963, contained information on the amount of fuelwood extracted, and that of 1958 underlined how much was gathered outside the forest. But no attempt, had yet been made to examine to what extent the volume of woody material available for energy and accessible to the people was sufficient to cover their requirements. In 1980 FAO assumed responsibility for the secretariat of the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal for the preparation of the Nairobi Conference: it was this' Panel which recommended that the survey proposed by FAO lead to the preparation of a map which would show where the fuelwood deficit, and hence the problem, was most acute.
Most of the studies carried out to date have dealt with the consumption of wood fuels, sometimes comparing this, fairly briefly, with the potential yield of the forest formations. In addition, most of the studies on forest resources undertaken recently deal only with fairly dense formations suitable for commercial utilization for industrial purposes Even the FAO/UNEP project for the evaluation of tropical forest resources, the results of which were published recently, while covering all woody formations, both natural and planted, uses a concept of productivity relating to industrial wood. The present study has, therefore, consisted of analysing, zone by zone, the situation as regards fuelwood needs and supplies accessible to the people, covering all resources, both natural and planted formations, whether dense or scattered throughout the rural area, and the by-products of agriculture and industry. The information assembled makes it possible to pinpoint the problem better and
above all to discern the seriousness of the degradation under way, bearing in mind the growth in the populations which continue to depend on fuel-wood, and the impact of shortages in zones with a fragile ecology: it demonstrates the order of magnitude of the deficits to be made up, and the relative importance of the various types of resources in the total supplies.
1.1 Objectives of the study
On the basis of the existing information, in particular the most recent data available from the FAO/UNEP project for the evaluation of tropical forest resources, supplemented by the authors of the study, the following objectives were set:
- to present an overall view of the situation as regards fuelwood in each of the main developing regions, and of the relative degree of dependence on this fuel in energy consumption;
- to assess the fuelwood supplies to which the populations have access and identify areas with a marked dependence where there existed in 1980 a noticeable imbalance between the populations' requirements and these supplies, i.e. to classify these deficit situations;
- to analyse present trends in order to show how the situations identified will develop if there is no change in trends between now and the year 2000; and to identify the zones which, although they have no apparent problem in 1980, will have a more or less marked deficit by the year 2000.
The results are given in this document on the basis of an analysis, the methodology of which is described in Chapter II. An overview of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries, together with a summary of the overall results of the study, is given in Chapter III. The regional situations in Africa south of the Sahara, North Africa and the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America, are each the subject of a special section in Chapters 17, V, VI and VII respectively. Chapter VIII discusses how to improve the situations, giving possible solutions and guidelines for strategies. A summary of the conclusions is given in Chapter IX.
A list and classification of fuelwood deficit situations is given in the annex.
1.2 Implementation of the study
The main work of analysis was carried out at regional level by teams of consultants or by regional institutions; FAO Headquarters was responsible for preparation, coordination and synthesis. The survey itself was conducted from February 1980 to July 1981 and the Map of the Fuelwood Situation was published in August 1981.
The following procedure was used in carrying out the study:
1) Preparatory phase: This entailed definition and preparation of a methodology of work and analysis, and rapid checking in tropical African countries of the validity and applicability of the methodology. At the same time the regional bodies or consultants were identified and their role as executants defined. The preparatory phase was completed by a meeting organized in May 1980 at FAO Headquarters between the central coordinating team and the regional teams in order to exchange views, effect an overall check of work procedures, and make available to the regional teams the information available at Headquarters.
2) Compilation and analysis of information at regional level: The regional teams collected and analyzed the information available country by country. They visited some countries selected as typical, for which case studies were conducted in order to improve understanding of the situations studied. On the basis of their experience and of these visits, the regional teams completed their analyses and prepared a preliminary regional report. During this phase the regional teams received constant backstopping from the central coordinating team.
3) Checking and harmonizing the presentation of the regional analyses: The preliminary drafts of these reports were examined at Headquarters. Certain clarifications and corrections were requested from the regional teams, together with some modifications in the presentation, in order to make possible an overall analysis based on a homogeneous approach. Regional maps were prepared.
4) Preparation of the overall analysis, the first results of which were presented to the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal at its final meeting in December 1980. These results were incorporated in the Panel's report to the Preparatory Committee for the Nairobi Conference.
5) Preparation of the Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries and the accompanying explanatory note.
6) Preparation of this report synthesizing the results obtained.
The following institutions and consultants carried out the regional studies, an essential component of this report:
Africa south of the Sahara: Tosseh Gnrofoun and Joseph Brookman Amissah
North Africa and Middle East: Michel Baumer
Asia: The "Preinvestment Survey of Forest Resources" (now called "Forest Survey of India") Institute, Dehra Dun, India
Latin America: Universidad Nacional Agraria, Departamento de Manejo Forestal, Lima, Peru.
The preliminary attempt at classifying African tropical countries from the point of view of their fuelwood resources and consumption was carried out by the Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.
<section>3</section>
Chapter II - Methodology
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Definitions
2.3 Classification of resources
2.4 Study procedure
2.5 Presentation of results
2.1 Introduction
The methodology worked out for this study is based on two fundamental considerations: the geographical specificity of fuelwood supply and consumption situations, and the very varied nature of the supplies. The aim is-to assess the level of supplies compatible with sustained production and to which a population can have access, and then to compare this level with that of the requirements. It is this comparison which provides an indication of the fuelwood situation and makes it possible to detect indices of incipient acute scarcity or deficit.
The geographical specificity of fuelwood situations is a well-known characteristic. The limited possibilities for transporting and having access to fuelwood mean that in studying a situation it is necessary to take into consideration relatively limited areas; otherwise there is a great risk that considerable local variations will be ignored in presenting an overall picture of the situation. The abundance of forest resources available in a relatively large region may eclipse local situations of acute scarcity, the resources obviously being where there is no demand; the reverse is also possible. There are, however, rapidly attained limits to the amount of disaggregation that is reasonably possible in sue a study. One of the first problems that the methodology had to resolve, therefore, was that of defining the parameters to be used in identifying fuelwood situations while endeavouring to go beyond the appearance of the situations at national level in order to show up the
variations that this may conceal.
The second characteristic is connected with the heterogeneity of what is covered by the term "fuelwood" and the variety of the sources from which populations obtain their supplies, although it is not usually possible to ascertain their relative importance accurately except in very detailed studies Fuelwood sources consist not only of forests properly so-called but also of other types of woody vegetations trees and shrubs, in closed or open formations, woodlots and even isolated trees scattered throughout the countryside, and wood waste from agriculture and industry. All these heterogeneous resources are utilized to produce warmth for domestic or artisanal purposes through direct combustion or after carbonization. Within the framework of this study it is particularly important to emphasize that the more difficult a fuelwood situation, the more probable it is that resources not directly connected with forests play an important supporting role, even a principal one in extreme
cases The methodology, therefore, had also to define approaches that would make it possible to include the different fuelwood resources in assessing supplies.
Finally, the methodology was worked out so as to use relatively homogeneous criteria in handling the great diversity of existing and available information, checked and supplemented by the knowledge and experience of those participating in the study. Here the regional teams played a particularly important role in checking and completing the analyses. It must be emphasized, however, that owing in particular to the need for global coherence, the overall presentation masks, over and above regional differences, considerable variations in the coverage and quality of the information; this is symptomatic of the varying degrees of awareness of the importance of fuelwood in energy balances and of the degradation in supplies under way in many places. Cases in which information was lacking were studies by reference to similar situations.
2.2 Definitions
In order to assess the situation as regards fuelwood supply and demand, it was necessary to define from the outset, precisely and unambiguously, the concepts necessary for achieving the objectives of the study. These definitions must be completed by referring to the classification of woody vegetation as used in evaluating the resources: potential yield of fuelwood.
The following definitions apply to the main terms used in the study:
Fuelwood; Wood and pulp material obtained from the trunks, branches and other parts of trees and shrubs to be used as fuel for cooking, heating or generating energy through direct combustion, not only in households but also in rural industries (curing, smoking, etc.). Included in this definition are charcoal and agricultural and industrial wood and pulp residues. The large-scale use of wood fuel for industrial purposes, for example in metal - working, is not covered.
This definition may cover a wide variety of material used as fuelwood, comprising even roots, bark and the leaves of woody plants, or crop residues such as straw, husks and the products from the pruning of fruit trees. Fuelwood hence covers a very varied range of plant material used more or less indiscriminately for the same purpose, depending on how scarce real fuelwood is.
Fuelwood needs; Minimum amount of fuelwood necessary in view of the minimum energy estimated to be indispensable for household consumption, artisanal purposes and rural industries, in line with local conditions and the share of fuelwood in their energy supplies. In some cases actual fuelwood consumption may be lower than estimated needs, owing to the existence of acute shortages, or higher, owing to the abundance of supplies. Fuelwood needs here exclude large-scale industrial use - for metallurgy, cement - making, etc. They are estimated on the basis of current conversion technologies in the energy systems that exist in the rural areas and in urban concentrations of limited size where energy consumption patterns remain very similar to those in the neighbouring rural areas.
Populations dependent on fuelwood or rural populations; For the purposes of this study it has been assumed that the populations dependent on fuelwood are populations with a rural type of energy consumption in which traditional fuels such as fuelwood play a major role.
It has been arbitrarily assumed that populations dependent on fuelwood consist of rural people properly so-called and the inhabitants of towns with a population of less than 100 000, who have usually kept a similar type of energy consumption. It is assumed that the proportion of the population of these towns which depends essentially on conventional commercial fuels is made up for by the proportion in the larger towns which continues to depend on traditional fuels.
Unless otherwise stated, it is to this definition of populations dependent on fuel-wood that reference is made in this study.
The population statistics used in this study, in particular as regards population trends to the year 2000, are those published by FAO ¹.
¹ World Population Estimates and Projections, 1950-2000.
Fuelwood supplies: Quantities of fuelwood which are, or can be made available for energy use on the basis of the mean annual productivity of all potential resources on a sustainable production basis. The mean annual fuelwood productivity is calculated by deducting from the mean total annual productivity the amount of wood destined for industry - which usually has priority. The potential resources comprise natural woody vegetation, plantations, the wooded elements scattered throughout cultivated zones, and the wood waste from industry and agriculture} these resources are defined more in detail in the following paragraph, which explains their classification.
Accessible fuelwood supplies! A distinction should be made between these supplies and the total apparent supplies. Accessibility, a correcting factor based on physical and economic considerations, makes it possible to take into account dispersion of the resources, lack of infrastructure for their utilization, their use for other purposes, such as the use of agricultural waste to fertilize the land, and various other parameters. The accessible fuelwood supplies represent the proportion of the quantities available for energy purposes that can actually be used under normal conditions of supply and demand.
Fuelwood balance; The difference between needs and accessible supplies shows whether there is balance or imbalance in the fuelwood situation at .present. A positive balance denotes an excess of supply over needs, and a negative balance a deficit. In the latter case, requirements are met either by over-utilization of the existing supplies, or by shifting to other types of fuel, if there are any. In the last analysis, consumption may be well below needs Since fuelwood situations are markedly location-specific, the fuel - wood balance for a fairly wide area may conceal considerable localized gaps between supplies and needs, particularly in the vicinity of large towns.
The balance between accessible supplies and needs, the end result of analysis, is the main indicator of the fuelwood situation in a given zone. When the balance is positive, it shows that the use of wood for energy purposes can be further expanded. When it is negative, it indicates the extent of the deficit between the level of accessible supplies on the basis of sustained yield and the minimum requirements of the populations dependent on fuelwood. The balance per inhabitant is particularly significant and will be constantly used in this study.
2.3 Classification of resources
2.3.1 Natural woody vegetation
2.3.2 Plantations
2.3.3 Other natural woody resources
2.3.4 Agricultural and industrial residues
2.3.5 Concept of fuelwood volume
The classification of resources for the purpose of assessing fuelwood supplies covers mainly natural woody vegetation, plantations, rural woodlots, and agricultural and industrial residues. The classification of natural woody vegetation and plantations, taken from the FAO/UNEP project on the evaluation of tropical forest resources, is briefly summarized below as regards the elements directly connected with fuelwood.
2.3.1 Natural woody vegetation
These are formations in which woody elements cover more than 10 percent of the ground. Though it is often difficult, if not impossible, to estimate this percentage from the descriptions given, and this percentage is not always used in information, it has been selected as the limit between formations in which the woody elements actually constitute a community and those in which they are scattered (or in lines) in landscapes with a non-woody vegetation or without any other vegetation".
"The word 'woody' is used although the trees of some monocotyledons do not contain 'wood' in the usual meaning of the word".
"The adjective 'natural' is used only in relation to plantations which can be considered as a purely artificial vegetation (see section 2.3.2 below). It does not mean at all that there is no human or, more generally, biotic interference. On the contrary a significant proportion, varying with countries, of 'natural vegetation' corresponds to degradation stages (after fires, clearings by shifting cultivation, over-exploitation for wood, grazing) or reconstitution stages after degradation, or to forests disturbed by logging, with or without management".
The following different types of natural formations are distinguished (see also the attached diagram):
- "N stands for any vegetation type of which the dominant woody element is the tree,... viz a woody perennial plant typically large and with a single, well-defined stem carrying a more or less definite crown (height more than 7 metres for mature trees) .
- "n corresponds to any vegetation type the main wood elements of which are shrubs of more than 50 cm and less than 7 metres high".¹
¹ These limits must be interpreted with flexibility, particularly the minimum tree height (and maximum shrub height), which may vary between 5 and 8 metres approximately.
- "NH corresponds to types with predominance of trees of broadleaved species (angiosperms), dicotyledons or monocotyledons (e.g. palms, raphias). Premodimance is characterized by a proportion of more than 50 percent of the crown cover".
- "NS corresponds to types with predominance of trees of coniferous species (gymnosperms). Coniferous species (for instance of genus Podocarpus), are often present in mixed tropical forests of medium and high mountains, without being predominant. As a result, no significant forest area has been classified as NS in some countries in spite of the occurrence of coniferous species".
- "NHC stands for closed broadleaved forests, i.e. those which, when not recently cleared by shifting agriculture or heavily exploited, cover with their various storeys and undergrowth a high proportion of the ground and do not have a continuous dense grass layer allowing grazing and spreading of fires".
- "NHO corresponds to mixed, broadleaved forest - grassland formations with a continuous dense grass layer in which the tree synusia cover more than 10 percent (e.g. various forms of "cerrado" and "chaco" in America, tree and wooded savannas and woodlands in Africa). This division between closed forests and mixed formations is more of ecological than physiognomic type and is not necessarily characterized by a crown cover percentage, since, for instance, trees of some woodlands cover the ground completely like closed forests".
A distinction has been introduced between mixed, broadleaved forest - grassland formations covering more than 40 percent of the ground (NH01), corresponding to wooded savanna, and those which cover 10 to 40 percent (NH02), or savanna with trees, this distinction corresponding to noticeable differences in the level of wood production and hence in fuelwood supplies.
Stretches of closed forests and mixed forest - grassland formations are sometimes rendered unproductive of fuelwood, either by legal prohibition of cutting, (in national parks, reserves, etc.) or by the terrain, which makes them almost impossible to utilize. These stretches have usually been excluded from the assessment of fuelwood resources.
- "NHCa (or NSa). or 'forest fallow', stands for all complexes of woody vegetation deriving from the clearing by shifting cultivation of closed, broadleaved forests or coniferous forests and consisting of a mosaic of various reconsitution facies ('secondary bush', 'young secondary forests', stands of Musanga or becropia. 'secondary growth'). Patches of uncleared forest and of agricultural fields are generally included in these areas, as it is impossible to account for them separately within the shifting cultivation areas (in particular in the visual interpretation of satellite imagery). When site conditions are unfavourable (e.g. broken terrain) or when the fallow period is reduced to a very short period, clearing by agriculture leads to such a degradation of the site that reconstitution of the forest is not possible within the foreseeable future; the resulting degraded vegetation is not included in the NHCa (or NSa) category, but in shrub formations (n) or outside woody
vegetation".
- "nH stands for formations in which the woody element consists essentially of deciduous shrubs and bushes (thickets, shrub savanna). In the absence of precise information, no attempt has been made in most cases to introduce a classification of these formations. For many mixed, deciduous forest - grassland formations, the separation between those in which the dominant woody elements are trees (MHO) and those in which they are shrubs (nH) is often approximate".
2.3.2 Plantations
The term 'plantation' corresponds to:
- forest stands established artificially by afforestation on land which previously did not carry forest;
- forest stands established artificially by reforestation on land which carried forest within the previous fifty years or within living memory, and involving replacement of the previous crop by a new and essentially different crop
Plantations in the sense used in this study do not include stands established by artificial regeneration and essentially similar to those they are replacing
A distinction is made between industrial plantations established totally or partly for production wood for industry (mainly sawlogs and veneer logs, pulpwood, pitprope) or as an industrial source of energy and non-industrial plantations (or 'other plantations') established mainly for the production of fuelwood and wood for charcoal, or small wood for rural populations
In the case of industrial plantations, fuelwood productivity is calculated on the basis of the products from thinni