<title>The role of domestic livestock in desertification control</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Back to contents - Next file
Professional alarmist and special interest groups, especially vegetarians, are blaming most of the world's ills and a forthcoming global catastrophe on livestock. Livestock, particularly cattle, are blamed for causing desertification, expending and polluting the earth's waters and contributing to global warming and depletion of the ozone layer. While scientists state that most of these spectacular and serious accusations are not based on fact, they nevertheless are being advanced and repeated mechanically, without understanding, by the media. The public is being misinformed and it is not surprising that many individuals are supportive of the extremists' call for an ecological renaissance and return to nature involving no domestic livestock grazing.
On the other hand, technologies which will allow man to better control his environment and to enhance and assure his quality of life are known and new ones are being continually developed. If the professional alarmists are serious, one would think that they would be more interested in supporting the implementation of these technologies, rather than making spectacular and illogical recommendations. However, it appears that they are either unaware of the technologies or prefer to ignore them.
To understand desertification on rangelands, its control and its reversal, one must have some knowledge of certain plant physiological, ecological and environmental phenomena and principles. An objective of this document is to describe and illustrate these phenomena and principles in a manner that can be readily understood by the uninformed. Moreover, to understand the role of domestic livestock in desertification control, one must know that livestock can be manipulated in order to achieve a desired effect for both the animals and the environment. Another objective of this document is to illustrate how this can be achieved. These objectives will pertain primarily to natural pastures or rangelands.
Principles are principles and while specifics will vary, most are applicable to all parts of the world. However, the practices for controlling desertification, will deal mainly with the livestock production situations in the Americas. The Near and Mid-East and Africa are not included because the vast majority of livestock are raised under a migratory system of production. Moreover, desertification control in these regions goes beyond technological implementation because a multitude of entangled sociological, economical, political and marketing factors that cannot be unravelled easily are involved. This does not mean that the problem cannot be solved. Readers interested in possible solutions in the Near East Region and possibly Africa are referred to Huss (1985).
This document emphasizes ruminant livestock. However, it is appropriate to say here that free-roaming pigs on pasturelands, as is the case in many Latin American countries, can be very destructive and the practice should be minimized as far as possible. Also, equines, kilo for kilo, put more pressure on grasslands than ruminant stock.
The Latin American and Caribbean region in this document is composed of those countries in FAO's South America, the Caribbean and North and Central America classifications with the exception of the United States of America and Canada. Specific references are made to the U.S. and to countries in other regions of the world merely to illustrate facts and/or points. Much of the information regarding the influence of grazing and vegetation on water yields, erosion and water quality comes from the United States because that is where the research is being conducted.
<section>2</section>
Livestock in support of people
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Ruminant products, services and values
Since domestic animals, especially cattle, are being blamed for all kinds of disasters varying from the decline of civilization to famine, pestilence, destruction and death, it is only proper that a short portion of this document be dedicated to the defense of livestock. Domestic ruminants and mankind have been associated with each other for centuries. Mankind has depended and still depends on ruminant livestock for food, byproducts and services. At the same time, ruminants have depended and still depend on man for their welfare.
The basic importance of ruminants to mankind lies in the fact that they can obtain their nourishment from fibrous forage and agricultural and industrial byproducts which people cannot directly consume or utilize. In turn, ruminants provide mankind with food, byproducts and services. About 50% of the earth's land surface is incapable of producing anything other than fibrous forage (Williams, et al., 1968). This land would be of little use to mankind without ruminant livestock.
The quantities of crop, fish, animal and industrial byproducts are astounding. All crops produce many more byproducts than products. For example, corn produces two times more byproducts than grain during the food processing stage, not including field by-products (Kassila, 1983). Many byproducts are processed and sold as feed, adding to the economy and possibly reducing the cost of food.
Garbage disposal is a serious environmental problem which would be more serious without ruminants. The processing of food crops for human consumption results in tremendous amounts of byproducts which are consumed by ruminants and converted into human food. If it were not for livestock, the disposal of this material would create an additional burden to an already overloaded garbage disposal system.
Ruminant products, services and values
Nutritious Food
Meat and milk are excellent foods containing many of the nutrients needed by humans. An outstanding attribute is that they provide an adequate supply and proper balance of ten essential amino acids (protein building blocks). Small quantities of meat and milk added to cereal and root diets can prevent the adverse effects of protein deficiency, such as the killer disease kwashiorkor, which also causes irreversible mental and physical retardation during a child's formative years, poor fetus development, inadequate body maintenance and many other health problems.
Total reported cattle and buffalo, sheep and goat meat production in Latin America and the Caribbean in 1991 was 10,533 million metric tons (FAO, 1991). Total reported fresh whole cow, sheep and goat milk production was 42,599 million tons (FAO, 1991). Portions of this are processed into cheese, butter, ghee, powdered milk and evaporated condensed milk for economic, conservation and distribution reasons. In respect to food supplies per capita per day in 1990, animals provided 18% of 2,693 calories, 43% of 66.8 grams of protein and 44% of 75.6 grams of fat.
The contribution of ruminants to national food supplies are even greater than indicated in the FAO Production Yearbook. The contributions of the llama and alpaca, which are also used for meat, are not included. Farm and village slaughtered animals, especially tropical sheep and goats, do not show up in national inventories. Many countries do not report goat meat and milk production to FAO, although the quantities are known to be quite high.
In spite of these discrepancies, it is obvious that domestic stock are making significant contributions towards nutritious diets in the Region. Statistics show that available calories, protein and fat of animal origin per capita per day are much higher in Latin America and the Caribbean than in any other developing region (FAO, 1991). The animals are valuable for this reason, if for no other reason, and attempts to eliminate them would be pure folly.
Clothing and Comfort
The Region produced 175,749 tons of scoured wool in 1991, along with 1,336 million tons of fresh cow hides, 86,000 tons of fresh sheepskins and 25,000 tons of fresh goat skins (FAO, 1991) plus an unknown amount of alpaca and llama hair. The hides and skins are processed into leather for the manufacture of shoes, clothes, furniture and other products.
While wool is exported, much of it is used for the manufacture of cloth and clothing items. Large amounts are used by cottage industries in the fabrication of sweaters, shawls, capes, socks, gloves and other such items to add to one's comfort during winter. Llama hair is used in the cottage industry for rug making and some countries manufacture woolen rugs. Alpaca fiber is highly prized by the textile industry and the price is usually two to three times that of sheep's wool.
Employment
Data is insufficient to determine the extent of either self-employment or employment due to both the rearing of stock and associated agribusinesses; marketing, processing, distribution, wholesaling, retailing, etc. It must be very large, involving millions of individuals. An estimate to demonstrate the extent of employment created by livestock is nevertheless attempted.
The Region's population in 1991 was 457 million, of which 162 million or 35% were economically active and 41 million or 25.6% of this group were active in agriculture. It is reasonable to assume that at least two-thirds of those individuals economically active in agriculture were also active in livestock production.
Cardozo (1984) reported that all of the small farm holders in the Altiplanos of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru owned some livestock. Personal experience indicates that the vast majority of the 13 million small farms in Central America and the Caribbean are stocked in part with livestock, particularly tropical sheep and/or goats. Nearly all the Savannah, the Pampa, the Patagonia and the arid and semiarid areas are utilized by livestock. Thus, it appears safe to assume that around 27 million of those economically active in agriculture were either fully or partly employed by the livestock sector, including self-employment.
A very conservative employment multiplier of 3, from the farm gate to the consumer, would result in a total of 81 million employed people due to domestic livestock. According to this estimate, 17% of the Region's total population and 50% of the economically active population is employed, at least in part, by the livestock sector.
Security and Stability
Livestock are like bank savings accounts (perhaps better because their values increase with inflation) to many landowners, particularly those with small and marginal holdings. The animals are kept when times are good and sold during family emergencies, such as sickness or when crops fail creating food and income crises.
Studies indicate that mixed-farming systems result in higher and more secure net incomes than crop production alone. As an example, in a study conducted in Colombia, animals represented 45.2% of a farm's revenue, requiring only 7.7% of the farm labour. Each unit of labour for livestock contributed 5.9% to the farm income whereas each unit of labour for other activities contributed only 0.49%. Another study in Colombia showed that animals represented 70% of the net income in integrated farming systems because production costs were lower than those for crops and because animals commanded higher prices. There was also less risk with livestock than with crops (FAO, RLAC, 1988).
Energy
Some ruminant species serve as a renewable source of energy. Oxen are used to pull farm equipment, wagons and carts in some areas. Even goats are used to pull water carts in Central American countries. Various world forums have stated that food production increases should be 1% above the population growth rate and mechanization is generally considered the required way for achieving this. However, the cost of tractorization and the required fuel is beyond the means of many farmers. Moreover, mechanization, as mentioned later, has been identified as a major cause of desertification in some areas.
Manure can also be converted into biogas without loss of fertilizer value. Fuel produced by anaerobic digestion can be used for mechanical and electrical energy and for heat and light.
Fuel
Although the use of dried manure for fuel is not common in Latin America and the Caribbean, it is in other developing regions such as Africa and the Near East.
Fertilizers
Organic fertilizers improve both soil condition and nutrient content. Animal manure is a very good and inexpensive fertilizer -- and the amount produced is important. A cow, for example, excretes 5.5 kg of dry matter per day. Most of this and manure from other kinds of stock falls on the grazing lands. With intensive production systems, however, large quantities can be collected and spread on croplands. There are also industries that collect, process and bag manure for sale to urban dwellers for lawn, flower and other plant fertilization.
Inedible Byproducts
There are many uses of the inedible byproducts such as pharmaceuticals, glue, soap, candles, bone jewelry, mineral supplements, animal feed and many others.
<section>3</section>
The rangeland resource and its importance
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
At least 50% of Latin America and the Caribbean is either too dry, too wet, too steep, too shallow, too infertile and/or too fragile to sustain cultivation or to support arborescent forests. These are the Region's rangelands defined by the Society for Range Management as, "Land on which the native vegetation (climax or natural potential) is predominantly grasses, grass-like plants, fortes, or shrubs. Includes lands revegetated naturally or artificially when routine management of that vegetation is accomplished mainly through manipulation of grazing" (SRM, 1989).
There is no rangeland prototype because there are many different types. Rangelands in the Region include natural grasslands consisting of either tall, short, medium, annual or desert species; savannahs both wet and dry; shrub-lands of various characteristics; alpine communities; coastal marshes; wet meadows and most deserts. The commonalities between these are: (1) they produce a kind of vegetation that only animals can consume and convert into products beneficial to man; and (2) they are not suitable for sustained cultivation and they are incapable of supporting arborescent forests. However, many forests can be grazed without damage to the trees within the multiple-use concept and these are often called "woodland ranges". The objective is not to destroy the forest, but instead to use its resources for more than one product.
Far too many national policy makers and planners do not know what the rangeland resource is, and it goes by many names, some of which are demeaning such as "wasteland" and "underdeveloped" land or "nonutilized" lands. Savannahs and natural shrublands are often put into the forest pigeonhole. Many original grasslands have been invaded by undesirable, high water-requiring and poor environmental stabilizing shrub and small tree species. These are often classified as "forest" and environmentalists cry, "deforestation" at attempts to reduce the woody cover in order to restore the original grassland. At any rate, rangeland resources are too often ignored in national resource surveys and inventories.
Feed Production
If the total digestible nutrients produced by the world's rangelands could be measured in grain crop equivalents, the results would be astounding. In the Near East, rangelands provide more than 90% of the nutrients consumed by 302 million head of domestic livestock; cattle, sheep, goats, buffalo, camels, horses, mules and asses (Norris, 1972 and FAO, 1991). Domestic animals in Africa likely obtain nearly 100% of their nutrients from natural forages.
While studies have not been made in Latin America and the Caribbean, experience indicates that more than 90% of the nutrients consumed by 519 million head of domestic stock comes from rangelands. It is 100% in some areas. Even in the United States, which is criticized for feeding grain to cattle, forages and roughages account for 80-85% of the total feed used to produce a pound of fed beef, including the breeding herd, calf-stocker phase and feedlot. Less than five pounds of feed grains are used per each pound of edible beef produced (Kunkel, 1990).
The total value of the rangeland feed provided by nature in terms of grain and processed feeds amounts to hundreds of thousands of millions of dollars. There would be very little affordable meat, milk, milk products, leather, wool and mohair for people's use without the inexpensive rangeland feed.
Water Yields
Water is at the bottom of any web of life. It is also essential for many of man's endeavors to improve the quality of life such as sanitation, industrialization, navigation, irrigation and recreation, to name just a few. Fresh water is not an abundant resource or at best, there is not an overwhelming surplus.
Table 1. Approximate distribution of water in the hydrosphere (FAO, 1973)
Type of water % of total water % of fresh water % of available water (i.e., fresh and unfrozen)
TOTAL:
Salt 95 
Fresh 5 
FRESH:
Frozen 4 80 
Liquid 1 20 
FRESH LIQUID:
Groundwater 0 .99 19 . 7 99
Lakes 0.01 0.2 1
Soils 0.002 0.04 0.2
Rivers 0.001 0.02 0.1
Atmospheric 0.001 0.02 0.1
Biological 0.0005 0.001 0.005
Table 1 summarizes the general distribution of the water of the hydrosphere among different types of water. Practically all of this water is contained in the oceans and salt seas. Of the fresh water resources of the earth (i.e., about five percent of the total water), the proportion stored in the form of snow and ice or permafrost - and thus not readily available for use-has been estimated as about three quarters of the total fresh water. Consequently, only about one percent of the total water of the earth's hydrosphere is in a form that can be readily and economically exploited (FAO, 1973).
Around 99% of the fresh liquid or available water is in the form of groundwater and the remaining 1% occurs in other forms (Table 1). This should not be construed to mean that this one percent is insignificant. To the contrary, these forms of storage or availability are very significant in respect to desertification. More about this subject will be approached in subsequent sections.
Forests rightly receive considerable attention as watersheds for both surface and underground water supplies. The contributions of rangelands, which also provide both surface and underground water, are either not realized or appreciated. The quantities of water provided by rangelands can be quite high even in arid and semiarid zones.
To illustrate the point, an example is taken from a study in Saudi Arabia, which is one of the driest countries in the world. Average annual rainfalls for various parts of Saudi Arabia vary from 30 to 300 mm. Ninety-nine percent of the country receives less than 100 mm of rainfall and one percent receives between 100 and 300 mm (Juneidi and Huss, 1978).
The Wadi Jizan in Saudi Arabia is around 1,100 km² and the estimated surface flow to Jizan Dam is 90 million cubic meters per year. Studies in the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia indicate a field of 2,900 cubic meters of groundwater per square kilometer of outcrop. Infiltration of only 1 mm over the 1.5 million square kilometers of sedimentary area comes to about 1,500 million cubic meters of water per year (Alfred, 1968).
The land area of Latin America and the Caribbean is 2,053 million hectares, of which approximately 50% or 1,026.5 million hectares are rangeland. Since one square meter of land yields one liter of water for each millimeter of rain and assuming that 15% of this water either runs off or percolates to an aquifer, the amount of water that these lands yield is beyond imagination. The Region's rangelands as watersheds deserve greater attention than they are getting.
Wildlife
The Region's ranges, forest and often the two in connection with each other, support a wide array of wildlife species: ruminants, birds, reptiles, rodents and others. Fish can be included because their habitat depends on the use and condition of the watersheds. Wildlife species are valuable for tourism, hunting, fishing and food. Their economic value is often greater than that for domestic livestock.
The conservation of wildlife is now receiving more attention than in the past. A Technical Cooperation Network on National Parks and Other Protected Areas, Flora and Wildlife has been formed with FAO And UNEP support. Laws have been passed protecting certain species, albeit enforcement is a problem. An association of rancher wildlife conservationists has been formed in Venezuela and some landowners in Mexico have gone into game farming. These are, no doubt, examples of just a few endeavors to conserve and exploit this natural resource.
Recreational and Aesthetic Values
Apart from hunting and the mere observation of wildlife, rangelands have other recreational and aesthetic values. Rangeland scenes are not static, but change from place to place, sunrise to sunset, and season to season. The photographer or anyone desiring the beauty of wide-open spaces can be at home on most rangelands. Rangelands may very well represent the last frontier of clean air to breathe and space to play.
Renewability
Rangelands are a natural renewable resource and they can be managed ecologically and be made to remain productive and environmentally stable forever and ever. However, rangeland abuse is more the rule than the exception in the Region and the resource is simply not given the opportunity to fully renew itself as it is capable of doing. Consequently, the desertification process is rampant and productivity is only a fraction of the potential.
Ranges have a remarkable ability to bounce back when given the opportunity. An example of this is taken from Syria (as illustrated in Figure 1). This arid area was thought to be beyond natural renewability owing to hundreds of years of overgrazing. It was deferred from grazing in order to plant fodder shrubs in plowed rows. The natural regeneration of shrubs and grasses between the rows was equal, if not superior, to the artificial and costly improvement practice. This example clearly shows that man can take advantage of the renewability attributes of rangelands and create productive and stable pastures to the benefit of both livestock and the environment.
In summary, the Region's rangelands produce a kind of vegetation that only animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, can consume and convert into products and services beneficial to people. The resource is naturally renewable and can be managed to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability to meet those of the future. Unfortunately, this goal is not being met.
Abuse is widespread, causing non-renewal of the resource's desirable components, deterioration and poor animal productivity. The abuse is continuing. If man intends to live and depend upon these lands on a sustained basis, this abuse must stop. Sustainable use and management must become the rule rather than the exception.
<section>4</section>
Desertification and its causes
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Concepts and Definitions
Desertification (also called desert creep, desert encroachment, desert formation, etc.) comes from the French meaning "making deserts." There are two schools of thought regarding its cause: (1) long-term (in the geologic sense) climatic change and (2) the destructive consequences of man's activities. The possibility of climatic change being responsible has prompted as many theories as controversies.
Instrumental climatology, the precise, modern science based upon actual measured observations, dates only from the middle of the nineteenth century, which is hardly enough time to detect climatic changes in geological terms. Desertification is occurring at a rapid rate in certain situations. Lamprey (1975), by comparing reconnaissance surveys in 1958 and 1975 in the Sudan, asserted that the desert's southern boundary had shifted south by an average of 90-100 kilometers during the 17-year period. This represents a rate of between 5.3 and 5.9 kilometers per year. Such a rapid rate of vegetation change would require a climatic change of huge magnitude and one that certainly would be measured by meteorological instruments.
Desertification symptoms have been observed to occur in patches only a few kilometers apart or even on the other side of fences. This is illustrated in Figures 2, 3 and 4. Figure 2 is a view of two different ranches in the Sertâo region of northeast Brazil. Vegetation on the ranch on the left is approaching the last stages of the desertification process. Desirable and environmental stabilizing vegetation dominates the ranch on the right. This is due to management.
Figure 3 is a view of an undisturbed range site in northwest Mexico which has not been grazed, at least heavily, because of the lack of livestock drinking water. There is no evidence of desertification symptoms. However, the same kind of range site, as shown in Figure 4, has been decertified because of prolonged destructive grazing pressure. These areas are near each other and the differences in vegetation cover could not be due to different climates.
Climatic change should not be confused with weather fluctuations or with micro-climatic changes. Climate or macroclimate is a long-term average of weathers. Weather is the day to day, month to month and year to year occurrence of climatic features: precipitation, temperature, wind, humidity and radiation. Weather fluctuates and cold spells, heat waves, wet spells, dry spells and droughts are normal. The media and general public often refer to "normal" rainfall, "normal" temperatures, " etc. The only thing "normal" about weather is its variability. However, patterns of recurrent droughts, possibly cyclic in nature, appear to be "normal" for the arid and semiarid regions. This is important regarding desertification and its control.
Macroclimate is the average of weathers as measured by meteorological instruments, all of which are located above ground and some of which are located a meter or more above the soil surface. Microclimate is the climate in which plants actually live including conditions both above and below ground. For example, if only 200 mm of 400 mm of annual rainfall measured in a gauge is available for plant growth because of runoff and evaporation, the plants are actually living in a 200 mm rainfall habitat, where only xerophytes can survive.
Microclimates can change, for better or worse, depending on man's interventions. Man has no control over weather and macroclimate, but he does have control over microclimate. This is fundamental to the understanding of what desertification really is and how it can be controlled and rehabilitated.
There is a possibility that there is an irreversible warming trend because of an increasing greenhouse effect due to an artificial elevation of atmospheric gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides and methane. The release of extra CO2 into the atmosphere is due to man's prodigious use of fossil fuels. Some claim that this is largely due to the energy required by livestock production systems, especially beef production in the U.S.A. Yet, Byers (1990) calculated that agriculture uses less than 3% of the fossil energy used in the U.S.A. and beef cattle production directly uses only 5% of this 3%. It is also claimed that the burning of grasslands and forests releases tons of carbon into the atmosphere. Yet the pyric factor is one of the factors involved in the formation of pristine vegetation. Grassland fires likely occurred in greater frequency and intensity in the past than at present (Billings, 1966). The consultant does not subscribe to the widespread destruction and
burning of forests in Latin America.
Ruminants generate methane, but all ruminants are not domesticated. There are millions of head of ruminant wildlife and their numbers in the past, in some situations, were greater than the current number of domestic ruminants. The American bison existed in greater numbers than the current number of cattle in the Great Plains of the United States. Claims that domestic ruminants contribute significantly to global methane production and global warming is highly questionable. Obviously, any warming trend is due to man rather than animals. Man has caused and is causing desertification and only man can undo what he has done and is doing.
Figure 5. Schematic illustration of desertification process.
Table 2. Classification of the world's climates according to average annual precipitation (Willie, 1962)
Average annual precipitation (mm) Classification % of Land Surface
Less than 500 Arid and Semiarid 55
500 to 1,000 Subhumid 20
1,000 to 1,500 Humid 10
More than 1,500 Very Humid 15
The end product or the last stage of the deterioration process is called either "desertized" or "desertified." Figure 5 is an attempt to schematically demonstrate the process. The symptoms and manifestations of desertification are highlighted in the Figure. The degree of departure of these from an environmentally stabilized plant community represents stages of desertification. The stages can be measured or at least estimated on rangeland ecosystems and perhaps other ecosystems as well.
The rate of desertification as measured in terms of years depends on a multitude of factors beginning with the character of the original plant community and the kind and intensity of misuse. A desertified ecosystem is irreversible regarding natural regeneration. It appears that it takes a very long time for rangelands to become desertified due to overgrazing. This is evidenced by the rangelands in the Near and Middle East which have the longest history of domestic livestock grazing in the world. These lands have been grazed for centuries and heavily overgrazed for the last 50 or more years. Yet, many have not reached the decertified stage (See Figure 1).
Reversibility or natural renewal is essential for desertification control and rehabilitation of the Region's rangelands. Most of the stages of degradation of the desertification process as shown in Figure 5 are reversible. Planners and policy makers need to be aware of this and implement appropriate actions.
Causes
Slightly more than one-half of the world's climates are classified as arid and semiarid (Table 2). Further sub-division of the arid and semiarid areas is loosely defined. Generally speaking, deserts receive 100 mm or less of rainfall, arid lands receive between 100 and 300 mm and semiarid
Arid:
Areas with limited options generally confined to native pastures and extensive animal production. Irrigation possible in some situations.
Semiarid:
Slightly more options than for arid areas. Primarily limited to native pastures and livestock production, but food crop and fodder production are feasible in specific areas. Irrigation also possible in some situations.
Although all climatic areas are subject to desertification the arid and semiarid areas in general and the arid areas in particular, are highly susceptible because they are only a few millimeters of rain away from being true deserts. These areas also represent the heart of the Region's livestock industry.
Weather Fluctuations
Arid and semiarid areas have harsh climates made more harsh by weather fluctuations. There are normally many more years of below average rainfall than average or above. Prolonged droughts occur frequently. Droughts occur so frequently in northeast Brazil, for example, that the area is called the drought polygon. Weather variation, per se, does not cause desertification, but it is an accelerator to desertification, especially when man continues land uses supportable only by average or above average rainfall. Failure to plan for the "bad" years and modify land use accordingly accelerates the desertification process.
Cultivation
Around 75% of the Region's total land area is considered to be arable (FAO, 1991). These lands are capable of sustaining cultivation. Unfortunately, attempts to meet the demands of a rising population have resulted in cultivation of rangelands and, in some cases, forest. These lands are incapable of sustaining cultivation for various reasons.
The common practice of cultivating steep slopes causes degradation. Fortunately, in some cases the system slash-burn-plant-harvest-and-shift to another spot does provide some environmental protection and rehabilitation in the intervals between plantings. The system does provide the rural inhabitants with some food and perhaps some income. The question is: "What could these people do if shifting agriculture were not available to them?" Shifting agriculture 