<section>a</section>
References
Dhungel, D. 1993. "The Effect of Harvest Date on Biomass Production and Oil Yield on Native Lemon grass (C. flexuousus)." Renewable Natural Resources Workshop.
Evans, J. 1984. "Silviculture of Broad-leaved Woodland." Forestry Commission Bulletin 62, pp. 115 to 116.
The Flora of Bhutan, Vol. 2, Part 1.
The Forestry Services Division, video No. DF/Ga-3-6/94/3954 dated 25 February, 1994.
Forest Flora of Chakrata, Dehra Dun, and Saharanpur.
Indian Forest Utilization, Vol. II.
Grierson, A.J.C. and D.G. Long. Flora of Bhutan. Royal Botanical Gardens, Edinburgh: Vol. 1, Part I.
Manual on Resin Tapping for Chir Pine Areas Under Tapping in Bhutan.
The Royal Government of Bhutan. 1991. Master Plan for Forestry Development. Annex Report No. 8.
The Royal Government of Bhutan. "Preinvestment Reports of Forest Resources for Northwest, Central and Eastern, and Southern Bhutan."
The Royal Government of Bhutan. "Problems Besetting Medicinal Plant Collection and Utilisation." Refer to p. 3, paragraph 2.1.1, of the Master Plan for Forestry Development, Annex Report No. 8.
Stapleton, Chris. Bamboos of Bhutan.
Study on the Market for Selected Medicinal Plants and Their Derivatives, Geneva, 1982.
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture). 1992. An Interim Guide to the Conservation and Management of Pacific Yew. Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region.
<title>Non-wood forest products of Bhutan</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
For centuries, the people of Bhutan have lived in harmony with nature in the far reaches of the eastern Himalayas. The Kingdom of Bhutan remains one of the most forested countries in the world, and harbours an astounding diversity of plants and animals. The country's environment has benefitted significantly from deep-rooted Buddhist ethics and a long history of conservation leadership.
The deep reverence the Bhutanese people have for their natural environment exists in spite of, or more likely because of, their extreme dependence on it. The forests of Bhutan, in particular, provide critical materials for the daily subsistence of most Bhutanese families. The Bhutanese make considerable use of wood for houses, shingles, tools, fences, and numerous other items, as well as for cooking and heating. But it is the extensive use of non-wood forest products by the Bhutanese that is especially striking.
Non-wood forest products touch nearly every aspect of the lives of a Bhutanese. The country's forests provide food, fodder, medicine, oils, resins, fibers, dyes, and raw materials for baskets, traditional paper, houses, brooms, mats and numerous other items.
Until recently, most non-wood forest products were used locally by Bhutanese people. Increasingly, however, these products are attracting the interest of outside buyers and consumers in far-away countries. This interest presents both opportunities and risks for Bhutan - opportunities include cash income for the rural poor, revenues for the government for developing the country, and increased investment in rural infrastructure and processing centers; risks include potential over-exploitation of natural resources, inequitable distribution of benefits, and shortages of raw materials that might other wise be used for traditional and local needs.
This publication, prepared by the Forestry Services Division of the Bhutan Ministry of Agriculture, highlights the extensive use and potential of non-wood forest products in Bhutan. It should serve as a useful introduction for all foresters, biologists, and rural development workers interested in Bhutan's complex and bountiful non-wood forest resources and products.
A.Z.M. Obaidullah Khan
Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative of FAO
<section>2</section>
Preface
Often there is a tendency to associate forests with trees and timber production only. Other products, such as bamboo, cane, oil, fibre, floss food, fodder and medicinal plants, are sidelined as merely "Minor Forest Produce," or MFP. Some so-called MFP, however, is economically even more valuable than timber. Moreover, its social and cultural values also add to its importance.
Forestry development, through people's participation programs, is both an important objective and strategy of the Royal Government of Bhutan's Seventh Five-Year Plan. These programs are expected to improve rural people's understanding of the importance of forests and, at the same time, contribute to improving their daily life. Classical forestry models that look at trees alone may not provide the necessary incentives to trigger wide response from the people. Social forestry models must provide quick and attractive economic returns. MFP, particularly medicinal plants, has a tremendous potential as cash crops, and it can often be grown alongside numerous tree species.
In Bhuta's past development activities, unfortunately, MFP as the name suggests, has been accorded less attention than it deserves. Such knowledge as does exist is limited. This ignorance of MFP's value and potential prevents us from reaping the full economic benefits from our vast storehouse of genetic resources. We are not yet sure how to harvest produce from the forests on a sustainable basis. The technology for cultivating such resources has yet to be adequately explored. It is hoped that the change in nomenclature, from MFP to non-wood forest products, will not only give MFP a better image, but also lead to the development of these important resources. The first step in doing this was to review existing information and compile a comprehensive document as a reference base of all local knowledge. A committee was set up for just this purpose. The committee then submitted this report. I am happy to say that their work has surpassed expectations and I am extremely pleased
witch the results.
I congratulate the committee on producing its excellent document within such a short period. This report has greatly improved our knowledge and should act as a catalyst for further development.
S. Thinley
Joint Secretary
Forestry Services Division
The Royal Government of Bhutan
Rugged terrain and lack of roads hinder the marketing and trade of non-wood forest products in most parts of Bhutan.
<section>3</section>
Overview of non-wood forest products in Bhutan
Forest policy
Forest strategy
Forest legislation rules and regulations
The importance of non-wood forest products
Problems and constraints in developing non-wood forest products
General recommendations for long-term activities in developing non-wood forest products
Organisations involved in the development of non-wood forest products
by K. J. Subba
Joint Director
Forest Resources Development Section, Thimphu
The Royal Government of Bhutan
The sudden rise of the Himalayas from the flat Indo-Gangetic plains into jagged and lofty mountain peaks endows Bhutan with a wide range of ecological zones. In the Himalayas, it is possible to move from tropical conditions to the alpine zone in a matter of hours. The flora and fauna are thus at once both diverse and unique to Bhutan's singular geography.
Most of the Himalayas, unfortunately, are in an advanced stage of decay Some authors even describe the Himalayas as dying mountains. For the rural communities of these soaring mountains, the world's highest, over-population and over-use of land resources long ago crossed the line of sustainability. At the same time, biodiversity has inevitably become much poorer, the protective value of the forests has been lost and the region, particularly downstream areas, faces severe, natural calamities every year.
Fortunately, Bhutan, in the Eastern Himalayas, enjoys a somewhat more hopeful situation. Here people have learnt to live in harmony with nature in a symbiotic relationship that goes back untold centuries. The Buddhist philosophy of love and respect for nature has also greatly influenced the people's attitude towards their land and its environment. Thus 60 percent of Bhutan's forest cover is still in a pristine state. Flora and fauna, extinct or threatened elsewhere, continue to thrive in Bhutan.
Forest policy
Bhutan's forest policy places conservation above all other considerations. Harvesting or commercial use of the forest is only permitted after conservation goals have been met and only if management policies ensure sustainable use.
Forest strategy
Bhutan has designated 23 percent of its national territory as protected areas, distributed over different ecozones. These are strictly controlled for the conservation of flora, fauna and biodiversity.
All remaining forests are designated production forests. Their management is also guided by conservation principles. Bhutan places strong emphasis on people's participation in forest management and on the development of forestry extension services.
Forest legislation rules and regulations
Rules and regulations are regularly updated to improve and better enforce forest conservation policies (the Royal Government of Bhutan's Master Plan for Forestry Development 1991, Annex Report No. X). These rules, however, still allow the Bhutanese people to practice their traditional use of forest products. Here are a few examples:
Medicinal Plants
· The 1974 National Forest Policy categorises medicinal plants and herbs as resources yet to be fully exploited. Hence the Policy specifies that these resources be surveyed for efficient management and use.
· May 25, 1988 - The Director of Forests approved a proposal to: 1) ban exports of medicinal plants, and 2) establish joint efforts by the Department of Forests (DOF) and the National Institute of Traditional Medicine (NITM) to both collect and cultivate medicinal plants.
Resin
· April 3, 1985 - Revised rules on resin tapping from chir pine (Pinus roxburghii) were approved.
Natural Dyes
· January 4, 1980 - The Royal Government of Bhutan waived royalties and sales taxes on the collection and sale of lac and waste products therefrom. This was to revive the dying art of lac cultivation and associated activities. No monopoly is now permitted.
· September 8, 1985 - Exports of vegetable dyes were curtailed. These are now for domestic use only.
The abrupt rise of the Himalayas from the plains of India determines everything in Bhutan - topography, settlement, economy and climate.
Bamboo and Cane (Rattan)
· November 7, 1978 - The Government decided that villagers in the Phontsholing area could henceforth collect bamboo and cane without paying taxes or royalties. This is to encourage the production of handicrafts for sale and domestic use.
· May 7, 1979 - The Government gave Mongar and Zhemgang villagers permission to transport "bangchungs," "palangs" (both traditional bamboo containers) and other products made of bamboo or cane anywhere, as long as they are for gifts, and not for sale.
· September 2, 1984 The Government, to encourage handicrafts production, allowed Dhrumjar (Mempa) Trongsa villagers to collect bamboo and cane for sale or domestic use without paying taxes or royalties.
Other Forest Products
No legislation, rules or regulations have yet been enacted for essential oils, mushrooms, and other forest products.
The importance of non-wood forest products
More than 80 percent of the Bhutanese population depends on agriculture and animal husbandry for its livelihood. To remain sustainable, the country's farm system is highly dependent on forests. Non-wood forest products, used daily, are taken for granted. Important as they are, the full impact of these products on Bhutan's rural economy is yet to be either assessed or documented.
Grazing and Fodder Production
Animal husbandry is an important contributor to the country's rural economy. Almost every household maintains at least a few cattle for draft power, animal products and for manure. Many Bhutanese keep large herds as a status symbol or as insurance against hard times. The country's animal population is estimated at 300,000 cattle and buffaloes, 28,000 yaks, 40,000 sheep, 42,000 goats and 22,000 horses.
These animals' dependence on forests for fodder is not as yet fully appreciated. It is general Bhutanese practice to simply chase the animals into the forests to forage wherever they like and for whatever is available. In Bhutan, forests and grazing lands often overlap. During winter, when forest fodder becomes scarce in the country's colder areas, cattle are driven to forests in warmer climes. Tree fodder is collected, particularly for the milch cows so important for milk production during winter.
Bamboo
Bamboo is rightfully known as the "poor man's timber." Its use is so versatile that it merits a full study on its own. In Bhutan, bamboo has many uses. Due to the country's varied climate, many different kinds are available. Large bamboo, such as Dendrocalamus hamiltonii, is found in tropical areas, while the very small Arundinaria maling is found at high altitudes.
One of the most common uses for bamboo in Bhutan is for making bows and arrows. Archery is the national sport and an important cultural activity. Bows are made from Dendrocalamus hamiltonii, though only those that grow on particular microsites produce good bows. Arrows are made from high altitude bamboo. Making these arrows requires considerable skill. The arrows' feathers, for example, are obtained only from one type of wild pheasant, while the glue for attaching them is made only from fish skin.
Split bamboo is commonly woven into mats for house walls and roofs.
Producing fine bamboo baskets and other containers is a speciality of the people in the country's eastern districts. Such products, now becoming popular with tourists, are marketed throughout Bhutan. Poor people also use bamboo baskets for storage and as water containers. Many of the country's poor live in houses made entirely of bamboo. In southern and eastern Bhutan, the larger bamboos are all but indispensable to rural life, so much so that living without them cannot even be imagined. The smaller bamboos found in central and western Bhutan are used for weaving mats, as fencing, or as roofing for temporary shelters.
Traditional Medicine
Traditional medicine is still practiced throughout Bhutan, with its more than 300 species of medicinal plants. The National Institute of Traditional Medicine (NITM), for example, is a well-organised institute staffed with traditional and western trained doctors. The Institute regularly collects plants to produce medicine as per formulae cited in ancient medical scriptures. NITM combines traditional medicine with acupuncture to treat all types of diseases. The Institute is rapidly gaining in popularity, even though a nearby modern hospital provides free services.
While NITM's set-up is quite elaborate, simpler systems of traditional medicine - provided by individuals or groups - are practiced in rural areas. In the south, traditions are different. Knowledge of medicinal plants is passed down from father to son. Some practitioners combine spiritualism, and its accompanying elaborate rituals, with dispensing medicine.
As traditional medicine does not have the side effects associated with modern-day medicine, it is once again becoming popular. The country's modernisation almost wiped out this age-old practice and once-thriving business. It is known that in olden days at least two plants, ruta (Saussurea lappa) and menu (Innula helenium), were cultivated and marketed in the Bumthang Valley. Today many people do not even remember what these plants look like. A remnant of menu, however, has been found and is being cultivated by at least one family.
The 14 most prevalent diseases in Bhutan (Master Plan for Forestry Development 1991) in order of seriousness are:
· Respiratory tract infections
· Diarrhoea/dysentery
· Skin infections
· Worm infections
· Malaria
· Conjunctivitis
· Peptic ulcer syndrome
· Otitis media
· Tooth and gum diseases
· Urinary tract infections and nephritis
· Childhood diseases
· Sexually-transmitted diseases
· Diseases of the female genital tract
· Complications in pregnancy and childbirth puerperium
Natural Dyes
Natural dyes comprise another group of non-wood forest products associated with Bhutanese traditional arts and culture. Cloth weaving is an important economic activity in the central and eastern "dzongkhags," or regions. At one time, the colouring of textiles was entirely done by using natural dyes. Many plants were cultivated for this, and some were even exported to Tibet. Natural dyes are gradually being replaced by chemicals or ready-made coloured thread. Improvements in the quality of natural dyes, however, may revive their production. A project at Khaling in eastern Bhutan is presently compiling an information base on natural dyes and conducting research to improve such dyes.
Pine Resin and Lemon Grass
Pine resin collection and lemon grass distillation are recently introduced activities in Bhutan. More than 270 tons of resin are collected each year by villagers in the country's eastern districts and sold to a factory. As the work is carried out close to their farms, farmers supplement their incomes by doing such collection when they are free from farm work. These activities pump more than Nu. 30 million (just under US$ 1 million) into the country's rural economy.
Lemon grass distillation employs some 400 families in the eastern dzongkhags. To these families, this activity has become even more important than farming.
Forest Foods
Forests also play an important role in Bhutan's food security. Food from the forests becomes critical to rural areas in times of crisis, when transporting food to remote areas is difficult, or when people have no money to buy food. Because of Bhutan's varied and unpredictable climatic conditions, from time to time the country faces localised droughts and other conditions causing crop failures.
During hard times, people search for food in the forests to supplement their meagre supplies. Thus an important plant is yam (Dioscorea sp.). This plant has long tubers and requires a considerable amount of digging to obtain. Tuber hunting, though, is always a gamble. A vine may yield up to 10 kilogrammes of tubers, or nothing at all. Yet the plant's exotic taste and the hungry mouths waiting back home, make the hard digging worthwhile. When food shortages become extreme, the bulbs that grow on the vines are also eaten. This occurs only under the most desperate situations as the bulbs, which are stewed, are bitter and cannot be eaten too often. Bhutan has other less well-known tubers, but Dioscorea remains the most important substitute for food grains.
Another commodity that sends poorer farmers into the forests during difficult times is seeds, from which cooking oil is extracted. Many wild seeds can be used to produce oil. The seeds of the Symplocos tree, for example, are commonly used for this purpose, even in good years. The seed of Gynocardia sp., a subtropical tree, is used less frequently because of its highly-poisonous covering. Sal (Shorea robusta) seeds are collected and marketed in India because Bhutan still lacks the requisite extraction technology at the rural level. Neolitsea is cultivated throughout Bhutan, particularly in the country's eastern districts. Aesandra butyracea, a multipurpose tree, is also an important source of oil.
A variety of forest fruits and nuts are regularly consumed in Bhutan, but contribute little to food security. Some fruit is plucked and eaten by rural folks passing through forests; some may be taken home. Fruits and nuts, such as the walnut, Cornus, Zizyphus, and Morus, are occasionally marketed. Some wild fruits are rich in vitamins. Phyllanthus emblica, for example, is recognised as a rich source of vitamin C.
Villagers also use many plants as vegetables. Fern shoots, bamboo shoots, mushrooms, cane shoots and even orchid flowers are marketed in their respective seasons. These are much sought after delicacies throughout Bhutan. Mushrooms, particularly Cantharellus cibarius, are canned and sold for as much as Nu. 50 (about US$ 1.50) per kilogramme. These are found in oak-pine forests in the country's temperate zones. Some are exported. The oak mushroom is-widely cultivated on oak billets.
Traditional paper made from Daphne spp. and Edgeworthia gardneri has become a popular export product.
Villagers in western Bhutan commonly collect and sell beetle leaf and beetle nut on a year-round basis. Leaves are collected from tropical and sub-tropical forests, then transported from western Bhutan to northern districts where wild leaves are preferred over cultivated varieties.
Bhutan's forests also produce a number of spices, used locally and exported. Piper sp. is one of the country's most important spices. Though not used locally, this spice earns people in tropical areas a good income during season. Cinnamomum sp. bark and leaves are also collected and exported. Zanthoxylum sp. seeds are marketed locally and are extensively used throughout the country.
Problems and constraints in developing non-wood forest products
Bhutan's potential for developing its non-wood forest products (NWFP) is quite considerable. But this promising sector is burdened, at least for the present, by several serious constraints. Too little is known, for instance, about the country's existing resources, management strategies, best harvesting practices and marketing opportunities. Professionals in the NWFP sector are far too few and they have limited knowledge of practical management and prospects for further and future development. Institutional support is extremely weak.
There is an acute lack of inventory data and even many of the best informed Bhutanese professionals admit they are all but completely in the dark as to the country's real NWFP resources. But finding out just what these resources are and, equally important, where they are requires money, and money is precisely the resource in shortest supply in the country. Bhutan is, after all, one of the poorest countries on earth. Per capita income is a lowly US$ 150 a year and government financial resources are never adequate to cover Bhutan's almost endless development needs.
The shortage of quality training institutes in the country is another major constraint to Bhutanese development. Legal codes and laws governing most phases of forestry development are as yet inadequate and where they do exist they are all too often ignored. Comprehensive enforcement of modern forestry legislation, even were it to exist, would require more forestry officers than Bhutan could afford to put into the field.
Geography itself is a massive physical barrier to the country's rapid development. Bhutan lies in the heart of the beautiful but stupendously rugged Eastern Himalayas, and is, in fact, one of the most mountainous countries on the planet. To build a good all-weather road in Bhutan is a colossal and extremely expensive achievement. The present road network, for instance, though by far the best the country has ever known, makes the transport of goods a slow, costly, and at times dangerous, endeavour. Roads, uniformly narrow due to the Himalayan peaks through which they pass, are few and far between.
During the long rainy season and the winters of ice and snow, Bhutan's roads often become altogether impassable, beset as they are by landslides and washouts. All this adds up to far more than just human inconvenience. It is a major obstacle to development of any kind.
These problems and developmental constraints seriously affect every aspect of the country's social and economic advancement, including its budding non-wood forest products industry.
General recommendations for long-term activities in developing non-wood forest products
· Establish national priorities based on all known non-wood forest products and prioritise them according to an agreed set of criteria.
· Aim for a more complete inventory of the prioritised commodities, giving species, locations, and quantities. This would involve taxonomists, botanists, forest rangers, and foresters, among others.
· Train personnel in plant identification, proper collection methods, appropriate processing techniques, efficient manufacturing procedures, quality control, and the generation of new designs.
· Establish and maintain gene banks for conservation, tissue culture, and seed storage, and start a collection of voucher herbarium specimens; set up extension and information centres for teaching the art of vegetable dyeing.
· Set up post-harvest handling facilities as close to commodity sources as possible for drying, sifting, deep freezing, controlled atmosphere, etc.
· Initiate annual scholarships and grants for B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in related disciplines or short-term, non-degree training programmes for acquiring new technologies.
· Create an agency, or agencies, to serve as the national clearing house for all matters pertaining to non-wood forest products, including marketing. This should include a mechanism to oversee annual reviews of accomplishments, preferably conducted by unbiased third-party personnel.
Organisations involved in the development of non-wood forest products
Forest Research Section, Research Extension and Irrigation Division of the Ministry of Agriculture
· herbarium collection, plant identification
· vegetative propagation of important non-wood products
Forestry Services Division
· collection of information on non-wood product use
· survey of non-wood forest products
Research Extension and Irrigation Division of the Ministry of Agriculture
· essential oils
· vegetable oils
· mushroom production
Ministry of Trade and Industries
· survey of specific non-wood products with industrial potential
· marketing and production
National Institute of Traditional Medicine
· collection of medicinal plants and production of medicines
· research on cultivation and propagation of important medicinal plants
The Handloom Weaving Centre, Khaling
· documentation on traditional natural dyes
· production of textiles based on natural dyes
Cottage Industries (Yatha Weaving Centres)
· production of textiles based on natural dyes
National Women's Association of Bhutan
· interested in local paper production and other non-wood products
Farmers' markets selling non-wood forest products are common throughout Bhutan.
<section>4</section>
Bamboo, cane, wild banana, fibre, floss and brooms
Bamboo
Cane
Wild banana
Fibre, floss and brooms
by Dorji Rinchen
Divisional Forest Officer, Samdrup Jongkha
The Royal Government of Bhutan
Bamboo
Bamboo grows naturally in Bhutan because of the country's largely undisturbed forests and the limited agriculture practiced in areas where bamboo proliferates (Table 1). The Kingdom probably has the greatest variety of bamboo species of all the Himalayan countries. Bhutan's great range of altitudes and climates account for this diversity. Bhutanese bamboo is principally of Himalayan and Chinese-Japanese origins, with some Southeast Asian and South Indian contributions. Bhutan has 15 genera and 31 species of bamboo. Possibly as many as 50 more species exist, but have yet to be identified.
Table 1 Information on Bamboo in Bhutan
Botanical name
Local name
Distribution
Parts used
Arundinaria spp.
Maling bans
Chimithangka and Thimphu
Selephu/Paro
Diafam/Samdrup Jongkha
Bhangtar/Samdrup Jongkha
Nganglam/Samdrup Jongkha
Deothang/Samdrup Jongkha
Pemagatshel
Stems
Leaves
Arundinaria maling
Hima
Begana/Thimphu
Helela/Thimphu
Lamperi/Thimphu
Stems
Bambusa spp.
Bhalu bans
Sarpang
Samdrup Jongkha
Samtse
Stems
Dendrocalamus spp.
Mal bans/Choya bans
Sarpang Zhemgang Samdrup Jongkha Pemagatshel
Stems
Dendrocalamus stricta
Bejuli bans
Sarpang
Stems
Distribution
Knowledge of the distribution of Bhutan's bamboo species is limited. Major species found in sub-tropical areas include Bambusa nutans, Dendrocalamus hamiltonii, D. sikkimensis, D. patelleries, D. strictus Drepanostachyum hookerianum, and D. intermedium Higher elevation species include Arundinaria racemosa, A. maling and A. polystachya. Other species are Dendrocalamus hookeri and Arundinaria griffithii (Griernd dwarf rhododendron trees).
Current and Potential Uses
Bamboo has long been used by the Bhutanese people. A few of its major uses, identified with the genera most commonly used for each product, are listed below:
Bambusa species
· split and woven mats
· used whole for construction and scaffolding
Dendrocalamus species
· roofs and walls of houses
· domestic and agricultural implements, such as water containers, baskets, trays, mats, etc.
· leaves provide valuable fodder for livestock
· shoots are edible and can be preserved
Drepanostachyum species
· finely woven domestic and agricultural equipment, such as baskets, trays, mats, sieves, etc.
· livestock shelters and temporary dwellings
· parts of traditional houses
· edible shoots
Thamnocalamus species
· roofing, mats and fencing
Arundinaria species
· high-quality woven handicraft products, such as food and drink containers, hats, arrows, quivers, etc.
· winter and dry season livestock fodder
· durable mats for building construction fencing material
· edible shoots
· shelter and food for endemic fauna in reserve areas
Bhutan's overall development policy is to make limited use of many natural resources, concentrating on the renewable ones. This policy recognises the importance of rural activities, such as agriculture, forestry, and handicrafts production, in the country's long-term development strategy. Bamboo is involved in all of these. The demand for bamboo is, therefore, bound to increase over time, particularly for use as fodder and other multipurpose uses. There is ample scope for greater bamboo production, especially in the country's higher areas where communities are widely dispersed and agriculture is less profitable.
The manufacture of handicrafts using locally-available materials, such as bamboo, and employing simple techniques and equipment is now emphasised in Bhutan. The country is fortunate in having highly-skilled craftsmen, a strong cultural heritage, and a good supply of renewable resources. There is a need, however, for improving the design of handicrafts and hence their market appeal. This could raise the income of the rural people while allowing them to maintain their culture and way of life.
Increasing the use of bamboo resources in the making of Bhutanese handicrafts has the advantage of building upon existing traditions without threatening the country's cultural heritage or way of life. The people of Zhemgang, for example, are permitted to collect bamboo free of taxes for making "bangchungs" and "palangs" (traditional containers) etc., for their own use or as gifts. Only unwise human interference has retarded bamboo proliferation in Bhutan.
Using simple methods, bamboo harvested from forests is often transported long distances.
Cane
Cane is the stem of the climbing palm of the genus Calamus and other related genera. Bhutanese cane belongs to the Palmae family and is commonly found in the country's tropical and subtropical areas. Palmae is represented by 170 genera and more than 2,500 species worldwide. There are 13 genera of Palmae found in Bhutan.
Distribution
As with bamboo, knowledge of the distribution of Bhutan's cane is limited. Species so far reported in tropical areas are Calamus acanthospathatus and Calamus tenuis, found in Zhemgang, Trongsa, Punakha, Chukha, Haa, Mongar, Trashigang, Samdrup Jongkha, Pemagatshel, Samtse and Sarpang Districts.
Calamus acanthospathatus is locally known as "de" (Sharchop-kha) and "phogrebeth" (Nepal). Calamus tenuis is known as "menj" (Sharchop-kha). A third cane species, locally-known as "phasi", has been reported but its presence is not yet confirmed.
Current Uses and Potential
Calamus acanthospathatus is a common climber, which grows extensively in Bhutan. It yields strong cane and is used as a substitute for rope and as cable for suspension bridges. It is also used for wickerwork, baskets, and containers. Thicker cane is used for making furniture frames, walking sticks and umbrella handles. The shoots of this plant are edible.
Calamus tenuis is used for making household items, such as mats, screens, furniture and chair seats.
The long distances from where cane grows to roads and the limited availability of this resource, restrict the potential for expansion of its use and exploitation.
Wild banana
Distribution
Wild banana (Musa spp.) grows in Bhutan's sub-tropical and temperate regions at up to 1,800 metres (Table 2). There are three varieties. Although it has never been successfully managed, wild banana grows prolifically on "tseri" (shifting cultivation) land abandoned after cultivation, openings in forests, and on