<title>Unasylva - Vol. 4, No. 4 - Technical assistance</title>
<section>1</section>
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
NORRIS E. DODD, Director-General
SIR HERBERT BROADLEY, K.B.E., Deputy Director General
DIVISION OF FORESTRY AND FOREST PRODUCTS
MARCEL LELOUP, Director
EGON GLESINGER, Deputy Director
R. C. FORTUNESCU, Executive Officer
HEADQUARTERS (Washington)
B. CLARKE
N. DE FELSÖVANYI
T. FRANÇOIS
J. D. B. HARRISON
J. KAGAN
C. MÖRATH
H. RECART
T. V. TARKIANEN
L. J. VERNELL
J. VINZANT
EUROPE AN WORKING GROUP (Geneva)
D. R. CAMERON, Chief
F. CZERNIN
B. G. FONTAINE
E. KALKKINEN
P. SARTORIUS
LATIN-AMERICAN WORKING GROUP (Rio de Janeiro)
P. TERVER, Chief
H. SCAVENIUS
FAR EASTERN WORKING GROUP (Bangkok)
M. A. HUBERMAN, Chief
C. PURKAYASTHA
STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY AND FOREST PRODUCTS
Chairman: L. F. WATTS Chief of U. S. Forest Service, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Vice-Chairman: B. DUFAY Hon. Director-General of Waters and Forests, Paris, France
R. R. CASTAÑEDA, Ministry of Forestry and Agriculture, Bogota, Colombia
G. CERF, Shell Buildings, Brussels, Belgium
A. CESCHI, Counsellor, Ministry of Commerce, Vienna, Austria
H. G. CHAMPION, Professor of Forestry, Imperial Forestry Institute, Oxford, England
M. D. CHATURVEDI, Inspector-General of Forests, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi, India
A. R. ENTRICAN, Director of Forestry, State Forest Service, Wellington, New Zealand
A. FJELSTAD, Delegate of the Royal Norwegian Government for Agricultural Affairs, Washington, D. C., U.S.A.
S. C. LEE, Director, Forestry Administration, Formosa
D. A. MACDONALD, Director, Forestry Branch, Department of Resources and Development, Ottawa, Canada
H. MARK, Director of the Institute of Polymer Research and of the Chemical Department, Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, New York, U.S.A.
A. PAVARI, Director Forestry Experiment Station, Florence, Italy
G. J. RODGER, Director-General, Commonwealth Forestry and Timber Bureau, Melbourne, Australia
S. A. ROMERO, Director of Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, Caracas, Venezuela
E. SAARI, Professor, Forestry Department, University of Helsinki, Finland
P. DE SOUZA, Chief, Division of Forests and Parks, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
F. TAMESIS, Director Bureau of Forestry, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Manila, Philippine Republic
E. G. WINKELMANN, Director of the Swiss Forest Economy Association, Solothurn, Switzerland
TECHNICAL COMMITTEES
Forestry Education: Chairman, H. G. CHAMPION, Professor of Forestry, Oxford University, England
Wood Chemistry: Chairman, H. MARK, Director of the Institute of Polymer Research and of the Chemical Department, Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. New York. U.S.A.
Mechanical Wood Technology: Chairman, J. CAMPREDON, Chief of the National Timber Institute, Paris, France
Unexploited Forests: Chairman, T. GILL, Secretary of the Charles Lathrop Pack Forestry Foundation, Washington, D. C., U.S.A.
Forest Research: Chairman, E. I. KOTOK, Assistant Chief in Charge of Research U.S. Forest Service, Washington, D. C., U.S.A.
<section>2</section>
Editorial
The Expanded Technical Assistance Program is a collective endeavor collective because all the United Nations and the member countries of the specialized agencies are participating or can participate in it.
In a collective undertaking it is well to know how each participant envisages the possibilities and the problems. It was therefore thought useful to provide a representative cross-section of the views of those who have to deal with the new program from the governmental point of view as well as from the technical point of view. The picture presented could not be a complete one. That would have gone far beyond the limits of UNASYLVA. The diversity of approach of the authors who have contributed to this issue does, however, illustrate the great number of problems to be solved. There will be no universal panacea that can be indiscriminately applied: each country's problems will have to be attacked according to the individual circumstances, and the skill of the technical assistance experts will consist in devising solutions best suited to local conditions, economic possibilities, and technical capabilities.
In order to understand clearly the possibilities of the Expanded Technical Assistance Program, it should be borne in mind that the funds are meant to provide countries with technical knowledge; financing undertakings beyond this stage is a separate and very complicated problem. Like all development, it will entail sacrifices to be made by the countries that are to be developed - the same sacrifices that were borne through years, or even centuries, by the countries that can now put their experience at the disposal of others. It may be possible, through the Expanded Technical Assistance Program, to shorten the time element, but not the sum of the effort needed. It is a great endeavor, and it will provide opportunity for the initiative not only of governments and of those organizations and associations created to encourage the development of the various branches of national economies, but also particularly of private industry and enterprise that will have to play an
increasingly important part if the Expanded Technical Assistance programs are to achieve their full scope.
The Technical Assistance Agreement with Guatemala is signed by Senor Dr. Don Antonio Goubaud-Carrera, Ambassador for Guatemala to the United States of America, and Norris E. Dodd, Director-General of FAO.
<section>3</section>
The expanded program of technical assistance
By M. PEREZ-GUERRERO, Executive Secretary, Technical Assistance Board, United Nations
The Expanded Program of Technical Assistance for economic development of underdeveloped countries, which recently was undertaken by the United Nations and the specialized agencies, has a history going back to the San Francisco Conference of 1945. The signatories of the United Nations Charter were aware that it was insufficient to create an organization, which should attempt to maintain international peace and security without at the same time promoting the economic and social conditions of peace. They, therefore, pledged themselves in Article 55 to work for "higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development."
The tremendous and dangerous disparity between the standard of living in the advanced and the underdeveloped countries was illustrated in a recent UN study. In 1947 it was estimated that the average income per caput in the United States of America was over $1,400 and in another 14 countries it ranged between $1,400 and $900. But in 25 other countries, comprising more than half the world's population, the average income was less than $100 a year. This inequality was nothing new. But it has been emphasized after the war by the emergence in Asia of substantial new independent nations, India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Burma, and Ceylon, whose elected governments are pledged to momentous programs for the improvement of the standard of living and whose populations are increasingly impatient of existing standards. The basic problem in these and other underdeveloped countries is constant pressure on the land, creating a vicious circle of poverty; poverty preventing investment in new
agricultural equipment which would produce better crops, or an industry which would create new employment; poverty which prevents the effective eradication and treatment of disease and of illiteracy.
To overcome this poverty capital investment is required - new industrial and agricultural machinery, power plants, medicines, transport equipment. But at an earlier stage what is more urgently required is planning and technical advice. Adult illiteracy, for instance, is not abolished by building schools but by finding the best medium for approaching the illiterate. In the eradication of disease to persuade the villager to adopt simple sanitary precautions is as important as to provide medicines. And the best industrial machinery is useless without trained mechanics to maintain it.
The United Nations and the specialized agencies are in no position to provide loans or investments, but they can, and always have seen it as one of their most important functions, provide experts to visit countries which require advice and technical instruction, and, what is equally important, provide training abroad for nationals of underdeveloped countries. Even before the announcement of President Truman's Point Four Program the United Nations General Assembly had appropriated a modest sum for a technical assistance program. This was used to organize expert missions to advise governments on their economic development programs and to offer fellowships for advanced technical training abroad.
Financing the Program
It was, however, as a result of President Truman's initiative that the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in February 1949 asked the Secretary General and the heads of the specialized agencies to work out a "comprehensive plan for the expanded program of technical assistance," and in August 1949, having considered that plan, evolved in Resolution 222(IX) detailed machinery for its administration. What remained was to find the money to finance it' and in July 1950 all members, not only of the United Nations but also of the specialized agencies, were invited to Lake Success to pledge contributions to a new Technical Assistance Fund. In a remarkably short and harmonious conference just over $20 million was pledged for the first 18 months of the scheme.
By the end of August about 11 percent of the pledged funds had already been paid in, and a start had been made with the operation. Under Resolution 222(IX) the method of work had been very carefully prescribed. The first $10 million of the contribution is automatically available for distribution among the participating organizations in fixed proportions. These organizations are, in addition to the United Nations, the following specialized agencies: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and World Health Organization (WHO). The organizations provide expert technicians or training facilities only in response to requests from governments, and not from individuals or private organizations. To ensure co-ordination and to prevent any duplication of work, a Technical Assistance Board (TAB) has been set up on which each agency is
represented, and in whose discussions the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund participate. The Board agrees on the establishment of joint missions to visit countries which have manifold problems for which technical assistance has been requested. It prepares background studies. It arranges for the necessary currency clearings. It sets common standards for experts and fellows. It arranges for the appointment of Resident Technical Assistance Representatives who are stationed in individual countries to advise governments on their requirements of technical assistance in relation to the developmental needs of the country and the resources at the disposal of the organization. The Board also maintains working relationships with other technical assistance schemes such as that of the Organization of American States. The Technical Assistance Board remains responsible to the Economic and Social Council which has set up a Technical Assistance Committee (TAC) consisting
of its full membership, to receive regular reports from the Board.
The Work in Hand
Such, briefly, is the history of the creation of the expanded program. Its future can perhaps be indicated from the numerous requests for assistance which have already been received from every continent. To note a few samples among them, the United Nations secretariat itself has been asked for economic advisers statisticians, and experts in social welfare. The International Labour Organisation has been asked to advise on co-operatives and social insurance. FAO has been asked to provide experts in agriculture, fisheries and forestry; UNESCO to advise on general education and illiteracy. ICAO has been asked for aviation experts; WHO for public health, malaria, tuberculosis, and typhus control experts.
Why must so wide a field be covered by the United Nations and the specialized agencies, when other means for carrying out technical assistance have existed for many years? This question was answered by the Secretary-General in opening the Technical Assistance Conference of June 1950. The program, he said, "is founded on the principle of universality - universality of participation of contribution and of benefits.... It demonstrates the United Nations spirit by the fact that the underdeveloped countries will share in its direction and administration on a basis of full equality with the more developed countries. None of the abuses associated with past experiences of political or economic domination of one country by another are possible.
Though the new program has made a sound start and a lot can be expected from it, its limitations should not be overlooked. Twenty million dollars is a small sum in relation to the appalling poverty of great areas of Asia and of Latin America. The expanded program cannot provide capital, nor indeed equipment except the minimum necessary for demonstration purposes. The number of well trained experts available for technical assistance work is also limited. By itself it can hardly raise the standard of living of any country. It depends for its usefulness on the energy and resourcefulness of the requesting nations in implementing the recommendations of the experts. But already it is clear that since the war there is a much wider intolerance of poverty, illiteracy, and disease in the world. Wherever governments are prepared to make efforts and even sacrifices to raise the standard of living and seek technical advice in doing so, they will find a sympathetic and unprejudiced source
of assistance in the United Nations and the specialized agencies.
<section>4</section>
What is technical assistance?
By SIR GERARD CLAUSON, K.C.M.G., O.B.E., Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Colonial Office, London
Technical Assistance is not a new concept; it is one of the oldest things in the world. Probably the first time it occurred was when Eve, with her superior sense of dress, helped Adam fix his fig leaf. "Technical assistance," in the sense in which the words are used in the phrase, "An expanded program of technical assistance to underdeveloped countries," is merely one application of a primordial human activity, but an application which is not as well understood as it should be, even in the underdeveloped countries to which this new prospect of help in solving their problems is held out.
Just as there is nothing new in the concept of technical assistance, so also there is nothing new in the concept of technical assistance to underdeveloped countries. Most countries in the world have received technical assistance from other countries at some period in the course of their history; and for centuries now individuals or corporations from the more advanced countries have deliberately gone to less advanced countries to help them in their development. Indeed for a good many years the governments of the more advanced countries, as well as the citizens, have taken a hand in the process. But until recently it never occurred to any government that its obligation to give technical assistance extended beyond dependent territories for which, in the modern phrase, it had international responsibility. What is new in the expanded program launched under President Truman's inspiration is that, for the first time in history, most nations in the world have publicly accepted a
financial obligation to take part in a co-operative program of technical assistance to the underdeveloped countries and bound themselves to do all that they can to make it a success.
The course of events since President Truman included Point Four in his famous inaugural address is too well known to need description, but particular attention should be given to the statement of principles annexed to the Economic and Social Council's resolution of August 1949, which has since been approved by the Assembly of the United Nations and the Technical Assistance Conference at Lake Success as governing the implementation of the program.
It would take more space than is available here to discuss these principles at length; the purpose of this article is merely to discuss their application within the field of forestry; but one preliminary observation is important. "Technical assistance" has limits which are clearly defined, and it is not worth giving it unless it is known in advance that certain conditions exist which will make it useful. To take a simple analogy, if a man's automobile has broken down and he asks for help to get it going again, technical assistance, in the form approved by the ECOSOC principles, would extend to looking at the automobile and telling the owner what had gone wrong and how it could be put right; it would not, however, extend to doing the repair job for him, or giving him the spare part necessary to put it right. That he must do for himself at his own expense, that is with his own money or a loan, if anyone will give him one. So it is no use giving a man technical assistance in
such a case if he is obviously as broke as his automobile, and it is known that no one will lend him the money to mend it. Technical assistance, in short, is a procedure for helping underdeveloped countries to help themselves; it is not a procedure for giving or lending them money to be spent on actual development.
An underdeveloped country either has forests or it has none. If it has forests, they are either left to themselves or they are exploited, more or less. If they are exploited, they are exploited either scientifically and properly, or unscientifically and harmfully. If a country has no forests, either the soil and physical conditions are suitable for forest cultivation or they are not. The only country which has no use for technical assistance in the field of forestry is the country which has no forests and knows that there is no prospect of establishing them. Every other kind of country may need technical assistance; even the country at the extreme opposite end of the scale which has forests properly and scientifically exploited may need technical assistance in the form of facilities for its forest officers to visit other countries and study their methods.
The opening up of vast tropical forests needs specialized experience.
Photograph by courtesy of British Information Service
Forms of Technical Assistance
The form of technical assistance which the individual country will require depends of course on its actual circumstances, but, broadly speaking, it will fall within one of the following groups:
(1) If a country has no forests, but thinks that they could be established and would be economically valuable, it requires the services of an expert silviculturist to examine the land and advise whether it is suitable for forest development. It is not, of course, realistic to suggest that this would be an isolated mission. There would be no sense in having an area examined simply from one point of view. What would be required would be a land survey conducted by a small team of agricultural, forestry, and animal breeding experts to look at the area in all its aspects and advise on the best use to be made of it.
(2) If the conclusion is that forest cultivation is probably the most economic method of developing the area, the next step would be a pilot project, that is the experimental establishment of a small forest to determine whether this judgment is correct. This would require the services of several experts over a period of some years to conduct the experiment.
(3) If the experiment is successful, the next stage would be to build up the forests and a forest service, side by side, and the forms of technical assistance required would be much the same as those which would be required by a country which has unexploited forests.
(4) If a country has forests which are unexploited, it requires first the services of a small team composed of, say, a silviculturist, a soil scientist and an expert in forest management to advise whether the forest can safely be exploited. This may not always be the case. If the soil is very poor, it may not be possible to reestablish cultivation of it if the forest cover is removed, and the only result of exploitation would be a galloping attack of soil erosion. If, however, the verdict was favorable, the mission would provide a plan of rational exploitation.
(5) Such a plan would not be one for immediate execution. The essential first step would be to build up a staff of forest technicians and forest guards to supervise the work of exploitation. The time is long past when it would be regarded as sensible to give a concession to some private profit-making organization to exploit the forest without proper supervision. Forestry is such a long-term project that it is not reasonable to expect that an enterprise whose main purpose is the making of immediate profits would, without outside stimulus, devote part of those profits to reinvestment in trees which will not in any event be ready for felling for decades and may not be really ready for hundreds of years. Moreover, even if, in principle, the forest is exploitable, it may be essential to leave parts of it untouched in such areas as the headwaters of rivers and streams, if the general agricultural economy of the country is not to suffer injury.
The first need in such a case, therefore, would be for a certain number of foreign experts, serving on medium- or long-term contracts, to start the forest service and train local personnel for it. Simultaneously, facilities would be required for sending local personnel with an adequate educational background to be trained for future work in the forest service in training establishments abroad. The size of the cadres required would depend not only on the size of the forests but also on the country's decision whether to entrust the exploitation of the forests to private enterprise or to carry out the work as a government undertaking. In the first event all that would be required would be a limited number of scientifically trained supervisors and an appropriate number of forest guards. In the latter event a whole range of silviculturists, experts in forest management and timber exploitation and conversion, and skilled forest workers would be required, and the task of
recruiting and training them would be proportionately the greater.
(6) If a country has forests which are already being exploited, the extent to which it will require help and the kind of help which it will require will depend on the extent to which the exploitation is already being controlled. If it already has a fully developed forest service, it will probably require no more than facilities to send members of that service to study methods of forest management and exploitation in other countries, facilities to send recruits for the service to training establishments abroad, and facilities for its representatives to study how the timber exported from the country is marketed and to find out whether an alteration in the extraction and conversion methods would make it possible to increase the foreign revenue. On the other hand, if the exploitation of the forests is imperfectly controlled or not controlled at all, the country will require the same kind of help as a country where the forests are not at present being exploited at all.
This is not, of course, a complete and exhaustive treatise on the application of technical assistance to forestry in all its aspects, nor is it written by a technical expert in forestry matters. It is merely a broad picture of the subject designed to help those responsible for the government, the general administration or the forestry departments of underdeveloped countries to consider what technical assistance they should request from the Food and Agriculture Organization.
One final word of warning. Forestry experts are rare animals, and most of them are fully occupied with responsible work in their own countries. It must not be assumed that they can be obtained in large numbers just for the asking.
Bullock-drawn high wheeled carts are still used to haul sal (Shorea robusta) logs in remote areas in India, where better roads and modern equipment could step-up production. Travel is so slow that fodder must be carried for the bullocks enroute.
Photograph by courtesy of Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, India
<section>5</section>
Progress of point four
By HIS EXCELLENCY B. R. SEN, Ambassador of India to Italy and Yugoslavia
It is now nearly two years since President Truman spoke of the need of a "bold new program" for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped countries. During these two years no problem in the international economic field has engaged so much public attention and interest as this problem of underdeveloped areas. As India's delegate to the Eighth Session of the Economic and Social Council, when the Point Four of President Truman's speech came up for the first time before the United Nations, I was privileged to analyze the problem and the actions proposed. It is interesting for me to have this opportunity to see the problem once again in the light of the discussions which have since taken place.
It is well known that throughout history there has been no greater source of international rivalry than the lure of economic domination of underdeveloped countries. One need refer only to the history of the rivalries of the European powers for colonial possessions since the sixteenth century to realize this historical fact. The origin of the two world wars can also be traced to this same motive, though people have sought to clothe it with other unrecognizable names. This fact found international recognition, though in a rather indirect way, in the Covenant of the League of Nations, in Articles 22 and 23 relating to the mandated territories. It found full and unequivocal recognition in Chapters IX and X of the Charter of the United Nations.
It will be noticed that both in the United Nations Charter and President Truman's address the need of international co-operation to develop underdeveloped areas is firmly represented as a means to insure international peace. The objective of the scheme of international economic and social co-operation is thus set out in Article 55 of the United Nations Charter: "With a view to creation of conditions of stability and well-being necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall promote...." President Truman's Point Four is stated by him as one of the "four major courses of action in our program for peace and freedom in the coming years," the other three major courses of action being: (1) unfaltering support to the United Nations and related agencies. (2) continuance of the program for world economic recovery, and (3) the strengthening of freedom-loving
nations against the dangers of aggression.
The importance of President Truman's declaration lies not in the originality of his concept, but in the forthrightness of his approach which, as the head of a country which more than any other is in a position today to implement such a policy on a wide scale, gave the matter an urgency and practical direction hitherto lacking in normal international discussion implementing the provisions of the UN Charter. President Truman placed the essentials of the problem in a truer perspective than had ever been done before. He pointed out that the problem had two integral parts: (a) international flow of technical knowledge and (b) international flow of capital investment.
Problems Confronting the Program
Since President Truman made his declaration, two tendencies have been noticeable - one to minimize the importance of capital investment as an integral part of the scheme; the other to depart from the context of international peace as set out both in the UN Charter and by President Truman. There has been a third tendency, viz., to advocate technical assistance for primary production only so as not to encourage any substantial deviation from the present pattern of national economy in different countries, and to exclude assistance for other developments, however necessary or desirable the country concerned may consider them to an over-all improvement of its economy.
The tendency on the part of some of the important countries to soft-pedal the question of international capital has been noticeable from the very beginning. There are of course various practical difficulties. Though some of the foreign capital needed can be found through loans and grants from the more fortunately placed governments, the bulk of it must come from private investment. But the present unstable political conditions, balance-of-payments difficulties leading to limitations of the right to transfer earnings and capital, fear of loss of ownership without compensation, and restrictions imposed by governments on the operations of foreign enterprise act as serious deterrents to the flow of private capital.
The difficulties, however, are not insuperable and in any case must be faced. The stake - maintenance of world peace and freedom - is high. We need men of vision and idealism to handle this problem - men who would not easily be thwarted by-practical difficulties. Lately there has been a hopeful development. In May this year a meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Commonwealth countries (except South Africa)was held at Sydney, Australia, to plan the economic development of South and Southeast Asia where poor living conditions are an increasing threat to the peace and freedom not only of Asia but of the world. The main recommendations of the Commonwealth Committee were: (1) preparation of a six-year development plan for the region, and (2) inauguration of a Commonwealth Technical Assistance Scheme involving an investment of £8 million over a period of three years. The committee is now meeting again in London to carry the recommendations to the stage of execution. The
non-Commonwealth countries in the region have also been invited to participate in the discussions.
The Commonwealth Consultative Committee appears to be proceeding on the following lines: (a) for the encouragement of international investment, the first thing necessary is to prepare a comprehensive development scheme covering the entire economy of the countries concerned; (b) as the major part of the capital investment for such a scheme must come from sources within the country itself, the scheme should attempt to assess those resources as closely as possible; (c) having screened the plans put forward under (a) and (b) the Consultative Committee will decide to what extent assistance can come from the Commonwealth countries and what assistance should be sought from other countries, particularly the United States of America; (d) the Consultative Committee will also discuss measures which must be taken by the countries concerned to build up confidence and create conditions to attract foreign capital. This appears to be the most positive and practical step forward in this
field since President Truman announced Point Four. The seal of approval to the development schemes of a country by such a highly authoritative body as the Commonwealth Committee should be a help in creating confidence in foreign investors, which is now somewhat lacking.
Industrial Development
That international capital under Point Four should be made available only for developing primary production is another of those suggestions which emanate from men who are too preoccupied with immediate practical difficulties. There are several countries in Asia and Latin America where industrial development fostered by foreign investment may bring about such a revolution in the methods of production that not only manufacturing industries but also primary industries like agriculture, mining, etc., may benefit. The essential point is that by the adoption of scientific methods of production, which go hand in hand with the process of industrialization, the period of apprenticeship which a pioneer industrial country like the United Kingdom had to undergo can be substantially reduced. What is needed is a progr