<title>Unasylva - Vol. 10, No. 2 - Forestry associations</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
INTERNATIONAL meetings concerned with forestry have on many occasions urged FAO to undertake a general survey of forest co-operatives.
This issue of Unasylva appears in answer to that request. The paper was not intended to furnish a guide to countries which, having no such organizations for mutual help, might wish to set them up. It was conceived as an attempt to assess the value and effectiveness of co-operatives as an instrument in the application of national forest policies.
Given this approach, it soon became clear that the survey could not be limited to co-operatives alone - although these must have pride of place - but would have to cover all forms of forestry associations. Certain associations, as will be seem greatly influence not only the application but even the formulation of forest policies. It is in order to exemplify this that the writer. has at times dwelt somewhat at length upon details of the working and activities of such organizations. In addition, it is sometimes very difficult to draw a clear dividing line between association and co-operative. Finally, associations and co-operatives concerned strictly with forestry are not the only ones to influence the development and application of forest policies. While the paper has not sought to go deeply into this matter, it was necessary to mention associations with more general aims, and also industrial and trade associations.
Acknowledgment is due to many who contributed to the preparation of this survey. Whenever FAO requested information, forest services readily furnished all details that might be of use. Special thanks are due to Zentralforstdirektor Dr. S. Duschek, who prepared a valuable report on Central European forest co-operatives; to Professor R. Nagata and Assistant Professors S. Surda and T. Arizizu of Tokyo University, whose account of Japanese co-operatives clarified the complexity of the organization and working operation of bodies in that country; and, lastly, to Länsjägmastere R. Hjorth, who provided a detailed survey of forest co operatives in northern Europe.
It must be pointed out that the subject dealt with is developing rapidly. Especially is there rapid change and progress in regard to forest co-operatives. New associations are formed, others merge or are absorbed, some disappear or reappear as companies governed by other rules and with other aims. Hence the reader must make allowances if the survey does not adequately cover all the most recent developments.
Owners of a small farm woodlot in central Finland plant out seedlings obtained from their local co-operative.
By courtesy of E. S. Paatero
The technical training of forest workers is one of the more important functions of the Swiss Forestry Association. Here woodsmen from a village in Switzerland are given a demonstration of correct ways of sharpening a crosscut saw.
By courtesy of H. Winkelmann.
<section>2</section>
Forestry associations
by T. FRANÇOIS
Chief, Forest Policy Branch, FAO Forestry Division^1
I. General considerations
II. Total merger of members' interests
IIII. Defence of public or professional interests
IV. Forest co-operatives
V. Success or failure of-forestry associations
VI. Conclusion: forestry associations and forest policy
^1 Paper translated from an original French text.
<section>3</section>
I. General considerations
IN the early days of history, forests were generally regarded as a no-man's land.
Primitive peoples did not countenance forests being appropriated by individuals, and this early feeling that the forest - and in general all uncultivated land - is common property, has been retained by many of the diverse civilizations which have since evolved. States, embracing all local communities, have thus tended to regard themselves as the owners of such lands. Under the feudal system, ownership of extensive areas of forest land in turn devolved on individuals and great families, and some such huge forest estates are still in existence today. The whole system of State-owned forests or of huge private estates was, however, mitigated by the common forest rights enjoyed by the peoples living on the forest borders.
Upon the dissolution of the feudal system, those who enjoyed common forest rights naturally became owners of at least a part of the big estates. In some areas, collective use became translated into collective ownership; in others, the holdings were divided into private domains. In the latter case, the pattern of forest ownership was decisively influenced by the laws and customs relating to inheritance. Where these decreed or favored the sharing of an estate among all the heirs, the forest holdings of individuals became continually smaller with successive generations. Also, individual ownership often extended not over a single compact holding but over a large number of scattered plots, frequently lying far apart from each other.
In more recently settled countries, individual forest smallholdings may have arisen in a different way. Although big trade enterprises were able, in certain cases, to secure ownership of vast wooded tracts, individual settlers tended to leave undisturbed the forest on the less cultivable parts of the land assigned to them, so creating isolated woodlands. In the aggregate, these relatively small areas often form a considerable proportion of a nation's forests.
Disadvantages of the fragmentation of forest lands
The fact that a forest tract is large, whether owned by the State, by a community or by a private person, does not in itself afford any guarantee that the forest is well managed. At the other extreme there is no reason why a small forest should not be carefully and intelligently maintained. The very smallness of its size, however, and the chance that its owner is of limited means, present an obstacle to good management. The deterrents are so great that in some countries, especially in Mediterranean Europe, fragmentation of the forest almost inevitably entails its destruction. At best, it is supplanted by trees commonly grown in association with agriculture, or by very open stands where timber production is merely accessory to the main purpose of grazing or the gathering of fruit or foliage.
But why should the small forest tend to be badly managed? The reasons are many. The chief is that the owner lets the forest go untended because it offers a poor financial return at long intervals. Yet this drawback can be avoided. There are certain kinds of treatment that will furnish a yield, if not yearly, at least at fairly short and regular intervals, even from a small forest. This, it is true, is not always possible, but all too often the owner, being technically ignorant, is quite unaware of what he could really get from his forest. One can hardly blame him, for he has other things to do.
What sort of person, then, is this owner? Two typical cases come to mind. In the first, he is a farmer, a part of whose farm is wooded. If the financial return from his woodland is a negligible fraction of his income, he has little inclination to give much attention to the forest, even though he may quite appreciate its advantages: wood for fuel, and sometimes even for building; a grazing-area too often abused; a source of litter and humus - as often abused - for his stalls and his fields. In the second case he is someone who, by purchase. chance inheritance or division of property, becomes the owner of a tract of forest. Perhaps living elsewhere and having no "sympathy" with the forest, he may think of it as an investment or a standby for lean times, but not as a regular source of income.
In either case, the fact that the owner of the small forest spares little thought for his forest until, rightly or wrongly, he decides to fell trees, puts him in a very weak position for selling them. Often he gets a comparatively small price for them. While it is true that piecemeal extraction of forest products is often unprofitable, this is not necessarily always the case: the small privately-owned woodland generally is, or could be, more accessible than the more extensive forest tract, for it usually lies nearer to roads and centers of population. In addition, it is often on more fertile soils and should give a proportionately higher production.
In many countries, if the small forest owner lacks technical knowledge, he can, theoretically, use the services of a professional forester. But the smallness of his holding does not justify his employing a full-time expert himself; and the cost of employing even a part-time forester would have to be set against any income his forest is capable of yielding. The case is the same if he wanted to make an outlay for forest improvement or for building up the forest capital. Particularly it is so when it is proposed to replant a cut-over area where for any reason natural regeneration is impossible; or when it is a question of planting to trees land no longer profitable to use for agricultural crops because of changed economic conditions in the area or in the family owning the land. Such operations are costly, and the expected profit, however large, will only come in the long-term.
Unless, therefore, the owner has some definite stimulus, it is most unlikely that he will do anything with his land. Maybe the forest will establish - or re-establish - itself, but it may well be of poor quality or may take a very long time to form. Many other factors may lead the private owner to neglect the upkeep or the establishment of a forest. In many countries, for instance, forest-grazing is freely allowed, and the animals, if not properly controlled, will seriously damage or destroy any natural or artificial tree regeneration.
There can, however, be too much generalization, and it has already been sufficiently stressed that the chief cause of the poor yield from small forests is indifference on the part of the owner. There are, however, instances where the yields from farm-forests make up the major part of a farmer's income. This holds good generally in Finland, often in Norway and Sweden, and sometimes in other heavily wooded areas like the French Landes. Under these circumstances, where the monetary return from the forest falls short of what could be obtained, failure cannot be attributed to the owner's lack of interest, but rather to some other factors that have been mentioned: the owner's lack of technical knowledge, the difficulty he finds in marketing small lots of timber, his shortage of capital for improvements or replanting. In addition, he may have to overcut or fell immature trees to meet immediate needs for fairly big sums to meet death duties or to buy urgently required farm
machinery.
Remedying the small-forest situation
The situation as it is can be remedied in various ways. In certain cases it is possible to regroup scattered private forest-plots by exchange or purchase so as to constitute larger and more easily managed units. This manner of consolidation has often proved successful - in Switzerland, for example. But it is difficult to make a successful forest manager out of a smallholder with a few hectares, even by regrouping into one unit the equivalent of several originally scattered plots.
Another solution is direct State help in the form of subsidies in cash or kind or technical aid, or indirect, in the shape of taxation relief or market protection.
But the course calculated to rouse the small forest owner - giving relief to his isolation, to his technical shortcomings, and to the difficulties inherent in the smallness of his holding - undoubtedly lies in his associating in some formal way with other forest-owners who are similarly placed.
Associations of this sort may take the most varied forms, which are examined in the following pages where experience in many countries is also related. The information so given may be useful to those whose task it is to direct national forest policies, and who find themselves up against the problem of developing small private forests to full efficiency.
There are, first, two other points on which to comment.
Areas involved
It is often felt that private forests and their distribution in small plots are the concern of relatively few countries of the world. One might question therefore the need for any concentrated attention to the problems they present if one did not appreciate that those "few countries" were situated in world regions where forest production is now among the highest and already has a considerable economic and social importance.
Table 1, extracted from World Forest Resources, (FAO, March 1955) summarizes the situation in regard to those countries most frequently mentioned in the present paper, and it shows the considerable extent of private forest, even in some regions where forestry is little developed.
Table 1 does not show the whole picture, for it gives no indication of the fragmentation of private forests. Although the average size of such forests varies considerably from country to country, in almost all highly-developed countries with a considerable area of private forest, fragmentation is very marked.
Out of Norway's 7,500,000 hectares of forest, 6.3 million hectares, in round figures (excluding forests owned by commercial companies and corporations) are privately owned; of these 3.6 million hectares are farm forests with an average area of 27.3 hectares, but a quarter of the nearly 132,000 woodland-owners possess less than 2.5 hectares of forest, and 60 percent less than 10 hectares.
In Sweden, commercial concerns own about 25 percent of the private forests, and the area of farm-forests seems to be appreciably larger than in Norway. In Finland, where almost all private forests are farm-forests, the average private forest is about 34 hectares in extent. Out of 140 million hectares of commercially-exploitable private forest in the United States, a considerable area is owned by commercial interests or big estate owners, but 55 million hectares are shared among over 3 million farmers. The average size of forest farms is about 17 hectares, and while the average for all private forests together amounts to 32 hectares, only 1 percent of the total number of owners possess more than 200 hectares each.
The fragmentation of forest land is, however, much more intensified in other countries. In Western Germany, out of 693,235 forests of less than 100 hectares, 323,136 are less than 1 hectare in area (their average area being less than 40 ares). In France there were, in 1946, 2,359,000 hectares of private forests made up of woodlands less than 10 hectares in extent' often subdivided into numerous scattered parcels, belonging to 1,445,730 owners, out of a total of 1,528,707. Of the forests less than 10 hectares in extent, the average area was 1.5 hectares. Finally, in Japan, privately-owned forest land is distributed among somewhat more than 5 million proprietors, of whom 73 percent or 3,634,000 own less than one hectare.
On a world count, the total area of woodlands of less than 1 hectare each is only 1,740,000 hectares, or 15 percent of the total area of private forest; the average area of these small holdings is less than 60 ares. The number of persons owning more than 20 hectares each is scarcely more than- 1 percent of the total number of private owners recorded. But the total area of all private forests is just over one-third of the total world forested area.
The situation of the European Mediterranean countries is somewhat peculiar. Spain offers a typical case. The statistics of this country class as "forest" all the mountain rangelands, closely associated with the forest, and all scrub and heathlands on the national territory. These montes amount to somewhat more than 25 million hectares in area. Of this total, about 16,800,000 hectares are privately owned, the average holding having the comparatively large size of 16 hectares. It should be noted, however, that less than 46 percent of this total area is covered by fairly open mature stands composed largely of evergreen oaks, cork-oaks, sweet chestnut, and poplar and eucalyptus plantations; while more than 55 percent consists of scrub, grazing-land, alfalfa and other rotation crops.
Country
Forest area
Area by ownership
Private forests as percentage of accessible forests
Total
Accessible
forest
State forests
Communal Forests
Forest owned by institutions
Private forest
Europe
In thousands of hectares
Percent
Austria
Denmark
Finland
France
Western Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
North and Central America
Canada
Guatemala
Mexico
United States
South America
Brazil
Chile
Paraguay
Asia
India
Japan
The figures cited above are thought-provoking. Leaving aside Eastern Europe and the expanse of the Soviet Union's Asiatic forest-land and that of China, it may be said that, in the temperate zone of the Northern hemisphere (i.e. in those parts of the world where timber-production is highest), at least 50 percent of production capacity is in the hands of private owners. This figure would loom much larger if Canada had not retained almost all forest-land under public ownership (although the farm forest problem has to be faced there as well). Moreover at least half of this area of privately-owned forest land is distributed among small owners whom it could be said that, on the whole, they have practically no technical knowledge and, particularly, no financial resources to enable them to derive full profit from the productive capacity of their forests.
Economic and social issue involved
The second comment to be made is that the existent pattern of ownership necessarily circumscribes any forest policy that a government may contemplate. This is especially so with the "farm-forest," strictly bound up with agricultural land tenure. The little farmer on whom ultimately depends the very life, if not of each nation individually, at least of the world as a whole, needs wood for his own use. He expects his farm-forest to furnish him with fuel, with fencing, with the small timber that he requires and possibly, too, with constructional timber for the upkeep and extension of his farm-buildings. The primary aim of forestry in such forests must, therefore, be the satisfaction of the farmer's needs; and this may have nothing in common with the kind of forestry aimed at getting the best from the forest soil in the interest of a well-planned national forest policy.
The influence exerted in this respect by the form of ownership must not, however, be overrated. Theoretically, a State which was or could be sole owner of the forests on national territory might well invoke a forest policy completely sacrificing local needs to the needs and activities of the country as a whole. In practice, however, this would be impossible since owing to the very difficulty of transporting over long distances primary forest products of low initial value, the populations near to the forest must inevitably benefit so far as timber needs are concerned, from the advantage of their location.
On the other hand, the farmer may no longer find it worth while contemplating procuring his timber needs from his own woodlands when improved communications enable him to satisfy his requirements elsewhere, perhaps more cheaply and without giving up valuable working hours to procure them. For instance, when coal or electricity furnish him with cheaper heating, he should need no persuasion to realize the advantage of transforming the coppice which once furnished his firewood into a high forest.
However, generally speaking, the small privately-owned forest - especially the farm-forest - is still looked upon as the recognized purveyor of local timber requirements. This is especially so in mountainous country and other areas difficult of access. So, as has been said, limitations are imposed upon any national policies relating to such forests, especially to plans for remedying their low productivity.
<section>4</section>
II. Total merger of members' interests
The low productivity of the small private forest is due to:
(a) fragmentation;
(b) the scanty technical and financial means at the disposal of the owners.
The best method of improving production is, therefore, that of merging completely - within a homogeneous area, naturally - all the forest lands belonging to smallholders, the interests of the owners being indissolubly bound by a permanent contract. With this fusion of interests, the forests can be managed as one large unit. When pooled and applied to this larger unit capable of giving a profitable return, the owners' financial resources will be more effective; even the owners' deficiency in technical knowledge can be remedied when there are means for calling in one or several professional foresters.
This solution has, in numerous cases, already been brought about simply by the changes and chances of historical evolution - an evolution responsible for the community forests found in many countries.
Community forests
Whatever system of forest ownership be recognized by State laws in countries where backward populations are still living, it is probable that, in most cases, the indigenous people regard recognized stretches of forest as belonging to a local community, if not precisely its property, at least as an area where that community holds the exclusive rights to hunting, gathering fruits, shifting cultivation, and so on. Economically weak, these communities have retained the notion of the forest as common property where all may gain their livelihood.
In Europe, the splitting up of the great feudal estates led to a variety of forms of forest ownership. Although there was a decided tendency in many periods to share out forest property - as in the case of other goods and chattels - between members of a community, yet the community-owned forest has remained extant in numerous regions. It is difficult to draw any conclusions from their present distribution because their formation is due at least as much to political as to physical and economic circumstances. They do not figure largely in Nordic countries: 40,000 hectares in Norway, 1,260,000 hectares in Sweden, 16,000 hectares (out of a total of about 438,000 hectares of forest) in Denmark. They are, on the contrary, numerous in mountainous regions. There are 18,000 such forests in Spain, with a total area considerably more than 6 million hectares (here, again, this applies to montes, not necessarily genuine forest). In France, their total area is over 3 million hectares; in
Italy about 1,300,000 hectares representing one-third of the total forested area; in Switzerland, the proportion is as high as 72.2 percent, of which 4.9 percent is owned by the cantons and 67.8 percent by lesser communities and corporations.
The predominance of community ownership in mountainous regions is perhaps due to the very feeling that, where living conditions are somewhat difficult and large financial resources lacking, this form of ownership is best calculated to ensure the benefits which the community has a right to expect from the forest:
(a) against avalanches, erosion, falls of rock;
(b) shelter and sometimes additional pasture for cattle;
(c) supplies of wood for heating and the repair of buildings.
If shared out among the members of the community, these forests would be subject to the whims of individuals and would run the risk of destruction or impoverishment until they could no longer fulfil those indispensable functions.
Collective forest-ownership, rooted in the past, takes the most diverse forms. In its simplest form, ownership is vested in an administrative unit with a certain legal autonomy: e.g., a village, a rural parish, or a town. Regulations, sometimes nationally applicable, sometimes peculiar to a region or even to individual administrative units, lay down the rights of each inhabitant to the production, in money or kind, of the forest. In the same way, the authorities responsible for managing the forest are appointed according to local, regional, or national usages or regulations.
It often happens, however, that the property and the normally-constituted administrative unit do not exactly coincide. For instance a forest may be owned solely by the inhabitants of a hamlet which is part of a larger parish. It may belong to several parishes or again to several hamlets lying in different parishes. Once again, in these various cases, the responsibilities for management and the methods of sharing products are determined by regulations which are the fruits of the lengthy historical evolution of these communities. Generally speaking, however, the fact of being a permanent resident - or having been resident for a certain period - in such villages, parishes or towns, entitles an individual to his share in the benefits from the common property.
Value of the community-owned forest
This form of collective ownership presents considerable advantages. It does not of course in itself guarantee that the forest will receive the best kind of management; but at least it creates in the group of collective owners an attitude of mind in favor of the conservation and good upkeep of the forest. This way of thinking is so healthily developed in some countries that local authorities can be permitted complete liberty in the management of their forests; they will themselves employ all the specialists they require, helped by efficiently-trained and adequate staffs. The State, or its higher administrative organs, does not have to interfere save in laying down the broad lines of national forest policy and the general executive regulations with which the collectivity naturally complies. But the State may further intervene, if necessary, by aiding financially a collectivity wishing to carry out large-scale works, for instance road-building or the planting of wasteland.
If, however, the State authorities consider it advisable to exercise a stricter control, this can easily be done, for the owner in this case is the collectivity, and State action can be justified in that the State is, in a sense, guardian to the collectivity, and must see to it that collective properties are managed not solely in the present interest of the population, but also with due consideration of the future.
There is a further advantage in this type of ownership: it is sufficiently flexible to solve a possible conflict of interests between local and more general requirements. There is no reason why the members of a forest owning collectivity should not receive their shares of the income in kind rather than in cash, and so long as a certain kind or quality of timber is needed by the members of the community, the forest can to a large extent be managed so as to satisfy those needs. If and when the need ceases, methods of management can be changed so that the forest, now serving wider requirements, can still yield to the community an income equal or superior to that which was formerly enjoyed.
The value attributed to this form of collective ownership is evidenced by the fact that several countries where it is rare or non-existent are encouraging its development. In Turkey, for instance, villages and towns in areas far removed from forests are obliged to plant at least five hectares. The State grants suitable public land free of charge for this purpose, or the plantations are established on lands already belonging to the collectivity. In 1951, more than 400 villages had already established new woodlands, and the number is still increasing. Village forests are a feature also in Cyprus: this policy is, indeed, general throughout territories administered on the British pattern.
In North America, the pattern of evolution, which elsewhere resulted in the establishment of forests owned by villages or administrative communities, has not occurred but there is a marked tendency here also to create town and rural community forests. Perhaps the establishment of school forests may be regarded as a step in the same direction, although the chief purpose of this is education and demonstration, clearly useful objectives.
A still more interesting development is to be noted in countries where there is no private ownership of forests as such. Here similar organizations have been set up which, if they do not amount to collective ownership at least imply collective use. In the Soviet Union, several million hectares of forest have been turned over to Kolkhozes, which manage them under the control of the central administration. This is tantamount to recognizing that the local populations near the forests have a right to some priority in the satisfaction of their needs. From these forests the Kolkhozes have to obtain the fuelwood and building timber for their own use. Where the Kolkhozes, because of their location, could not be afforded such advantages, the general policy of the U.S.S.R. is, we know, to develop artificial plantations, especially in the form of shelterbelts for protecting soils and crops from the erosive and drying action of wind.
Recent reports, it is true, suggest that the management of the forests allocated to Kolkhozes is not entirely satisfactory. This, however, does not seem to have affected the principle of the thing; but perhaps the central control will be tightened to ensure that the forests are properly managed both to the advantage of the Kolkhozes and to the country as a whole.
In other countries where the forests are entirely State owned, special measures customarily ensure that the rural populations in the vicinity of the forests can obtain adequate wood supplies by the institution de jure or de facto of commoners' rights, which provide a solution satisfactory to a greater or less degree according to the control maintained upon the exercise of such rights. In Thailand, for instance, where there are no private forests, the Forest Service places restrictions only on reserved species (those of commercial value) while anyone is free to cut the unreserved species.
Corporation forests
Collective forest ownership which has evolved from history is not always vested in a civil administrative unit. There are the parallel cases of forests belonging to religious communities, numerous not only in Europe but also in some Moslem countries; although, in the latter case, it is a matter rather of perpetual rights of usufruct than genuine ownership. There are also some forests collectively owned by public charities, the management of which is more or less directly State-controlled.
On the other hand, there are cases in which the rights to collective ownership have assumed an entirely personal character. They no longer depend upon the individual's membership of any administrative collectivity: they are vested in his person and are passed on to his descendants. These forests might be called Corporation forests, which is the name applied to them in Switzerland where they occur fairly frequently.
In that country, such forests occupy 40,000 hectares, 12 percent of the total area of private forestland. In the Federal Republic of Germany, forests of a similar category cover 280,000 hectares or 4 percent of the total forested area, and in Austria 138,000 hectares or much the same proportion. These two figures include forests belonging to recently established companies. Forests of the same type are to be found in France and elsewhere in Europe.
The historical origin of this form of ownership is the free banding together of individuals into a corporation, obviously under the pressure of economic conditions. In Switzerland, at any rate, many of them are Alpine corporations, owning, besides forests, extensive acres of alpine pastures, and they were nearly always originally constituted for the purpose of managing these pastures in common. In the Schwyz canton, for instance, there are very large corporations of this kind, totalling several thousand members and holding several thousand hectares of grazing land. Some forests known as forêts de bourgeoisie originally belonged to the citizens of a town, but since the ownership rights were vested in their persons and not in the town, these forests too are now corporation forests.
Corporation forests are completely independent of modern administrative units, and their administration is governed by regulations laid down in times long past and which are generally very strict; the corporation's supreme tribunal is the assembly of members.
As in the case of any other forms of ownership, it does not necessarily follow that a corporation forest is by the nature of the title deeds, thereby well managed. On the other hand, especially if it has other property besides woodlands 