<title>Unasylva - Vol. 11, No. 2 - Ten years of forestry in FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
One world - One forest
"The name of FAO's new magazine, Unasylva, is well chosen-one world, one forest. This new review will attempt to shed light on all manner of problems in the field of forestry and forest products, to compare methods that are being used in different countries, and to present the opinions and suggestions of experts in the various fields. I hope and believe it will be a keen new blade in the world-wide battle for freedom from want."
These words are taken from an editorial by Sir John Boyd Orr, the first Director-General of FAO, which appeared in the first issue of Unasylva in 1947.
From the time of entering upon my duties as Director of the Forestry Division of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, I had the intention of publishing a forestry periodical with a threefold purpose: to disseminate technical knowledge of worldwide or regional interest; to keep readers informed of the forestry activities of the Organization, and to be a connecting link between forest services to keep them informed of changes in the forest policies and the organization of the services of member countries.
It took a year to overcome the technical and administrative difficulties inherent in such an undertaking and it was in July 1947, when the provisional Headquarters of the Organization was at Washington, that the first number of Unasylva appeared.
When it was started there were many who-doubted the wisdom of embarking on this project. But I always felt that a periodical like Unasylva had a real contribution to make and I think that my point of view has been amply proved during the ten years Unasylva has served the cause of forestry all over the world.
It seems now appropriate to celebrate the passage of these ten years by a special number devoted to taking stock of our activities.
To present a balance sheet of the activities of FAO in regard to forestry during this period is therefore our object here. The accomplishments are the work neither of one man nor of the few individuals who have become international civil servants. I have made the point from the beginning that the work of the Forestry Division is a collective work in which all the forest services and technicians of the world participate. It is in this spirit that I have organized the work of the Division, and that, in particular fields, a large number of experts have been associated with the activities of our technical groups.
For those who are not familiar with our work, this issue of Unasylva will give them an opportunity of learning about it and perhaps of realizing that it is not always accurate to say that international organizations have no value.
For the others, for all those who have been associated with the work of our regional commissions, technical groups, and meetings, it may bring pleasantly to mind some particular incident at a conference, some episode of a commission or congress, perhaps some forgotten friend.
I hope in this, spirit that this number will interest you and that it will be appreciated. May it strengthen our friends in the view that there is still much to be done in the field of forestry, that the path is barely marked out, but that the future is full of promise and that we hope to see the young generation overcome the obstacles which we have only reconnoitred.
FIGURE 1. To many people the classical concept of scientific forestry is embodied in the high forests of France. Typical high forest of oak with an understorey of beech. Forêt domainiale de Bercé (Sarthe) France.
Photograph: Direction générale des eaux et forêts
FIGURE 2. Cattle grazing in an old stand of larch. Forêt de Montgenèvre (Hautes Alpes) France
Photograph: Direction générale des eaux et forêts
<section>2</section>
Ten years of forestry in FAO
MARCEL LELOUP Director, Forestry Division
Objectives
Inventories and statistics
Forest policy
International action - Regional forestry commissions
Other international activities
National action - Direct technical assistance
Collection and dissemination of information
Organization and working methods
Conclusions
Objectives
To supply an expanding world economy with useful forest products, in the qualities and quantities adequate to sustain the general welfare: such, in very broad terms, was the objective that the Quebec Conference of 1945 laid down for FAO.
The field of work thus assigned to the Forestry Division is wide indeed. It not only includes the growing of timber, the production of which has to be increased without danger to the future of the forest, but it extends to all harvesting operations and to primary wood-processing industries; the development and improvement of appropriate equipment must keep pace with the increase in volume of the available raw material. It covers also the marketing and distribution of forest products, the development and improvement of manufacturing methods so that the consumer can get products derived from the forest and forest industries at a reasonable price, while both producers and workers get a just remuneration.
Besides this, among the basic values that man derives from the forest are the protection of his fields, the regulation of streamflow and control of floods. It is a chief means of controlling wind and water erosion. The forest serves to beautify the landscape and to provide healthy living conditions. These are considerations that must not be overlooked and which must even be given a primary place in FAO's outlook.
A very approximate appraisal of the world's existing forest resources and of the possibility of creating new ones an appraisal that has been continually re-scrutinized from 1946 on-shows that the objective is not utopian. Nevertheless, although a large proportion of the land surface of the world is covered by forest, it is far from being as easy to attain as the abundance of resources might lead one to suppose.
The world's forests are, in fact, very irregularly distributed. The transport of wood from areas where it is abundant, which are generally sparsely populated and ill provided with means of communication, to thickly populated areas where it is most needed, is often an economically insoluble problem. The concentration of the population of the world at the most favored points, in terms of either climate or soil fertility, has sometimes promoted the development of intensive silviculture, but has more often led to the wholesale destruction of the forests in just those areas. The lack of forests has not only economic consequences. It leads also to soil degeneration and irregularity of the water regime. Despite the expanse of the areas still occupied by forests throughout the world, there is still need to create other new forests to replace those that have been lavishly destroyed.
Taking all facts into account, the Forestry Division soon realized that its general program of action had to be concentrated on four basic aims. These four aims were and continue to be:
a) Increase in the yield from forests now being used - Even in the most advanced forestry countries, it is admitted that such an increase is possible, either by applying sound forest management methods or by a wider use of techniques that research has improved, is now improving and will further improve in the future.
b) Reduction of waste - This means not only the waste occasioned by the primary conversion of wood but also the waste from logging operations, including trees and species abandoned because there is no economic use for them for the time being. In this field also considerable progress can be made.
c) Opening up of virgin forests - The bringing into use of forests hitherto inaccessible takes place almost automatically when, as in Canada or Russia, the forests will provide timber of high economic value, especially softwoods. It is a much more difficult proposition in tropical regions where there are extensive forests, because it entails being able to make effective use of the timbers that occur, then the setting up of industries capable of processing them, and often human colonization of the areas involved.
d) Planting of new forests - Apart from any economic considerations, the establishment or reestablishment of forests on areas dangerously subject to erosion is a sheer necessity. But locally for some communities, on the national level for many countries and regionally for some continents, as the studies carried out by the Division in the past ten years have shown, the planting of new forest is essential to meeting foreseeable increases in wood consumption.
Translated from an original French text.
The techniques to be used for increasing the yield of existing forests, reducing the volume of waste, opening up virgin forests or planting new forests, were already well known ten years ago, even though they have since been refined and diversified. Nevertheless, great difficulties, not of a technical but of a political, economic or social character, very often prevent them from being applied. To take only the simplest examples, the opening up of virgin forests requires the investment of considerable capital which is often lacking in underdeveloped countries; the planting of new forests frequently clashes with competitive types of land-use, agriculture or pasture.
These difficulties can be overcome only by thinking out for each country, region and the world as a whole, a balanced development program, in which forests and forest industries will have their proper place. A forestry program, formulated within the framework of the general development program and co-ordinated with it, is simply the forest policy of the country, region or world. That is why the Forestry Division has, from the start, strongly urged the need for forest policies at each of these levels.
Apart from the non-technical complications just mentioned, the implementation of such forest policies and even their formulation faces other difficulties, because some forestry techniques are still insufficiently developed and some forestry problems far from being solved. In many cases, the non-forestry obstacles could be overcome if these techniques were improved and if more flexible or more adequate solutions to the problems were found.
FIGURE 3. Rehabilitation of existing forest is an aim of FAO. General view of an old forest of cedars in the Atlas mountain of Morocco.
Photograph: M. Laidet
In view of the goals to be achieved, the Forestry Division drew up a 15-point plan of action. Formulated in 1951, it still remains valid. The points, corresponding to the Division's fifteen lines of activity, can be summarized as follows:
1. Forest policy
Advising governments in drawing up and implementing national forest policies in keeping with the relative economic importance of forests in each country, a policy aiming at the conservation and proper utilization of forest resources and the rational development of the corresponding forest industries.
Co-ordinating national forest policies on the international level, through the action of FAO's Regional Forestry Commissions and ultimately the FAO Conference.
2. Forest inventories
Advising and assisting governments in planning and carrying out national forest inventories, so as to obtain more accurate and internationally comparable data.
Collecting the statistics thus obtained for the preparation and publication of regional and world estimates, to serve as a basis for the co-ordination of national forest policies on the international plane.
3. Forest economics and statistics
Working out standard estimates of the costs of forest enterprises and operations and assembling data so as to make it possible to compare different methods of conducting such enterprises economically and to calculate the prime cost of the various forest products.
Assembling, compiling and regularly disseminating statistics on forests and forest products with a view to providing governments with objective, comprehensive and up-to-date data. Improving national statistics by the introduction of more reliable assembling methods.
4. Education
Advising and assisting governments in creating public opinion alive to the importance of forests and forestry in the national economy.
Establishing the necessary facilities for the education of foresters and technicians and for the training of subordinate forestry personnel, and forest and industrial workers.
5. Soil and water conservation
Bringing about a general recognition of the essential function of forests and grasslands in streamflow regulation and in soil conservation.
Advising governments so that they can draw up rational policies of land use, particularly the use of forested and "wild" lands forming the greater part of catchment (watershed) areas.
6. Conservation and improvement of forest ranges (grazing-land)
Advising and assisting governments to adopt sound policies for the utilization and conservation of the vast areas which, while serving as natural grazing lands for livestock, play a great but too often disregarded role in protecting farm land and regulating streamflow.
Close co-ordination of such policies with forest policy.
7. Silviculture and forest management
Advising and assisting governments in applying appropriate silvicultural methods to all forests playing a protective or productive role, or fulfilling other important functions.
Promoting forest research: studying and spreading techniques to assure an increase of growth in forests and improvement of the quality of forest products.
8. Afforestation and reforestation
Encouraging research work and assisting governments to ensure the extension of forests on bare or depleted land, in conformity with the aims defined in each case by the national forest policy.
Improving and spreading modern techniques for the establishing or restocking of forests by planting or seeding, adapted to the various conditions of soil and climate.
9. Forest protection
Assisting governments in devising administrative and technical methods to control fires, pests and diseases.
Encouraging the conclusion of international agreements to control the spread of these destructive forces.
10. Equipment
Promoting the introduction of useful modern equipment for the efficient and economic utilization of forest resources and the industrial processing of their products.
Assembling information from equipment manufactures, analysing and publishing it in appropriate forms. Encouraging manufacturers to produce machines and equipment that fully meet forestry requirements.
Improving the conditions of forest workers.
11. Modernization and integration of forest industries
Encouraging in all countries a gradual conversion of forest utilization into a suitably planned integration of forest industries with forest management; this entails forest management on a sustained-yield basis so that the forest can supply continuously an optimum group of industries with produce of specific qualities and in specific quantities.
Improving and modernizing existing industries to give increased yields from all phases of operations.
12. Chemical utilization of wood
Promoting research in the field of wood chemistry.
Advising and assisting governments in setting up new industries, in applying modern techniques and in generally improving the chemical utilization of forest products; often such utilization constitutes the only economic possibility of exploiting mixed forest stands or low grade timber and the residues from logging and mechanical processing operations.
13. Mechanical utilization and standardization
Seeking a more rational mechanical utilization of timber.
Facilitating trade in forest products, particularly by the standardization of export contracts.
Endeavoring to bring about general agreement on standardization of terminology, measurement, sizes, grades and testing of industrial wood and primary forest products.
14. Production awl distribution policies
Keeping a constant check on the current situation regarding the production of and trade in primary forest products and promoting action on the international level, to the extent possible, to adjust available supplies to demand.
15. Stimulation of consumption
Promoting action on the international and national plane to raise consumption of forest products to a level that will ensure for all peoples of the world adequate housing and an adequate standard of living.
FIGURE 4. Efficient management of farm woodland is another aim of FAO. A hardwood stand in Ontario, Canada, recently thinned.
FIGURE 5. A hill forest of silver fir in the Himalayas, India. During the war a great deal of this timber was used for airplane construction.
Photograph: F.R.I., Dehra Dun
Most of the activities outlined above are of concern to all countries and have world-wide implications. But the Forestry Division realized from the start the importance and indeed urgent necessity of adapting its actions to the particular needs of the different regions. There are of course differences in forest conditions from country to country and also within countries. Similarities of soils, climate and civilizations make it possible conveniently to divide the world into a number of regions within which comparable forest policies would be in order.
By suitably choosing the lines of activity to be emphasized in each region, one can hope to assist the region generally, as well as the countries that form part of it, not only to define or elaborate but also successfully to implement forest policy.
In Europe, the outstanding features of the forestry situation is that the continent has to meet the rapidly growing demand for timber with resources that are strictly limited and already relatively intensively exploited. Better organization and management of small forest holdings, which are widespread in this part of the world, the use of still more intensive methods of silviculture, the reduction of waste and the development of both internal and external trade should make it possible to cope with this situation.
The situation in North America is in some respects similar. This region, however, still possesses considerable untouched forest resources. On the other hand, expansion of the general economy is extremely rapid. Consequently, rational exploitation and the assured renewal of the resources should be the fundamental of the forest policy to be followed.
In the Near East and in North Africa, the establishing of new forests both to meet the demand for timber and to protect soil and water must be the main objective of forest policy. This objective is difficult of achievement owing both to the climate and to the social environment.
In Asia and the Far East, there is a marked imbalance between the forest production zones and the zones of population where the requirements for timber are concentrated. A large part of the forests pose problems that are common to many tropical areas, for instance lack of homogeneity and extensive practice of shifting cultivation.
Finally, in Latin America as in Africa, south of the Sahara, the most difficult problem, though it takes different forms in the two regions, is the opening-up and efficient exploitation of tropical virgin forests. There remains much progress to be made in tropical silviculture.
It was this variety of circumstances that has just been outlined, and the diversity of the methods to be used in meeting them, that determined for the Forestry Division the adoption of a regional approach to world forestry.
The means employed for this approach were and still are FAO's Regional Forestry Commissions, now existing for most regions (there are no Commissions for North America, Africa and eastern Europe with northern Asia). They function at the policy level, while their subordinate committees, working parties and other organs work at the technical level.
FAO technical assistance missions are their projection at the national level.
The Conference of FAO co-ordinates action on the world level.
Inventories and statistics
Forest Inventories
To formulate a forest policy, knowledge of the forest resource is essential. Data are provided by forest inventories which should yield information on the afforested area, ownership, composition of the stands, as well as estimates of the volumes of standing timber, annual growth, fellings and removals. In some countries, these data are contained in the various management plans, but especially in regard to countries where considerable areas of forest are under private ownership, it is very seldom that the aggregate data contained in such plans can constitute a true national inventory, even in respect to stands that are accessible or that may be earmarked for full utilization in the near future.
To obtain such national inventories, new methods are now available such as those devised in the Scandinavian countries, the Netherlands and North America, whereby inventories can be made for large forest areas on the basis of aerial photographs. These possibilities have so modified the problem of undertaking forest inventories that one may say that, with the possible exception of wood chemistry, no similar progress has been made in the last fifteen years in forestry science. In addition, these modern methods have reached a high degree of accuracy. The national inventories for Sweden, Finland, Norway and Great Britain are based on a combination of traditional methods and photogrammetry. Other countries which have begun or are undertaking national inventories based on such methods are the Netherlands, France, Italy, Thailand, Mexico (for a part of the country) and the Amazon basin in Brazil.
The Forestry Division set itself two tasks, namely, to keep abreast of new technical developments and to disseminate the results of experience made in the most advanced countries. A study entitled Planning a National Forest Inventory was published in 1950 in the interests of those who were to undertake a forest inventory on a large scale for the first time. A second edition is planned that will take into account the most recent technical advances. Articles in Unasylva dealing with particular aspects, have shown the progress achieved in some countries.
These technical advances have been made chiefly in the inventorying of coniferous forests in the Northern Hemisphere. Especially from the statistical standpoint, methods of interpretation cannot be applied automatically to tropical regions. New methods have often had to be devised in order to be able to carry out an inventory of tropical forests rapidly and inexpensively. Through the Expanded Technical Assistance
Program, FAO has been able to send experts in forest inventorying to tropical countries, and it is encouraging to note that problems, already defined in regard to pure, even-aged conifer forests, can also be solved in regard to dense, mixed and uneven-aged stands. Satisfactory results have been obtained in forests of teak and dipterocarps as well as in the tropical virgin forests of the basin of the Amazon, where a specialist assisted by two young technicians has been able to conduct an inventory of two million hectares in two years.
The countries of the tropical and subtropical regions are becoming increasingly aware that they will be in a proper position to develop their forest resources only after carrying out a systematic inventory. The lack of technicians in this specialized field, however, is a serious hindrance to the progress that could be made. It is true that FAO has already made available to these countries a number of Fellowships to enable technicians to obtain a thorough knowledge of new methods abroad. This, however, is only a beginning, and steps are being taken to establish specialized courses for instruction: it is hoped, for example, to develop in Indonesia a first training center for forest inventories comprising courses lasting six months.
Statistics
The Forestry Division began its work at a time when the statistical services of many countries were disorganized, many statistics publications not having appeared for a number of years. The first task, therefore, was to assemble and present all the available data on the world forest situation in order to give a background to the great problems with which FAO would have to deal. A report summarizing this situation was submitted to the Copenhagen Conference of FAO in 1946, but this report clearly revealed that available statistics varied from country to country and were unsatisfactory as regards conception, scope, content and accuracy: nor were they sufficiently complete to be used for such important purposes as the formulation of forest policies or the recording of forest development trends.
The work of the Economics Branch of the Forestry Division was concentrated on two aspects of this problem: first, assembling, comparing, tabulating and interpreting available current statistics on forest production and forest products, in order to have on hand all the necessary data for analyzing the world situation and its trends; second, improving the statistical methods used in various countries, in order to increase their scope, accuracy, up-to-dateness and comparability from the international standpoint. In practice, it is difficult to make a strict division between the two aspects of this work, and overlapping is inevitable.
One of the greatest obstacles to comparability of statistics was due to lack of clarity of the terms used. Inaccurate definitions, for example, of the terms "annual cut" and "annual increment" led to such large divergencies in the figures that the same data could serve as arguments for diametrically opposed conclusions. Two international conferences on forestry statistics held at Washington and Rome in 1947 clarified the most important definitions to some extent and fixed the conversion factors to be commonly used. Since then, the work has been carried on by working parties on statistics composed of experts from Europe and North America whose recommendations are made public through the Forestry Division's statistical publications. In order to make terms and definitions more generally applicable also to tropical forests, statisticians of these regions are being consulted to an increasing extent. Experience shows, however, that it is extremely difficult to lay down definitions
of world-wide application in regard to such simple terms as "forests" or "annual fellings".
The improvement of statistics and the introduction of new series of statistics required for the formulation of a forest policy constitute a continuous patient effort. Improvements have been brought about in many countries by the introduction of sampling methods for estimating both fellings and sawnwood production as well as for ascertaining the composition of stands. The Expanded Technical Assistance Program should be destined to play an important role, since it provides the possibility of organizing pilot sample surveys in various parts of the world and of assisting governments to improve their statistical services through the provision of experts and the granting of Fellowships for training technicians. The introduction of the United Nations' Standard International Trade Classification in many countries now makes possible an international comparison of the data on trade in forest products.
A big gap in the compilation of statistics appears, however, in regard to the consumption of wood and its products. Few governments compile systematic statistics on the consumption of wood by end-uses: in regard, for example, to the quantities of sawnwood consumed in housing, industrial construction, transport, packaging and wood-processing industries, and to the requirements of rural populations. Owing to this gap it is difficult to make long-term forecasts of requirements and, as a result, forest exploitation is too often a speculative matter involving devastation of the stands. In 1950 and the following years, a first attempt was made by FAO to compile statistics on end-uses, in order to determine the trends of timber consumption in Europe for the next ten years. Since that time, many European countries have introduced statistics based on the end-uses of all or some of the roundwood categories, and all countries are becoming increasingly aware of the importance of this
type of statistics in forest economics. These have been incorporated in the "minimum long-term program for forestry and forest products statistics", drawn up by the Forestry Division in the light of ten years' experience in international statististical work, which will be discussed in the near future by the various Regional Forestry Commissions.
The collection and dissemination of national forestry statistics is carried out on the basis of statistical questionnaires sent to FAO Member Governments. And, incidentally, the mere fact of having to fill in such questionnaires, prepared by highly qualified experts, has obliged countries to improve their national statistical services. The data are published in the FAO Yearbooks of Forest Products Statistics, which contain the most recent data on fillings in the most important roundwood categories, their utilization, the production of and international trade in sawnwood, sleepers, plywood, wood pulp, paperboard and fibreboard, and show the per capita consumption of certain wood products. It is noteworthy that the tenth volume has recently been issued, an anniversary that has not been attained by any other United Nations Statistical Yearbook. A comparison of the first volume with the last shows the progress achieved in international and national forestry statistics during
this period: whereas, in the first years, some 80 countries only were able to reply to questionnaires, the last FAO yearbook incorporates the replies of 130 countries, representing from 90 to 96 percent of the world production of, and trade in, forest products.
FIGURE 6. The old way. There is still a decided place for animal power in forest operations as the above scene of elephants piling teak logs in northern Thailand shows.
Photograph: S. Bunnag
A similar but more detailed survey concerning the production, trade, stocks and prices of pulpwood, pit-props (mine timber) and sawn softwood is made every three months for Europe and North America. The assembled data are published in the statistical annex to the Timber Bulletin for Europe, produced in collaboration with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. It is proposed to modify the form of presentation so as to obtain quicker release of the statistics and market reports.
Every five years, another FAO questionnaire leeks from Member Governments all available data on forest resources, forest areas, classification of forests in use, growing stock, gross increment, net growth, allowable cut, fellings and removals. An initial survey was made in 1947. It was repeated in 1953 and the results were published in the report entitled World Forest Resources. This volume contains the most complete statistical account of the forested areas of the world to be published so far.
In the field of forestry statistics, the work of the last ten years is encouraging. It shows that progress has been made in many countries, but it also shows that there still remains much to be done in order that accurate data may be available on which to base an increasingly efficient utilization of the forest resources of the world.
Commodity Reports and Special Studies
The complete data assembled in connection with FAO statistical publications and analytical appraisals makes it possible to supply accurate and timely information to an ever-increasing number of correspondents who send in the most varied requests. The Forestry Division has thus been able to organize an effective intelligence service.
It is also on the basis of this intelligence which FAO alone can collect on a world or regional basis that short-term market and commodity reports can be drawn up, and special studies undertaken are concerned with long-term forecasts.
Production, international trade, consumption and prices of most forest products are in constant fluctuation. It is natural, therefore, that production, distribution and price policies, as well as the problems of marketing certain categories of roundwood, sawnwood, plywood, pulp and paper should be periodically reviewed in commodity reports published in Unasylva. Such reports are often the starting point of efforts in the international field to prevent a short-term disparity between supply and demand or to encourage production and to eliminate obstacles to trade. Within the more limited framework of Europe, the forest products markets of the thirteen mai