<title>Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East - Proceedings of the </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The Near East region is a major center of plant diversity. It provides a wide range of plants of great value to mankind. The number of species of higher plants of the region is estimated to be 25000 vascular plant species. Forests of the region are rich in plant genetic resources. They provide food that supplement the agricultural and contributes to household nutrition, fodder, fertilizer, fiber, medicine, essential oils, dyes, gums, resins, and construction materials. Some of these products are internationally used in food, medicines, flavorings, perfumes, and confection besides providing additional employment and income to the local people.
To increase awareness on Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP) and to strengthen national collaboration on the regional level, FAO's Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) has organized various regional and global expert consultations.
In the light of the above-mentioned situation, and because of the uniqueness of forests and rangelands and their products in the region, an expert meeting on NWFP was held in Cairo, 19-21 May 1997. It was focused on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants in the Near East countries with the following objectives: i) to discuss the present resource situation and utilization status of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants as well as other NWFP in the Near East region, their potential and the problems and issues to be faced for their sustainable development; ii) to identify and propose priorities of action for conservation and sustainable development of medicinal , culinary and aromatic plants products in the Near East; and iii) to exchange ideas for establishing a regional network on medicinal plants in the region. The meeting attracted 23 participants from 10 different countries and 2 organizations in the Near East region.
This proceeding is published to disseminate the information and recommendations of the meeting and to establish networks among the region's countries.
It is hoped that the outcome of the proceeding will contribute in raising the awareness on the NWFP products in the region and understanding their importance for the local needs and national economies.
A.Y. Bukhari
Assistant Director General/
Regional Representative
Regional Office for the Near East
Acronyms
ACSAD Arab Centre for the Study of Arid Zones and Dry Lands
AOAD Arab Organization for Agricultural Development
CIFOR Centre for International Forestry Research
CIHEAM Centre International des Hautes Études Agronomiques Méditerranéennes
COFO Committee on Forestry (FAO)
CSD United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FOPW Wood and Non-Wood Utilization Branch (Forest Department FAO)
GAC Gum Arabic Company
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNP Gross National Product
HPS Hand Picked Selected
IIED International Institute for Environment and Development
ICMAP International Council for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
IPF Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests
IPGRI-WANA International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Regional Office for
West Asia and North Africa
IRIS Interactive Regional Information System
IUCN World Conservation Union
IUFRO International Union of Forestry Research Organisations
LEAD Leiden Ethnosystems and Development Programme
MAICh Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania
MAP Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants
MAPRI Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Research Institute
MEDUSA Regional Network for the Identification, Conservation and Use of Wild Plants in the Mediterranean Region
MOALR Central Administration for Afforestation
NEFC Near East Forestry Commission
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NWFP Non-Wood Forest Products
RNE Regional Office for the Near East (FAO)
SUST Sudan University for Science and Technology
SYP Syrian Pound
DT Tunisian Dinar
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
WHO World Health Organization
WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>2</section>
Summary report and conclusions
BACKGROUND
Since 1991, in an effort to increase awareness of Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP) and to strengthen national collaboration at the regional level, FAO has collaborated with other interested agencies to conduct a series of regional expert meetings on NWFP. FAO's Wood and Non-wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) has co-organized various regional expert consultations in: Asia and the Pacific Region (Bangkok, Thailand, 1991); Anglophone African Countries (Arusha, Tanzania, 1993); Latin America and the Caribbean (Santiago, Chile, 1994); the Congo Basin (Limbe, Cameroon, 1998) and the Boreal Forests (Joensuu, Finland, 1998). Two global expert consultations have also been organized: "Social, Economic and Cultural Dimensions of NWFP" (Bangkok, Thailand, 1994), and the "Inter-regional Expert Consultation on NWFP" (Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 1995).
The Near East region had not yet been covered by such an effort, and the "FAO International Expert Meeting on Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East" was the first Expert Meeting in the Near East on NWFP. Because of the uniqueness of the region's forest and rangelands and its products, the focus of the meeting was on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants, as these are among the most important NWFP of the Mediterranean region.
The meeting was jointly organized by the FAO Regional Office for the Near East (RNE) and the Forest Products Division (FOP) and was held at the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture in Cairo, Egypt, from 19 to 21 May 1997.
OBJECTIVES
The specific objectives of the Expert Meeting were to:
* Gain a better insight into the present resource situation and utilization status of Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants (MAP) of the Near East region, their potential, and the problems and issues to be addressed for their sustainable development;
* Identify and propose priorities for action at various levels and propose programmes and projects to support national/regional efforts for resource conservation and sustainable development of MAP products in the Near East.
The focus of the meeting was on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants gathered from wild sources (such as on forest and/or on range lands) in the Near East, so as to differentiate these products from those obtained as agriculture cash crops (on irrigated or on rainfed lands). It was also noted during the meeting that the notion "forest land" (defined by FAO as land with a minimum of 10% tree cover), should encompass also the very extensive "range lands" (lands with a tree cover of less than 10% and mostly used for extensive grazing) in the region.
See Annex 1 for the Agenda of the meeting
PARTICIPANTS
The meeting was attended by 23 participants (including two observers and two resource persons from FAO). All invited experts came from countries of the Near East region, i.e.: Tunisia, Syria, Iran, Turkey, Cyprus, Yemen, Jordan, Sudan and Egypt. Observers included Mr. Hennawi from the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD), and Mr. Heywood, who's participation at the meeting was sponsored by the Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh/MEDUSA). Some officers from the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture also occasionally attended the meeting. The 19 experts invited by the organizers were selected on the basis of their specialized knowledge of NWFP in general and MAP in particular, and on the basis of their role in the management and utilization of forest resources in their country. They participated to the meeting in their personal capacity and not as representatives of their governments. See Annex 2 for the List of Participants.
SUMMARY REPORT OF THE MEETING
The meeting was opened by Dr. Mamdouch Charaf Eddin, Vice Minister of Agriculture, on behalf of Dr. Youssif Wally, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture and Land Reclamation of Egypt. In his speech he underlined the importance that the Egyptian government gives to the sustainable utilization of its forest resources, and the need for close cooperation with countries in the Near East region in this regard. Dr. Abdel Azeem El Gazzar, Director of the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture, and Dr. Reyadh Mamdouh, Under Secretary of State for Afforestation, emphasized the important contribution of these forest resources to socio-economic development and to food security.
Dr. Mamdouch Charaf Eddin stressed that the meeting was timely planned, as it underscored the importance that the international community attaches to sustainable forestry development in the region. He also emphasized that the meeting was designed to facilitate an open dialogue among experts, and that it would make a direct contribution to the technical discussions on the development and utilization of NWFP in the Near East, and the role they play in the sustainable development of forest resources in the region.
Mr. Reyadh highlighted the important contributions of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants and other NWFPs towards: (i) improving nutrition and health of the rural population in the Near East region; (ii) providing additional income for landless people; (iii) conserving the biological diversity of Near East forest resources. He also stressed the need for scientifically sound management and utilization of these resources, which should be fully compatible with the principles of sustainable forest management.
Speaking on behalf of FAO, Mr. A. Al Fares and Mr. P. Vantomme welcomed the participants, thanked the Government of Egypt for hosting this important meeting, and briefed the participants on the background and objectives of the meeting and its expected outcome.
The meeting elected Mr. Reyadh as Chairman and Messrs. Khater and Gavrilides as Rapporteurs. Mr. Vantomme of FAO HQ (FOPW) and Mr. Al Fares of the Regional Office for the Near East (RNE) served as Secretaries for the meeting.
The programme of the meeting was articulated in two technical sessions: i) Overview of the Resource Situation and the Present Status of Utilization of the Major Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East Region; ii) Product Development and Policy/Institutional Issues. Each session included presentation of keynote papers, country reports and case studies, followed by general discussions.
The first session began with the presentation of three regional papers: "Plant Resources and their Diversity in the Near East" (V. Heywood), "The State of Agriculture, Forestry and the Environment in the Near East", (A. Alfares), and "Major Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants Gathered from Wild Sources in the Near East: Product Utilization and Trends" (P.Vantomme). The meeting was further briefed on the resource and utilization status of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants through detailed country reports. Countries covered included: Turkey, Jordan, Syria, Yemen, Egypt, Cyprus, Tunisia, and Iran. The meeting was informed on the experience gained by these countries in the development and use of their NWFP, with particular reference to progress made in forest management, harvesting, processing and trade practices.
The second session covered the presentation and discussion of case studies documenting the situation, trends and needs of selected products: Mushroom production in Turkey, Jordan and Syria; NWFP in Turkey; Afforestation with Jatropha curcas in Egypt; Gum Arabic production in Sudan (including the production and marketing of new gums like Karaya, Sterculia setigera) and Medicinal and Aromatic plants in Arab countries. Three studies that had been commissioned by FAO-RNE on MAP in Pakistan, Sudan and Turkey were also presented. In this proceeding, only a summary of these three studies is given, copies of the entire documents are available from FAO-RNE.
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The meeting provided a useful overview of the specific characteristics of the many NWFP and their resource/utilization status in the region. The outcome of the discussions of the meeting was presented and discussed in plenary until an agreement by consensus was reached on all recommendations. A copy of the key recommendations were then distributed to each participant at the closing session.
The following are the main findings of the meeting and the corresponding recommended actions to be taken:
Information on the resources
It was found that there is a lack of:
* an agreed list of species (including important micro-organism) with standard names, synonyms, and agreed taxonomy;
* information on properties, distribution and dynamics of species and their associated ecosystems;
* information on how plants are utilized, harvested, cultivated and propagated;
* reliable production and trade statistics;
* germplasm/certified/authenticated stock for cultivation;
* data on the socio-economic contribution of MAP and other NWFP to rural development;
* data on the various values of NWFP, including their contribution to income generation, soil conservation, food security, and maintenance of biodiversity.
Some information on the above is partially available from many and often very different sources, however this information base is still far from being comprehensive and adequate to cover the whole Near East region.
Proposed action
à Establish a regional metadatabase on medicinal, culinary and aromatic (and other NWFP) resources of the Near East based on existing efforts/databases;
à Create a "Directory on Who in the Near East is doing What on NWFP and Where" (including the utilization of the work done by AOAD, MEDUSA, IUCN, and others);
à Improve networking among key institutes in the region to strengthen information exchange, technology transfer, development of regional statistics and propagation methods (need for a regional training programme/center).
Conservation/protection/utilization of the resources
It was found that regulations and forest/rangeland legislation dealing with ownership, user rights, protection, utilization and harvesting of wild populations, at national/sub-regional level are inadequate. This situation is leading to over-harvesting and increased degradation of the natural resources, resulting in the inability of the wild populations to regenerate. It was also found that there was a lack of participatory and integrated forest resource management (combining wood production, grazing and NWFP).
Proposed action
à Review present national forest legislation in the region to identify critical gaps;
à Assist governments in the development of comprehensive strategies to address in a multidisciplinary manner the conservation and sustainable development of their medicinal, aromatic and culinary (and other NWFP) resources;
à Set aside gene reserves/conservation centres. This would require carrying out a feasibility study for establishing regional gene banks on MAP of the Near East.
The need for regional action programmes was mentioned, including developing field
projects to:
à Define the role of local people and develop participatory approaches with rural populations for improved conservation/utilization of the resources;
à Strengthen regional research collaboration.
Product Development and Policy/institutional aspects
It was found that there is urgent need for:
* Establishing an integrated approach towards NWFP development (and NOT to focus on one species only);
* Achieving optimization of the use of the products: improve industrialization, better techniques for harvesting, processing, etc.;
* Promoting the domestication of resources when relevant (as sometimes supply from both wild and farmed sources is desirable for social reasons);
* Setting up regional organizations/networks (or Centre) on given products;
* Improving the quality standards of products.
Proposed action
à Prepare marketing studies on important NWFP and MAP;
à Organize training workshops on specific topics (quality, marketing, involvement of local people, forest policy, extension).
CONCLUDING OVERALL RECOMMENDATIONS
The Meeting recommended that the development and promotion of NWFP between countries in the Near East should be strengthened through improved networking, and/or regional development projects/common programmes and, in this regard, close collaboration and coordination should be sought with, and among, the Arab agencies and institutions working in the same or related fields.
The Meeting recommended that a review of national forest policies and regulations in the region be carried out so as to identify critical gaps which could impede a sustainable conservation and development of NWFP.
The Meeting recommended that each country to become involved in a process of promotion of NWFP and that this process be developed simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels.
The Meeting recommended that every effort be made to promote the exchange of information and experience related to this field, through, in particular, the organization of meetings between experts.
The Meeting finally recommended that follow-up action be taken and requested FAO to take a lead in the identification and formulation of a regional project to promote the sustainable development of NWFP in the Mediterranean basin, and to prepare a project document for submission to interested donors. This effort is to be carried out in close collaboration with relevant sub-regional organizations (such as ACSAD, AOAD and others) and with agencies from the countries concerned.
<section>3</section>
SESSION 1
Regional overview of the resource situation and the status of utilization of the medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants in the Near East
Plant resources and their diversity in the Near East
V. Heywood
University of Reading
FORESTS
Under the FAO regional structure, the Near East region includes the following 30 countries: Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tadjikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
According to FAO (The State of the World's Forests, 1997), the total area of forests and woodlands in the region in 1995 was about 131 million, i.e. 2% of the land area of the region.
The largest forest area is in Sudan (41.6 million ha), followed by Iran (11.4 million ha), Turkey (8.9 million ha), Morocco (8.4 million ha), Kyrgyzstan (7.3 million ha), Algeria (1.87 million ha), and Afghanistan (1.4 million ha). The forest and woodland area in the remaining countries is less than one million ha. Countries like Bahrain, Malta, Oman and Qatar have no forests. Egypt, Kuwait and United Arab Emirates have only man-made plantations. The land area, population numbers, GNP/person and forest area of the countries in the region is shown in Table (1).
Due to the prevailing harsh climatic conditions of the region, forestland is mostly comprised of savannah areas, open woodlands, and land with scattered trees and xerophytic shrubs. However, in the Atlas mountains of Morocco, highlands of Cyprus, Pakistan, Turkey, the Caspian sea and Southern Sudan, temperate forests and high rain zones are found.
In countries lacking natural forests, fast growing and multipurpose tree species (i.e., eucalyptus, casuarina, poplars and acacias) are planted in the form of windbreaks or shelterbelts around the farms, highways, public facilities and in the agroforestry systems. These help to meet the local needs for wood and to protect the agricultural crops against wind as well as providing amenity and amelioration of the environment. In countries that have natural forests, such plantations provide significant amounts of wood (e.g. 4 million m^3/annum of wood are made in Turkey mainly from poplar plantations) and even greater amounts than the natural forest production (e.g. Iraq, Iran, Lebanon Syria and Tunisia).
In general, the forestlands in the Near East countries are state owned, although there are some variations among the countries regarding ownership and the rights of forest dwellers and local populations. Many countries in the region have enacted laws and legislations to regulate the use of forests by local populations and protect them against damaging interventions.
According to FAO statistics (Table 2), the forest area of the region decreased during the period 1990-1995. The main causes for degradation are: over exploitation of wood for fuel by rural populations, overgrazing and the increase in need for wood and non-wood products and services of forests by the growing population in the region.
Deforestation in the region during this period was very high. The most affected countries were Sudan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Algeria. The forests are used as a source of timber, fuelwood and other wood products. Fuelwood and charcoal are the most important products in the region. For example, in Sudan, the consumption of fuelwood (firewood and charcoal) represented the largest share of total consumption. Wood for construction, maintenance and furniture accounted for 7.2%, 3.8% and 1.5% respectively. In Turkey, the average annual wood production of state owned forests is around 7-7.5 million m^3 of round wood and 6-9 million m^3 of fuelwood.
NWFP include medicinal and aromatic plants, herbs and spices, gums, resins, tannins, fibers, mushrooms, honey, fruits and nuts for nutrition, fodder for animals as well as wildlife products. There are also other very important services provided by the forests in the region. Protection of soil and water resources is a primary function of forests and wood plantations. Forests play a vital role in combating desertification and preventing soil erosion in fragile regions (Sudan, Yemen and North Africa countries), as well as protecting watersheds in mountainous areas (Yemen and Cyprus). Shelterbelts and windbreaks protect fields, cities and infrastructure, ensure environmental stability and increase soil productivity by mitigating the effects of climatic fluctuations in many countries of the region (Egypt, Libya, Iraq, Sudan, Syria and Turkey). Amenity and recreation are also among the important functions of forest areas. In line with the rapid urbanization in many countries of
the region, demands for recreation activities have shown rapid increase. For example, in Turkey 428 recreation sites covering 15 946 hectares have been established, and 32 national parks covering an area of 649 486 hectares. Forests play a significant role in the preservation of biodiversity and the gene reserves in the region. They provide work opportunities and additional income to the rural population living in and around forests.
Floristic Diversity of the Near East Region
The flora of the Near East region is diverse and comprises some 23 000 vascular plant species of which 6 700 are endemic to the region (Table 3). The flora of the Middle East is estimated at 15 000 species by Heller (1991). These figures can be compared with 25 000 for the flora of the Mediterranean region.
In some countries such as Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Cyprus, Israel and Turkey, modern inventories of flora have been completed while in other countries, such as Iraq, Iran and the Arabian Peninsula, they are still in the stage of development. A recent checklist of the flora of Egypt has been published (Boulos 1995) and in the same year another catalogue of the flora was published by El Hadidi & Fayed (1995). The first of seven projected volumes of the "Flora of the Arabian Peninsula and Socotra" was published in 1996 (Miller & Cope 1996). This aims to provide a regional framework for the floras of the countries of the Arabian Peninsula (Saudi Arabia, Republic of Yemen including the Socotran Archipelago, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait). Another major floristic work is the "Conspectus Florae Orientalis" (Heller & Heyn 1980-94), an annotated catalogue of the flora of the Middle East. This synthetic catalogue is in some ways a supplement and update of
the taxa listed in Boissier's classic "Flora Orientalist" that was completed over a century ago.
Nineteen "centres of diversity" were recognized in the Middle East and South West Asia. They include the Levantine Uplands of Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel and Jordan which form part of the "Fertile Crescent", of major importance for agriculture. The region also contains Vavilov's Near Eastern Center of Origin of Crop Plants and the Near Eastern Complex recognized by Harlan (1992) where a wide variety of cultivated plants were domesticated, as well as in neighboring areas such as the Mediterranean.
DIVERSITY OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS, HERBS AND SPICES
The use of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants, herbs and spices in the region goes back thousands of years and forms an important part of various cultures. Although many of the species concerned have fallen into disuse, traditional medicines still play a major role in health care systems. A list of the most important medicinal and essential oil and perfume plants is given in Table (4). The most important plant families are: Boraginaceae, Caryophyllaceae, Chenopodiaceae, Compositae, Cruciferae, Gramineae, Labiatae, Leguminosae, Liliaceae, Rosaceae.
In Turkey, more than 500 medicinal and aromatic plants are being used. Whole or parts of plants of about 250 species are exported (Koyuncu, 1995). Turkey is also rich in aromatic plants and Baser (1993) estimates that a third of the flora of Turkey consists of aromatic plants used for fragrance, flavoring or containing essential oil. In Tunisia, 152 medicinal plants have been recorded together with 38 essential oil plants (Chemli, 1997). Amongst the 1500 or so plants used in Iraq, a large number serve medicinal and aromatic purposes. Some of them are cultivated (Chakravarty,1976).
In the Arabian Peninsula oleo-gum-resins are found in Boswellia and Commiphora of the family Burseraceae. These are produced in resin ducts in the bark. Boswellia sacra, the most celebrated plant of Dhofar, and one that played a key role in its economy until recent times, was widely used as a medicinal plant for a whole range of ailments by physicians. Three species of Commiphora are used medicinally in preparations made from their resinous wood or from the resins: C. oliacea (or C. Copobasamum), the famous Balm of Gilead (Meccamyrrh), C. Foliacea, whose wood is widely used, and C. habessinica whose resin is very valuable as a medecine.
Information about the medicinal and aromatic plants of the region is scattered in a range of different works. Some are little more than briefly annotated lists of the common species to be found in a particular country (e.g. "Medicinal plants of Iraq". F. M. Karim & S.A. Quraan, 1986). In other countries such as Pakistan and Yemen, they contain detailed information about actual uses, how they are traded and so on.
The introduction of more extensive farming of medicinal plants should be considered. This requires more information about which species grow in the wild, their conservation status, how intensively wild species are harvested, how extensively they are cultivated and what are the existing and potential markets (local, national and international). This also requires the participation of the local community and its indigenous knowledge, and proper analysis of the socio-economic, cultural, agricultural, technical, scientific and conservation factors involved.
INTERNATIONAL ACTIONS AND NETWORKS
One of the difficulties in planning action related to medicinal plant species is the lack of detailed information on their identity, geographical distribution, current uses, conservation status in the wild, cultivation practices, and trade statistics. Moreover, the range of interest groups involved with medicinal plants is remarkably wide. For this reason a recommendation was made at the first World Congress of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants for Human Welfare held in 1992 to set up an international coordinating body. Subsequently an International Council for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (ICMAP) was created in 1993. The aim of this body is to provide a forum for more effective cooperation between the various organizations and individual scientists, technologists and other specialists working in the field of medicinal and aromatic plants. Activities involve formulation of new ideas, actions, strategies and promotion of education and training in all fields related to these
plants.
More specifically the objectives of ICMAP include:
* Organization of World Congresses on medicinal and aromatic plants;
* Publication of a newsletter;
* Establishment of a clearing house mechanism and information system on MAP;
* Improvement of information exchange with industrial users;
* Promotion of knowledge of the uses of traditional medicine systems and phytomedicines;
* Establishment of task forces on areas such as genetic resources and traditional medicine.
A regional network for the Identification, Conservation and Use of Wild Plants in the Mediterranean Region called MEDUSA was established during a workshop on "Identification of Wild Food and Non-Food Plants of the Mediterranean Region" held on 28-29 June, 1996 at the Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh). This network is financially supported by the Directorate General of the European Union, CIHEAM, and MAICh.
The general aim of the Network is to propose methods for the economic and social development of rural areas of the Mediterranean region, using ecologically based management systems that will ensure the sustainable use and conservation of plant resources of the area. These plant genetic resources are of actual or potential importance to agriculture, various industries and human health, and consequently improve the quality of life.
The specific objectives of the Network are:
* The identification of native and naturalized plants of the Mediterranean region, used as: food (including food and beverages, for humans); food additives (including processing agents and additive ingredients used in food preparations); animal food (including forage and fodder for vertebrates); bee plants (including pollen or nectar sources for honey production); invertebrate food (including plants eaten by invertebrates useful to humans e.g. silkworms); materials (including woods, fibers, tannins, latex, resins, essential oils, waxes, oils); fuels (including fuelwood, charcoal, fuel alcohol); social uses (including masticators, anti-smoking devices, hallucinogens, psychoactive drugs, contraceptives, and plants for ritual or religious purposes); vertebrate poisons (including poisonous plants for hunting and fishing); non-vertebrate poisons (including mollusicides, herbicides, insecticides, bacteriacides and fungicides); medicines (for human and veterinary uses);
environmental uses (ornamental, hedges, windbreaks, soil improvement, erosion control, and indication of metals, pollution or underground water); and gene sources (including wild relatives of major crops).
* The creation of an Interactive Regional Information System (IRIS) containing scientific plant names, vernacular names, plant description, chemical data, distribution, habitat description, uses, conservation status, present and past ways of trading and marketing, indigenous knowledge (ethnobiological and ethnopharmacological), and references to literature sources.
* The preliminary evaluation of the conservation status and potential utilization in agriculture of these plants as alternative minor crops.
The network includes representatives of international organizations, such as CIHEAM-MAICh, IUCN, ICMAP, FAO, IPGRI-WANA and LEAD which form the Steering Committee, and representatives from the countries of the Mediterranean basin (initially Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Turkey, Greece, Italy, France, Spain and Portugal). It is envisaged that the Network will eventually include members from all the Mediterranean countries and other international organizations.
OTHER NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
Food
The Near East forests provide a wide range of foods. Edible fruits are particularly important as they provide essential nutrients to the diet of local people. Examples of some edible fruit forest trees are: Pistacia, Pinus pinea and carob in Syria, Iran and Turkey; walnut, mulberry, tamarind, mango and Zizyphus sp. in Pakistan; and Andansonia digitata, Balanites aegyptiaca and Zizyphus sp. in Sudan. In countries tha