<title>Industrial charcoal making</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This manual on Industrial. Technologies for Charcoal Making represents another step by FAO to help overcome fuel shortages in the developing world.
Energy is one of the most important commodities required to satisfy the physical needs of mankind. Over the years, limits in the availability, technological changes, locations of resources, prices and use of certain fuels have required the use of new sources of energy.
Furthermore, during the last years, the growing population, the continuing industrialization and economic growth of countries have led to an increasing demand of fossil fuels. The economic difficulties that most countries are facing, together with high oil prices, are bringing about a period of energy transition from an economy based primarily on hydrocarbons to one based increasingly on new renewable sources of energy. Although many technical solutions using new and renewable sources of energy have been tried during the last ten years, forest biomass, due to different technical, economical and social reasons, seems to be one of the most appropriate alternatives.
Sixty percent of all wood taken from the world's forests is believed to be burnt as fuel - either directly or by first converting it into charcoal. The proportion of fuelwood used to make charcoal can only be estimated but it is probable that around 400 million cubic metres are transformed into charcoal per year throughout the world.
In developing countries charcoal is mainly used as domestic fuel for cooking and heating but it is also an important industrial fuel. Large amounts are used in foundries and forges, in the extraction and refining of metals, especially iron, and in numerous other metallurgical industries as well as in cement factories and chemical applications. Also, in those countries with abundant forest resources the export of charcoal can be a profitable industry.
In most developing countries the traditional methods of charcoal making are the only technology known, but due to shortages and rising prices of raw materials in industrialized countries, new and improved technologies for charcoal production have been developed and taken into use during the last decades. Through technical achievements, the carbonisation of almost any type of forest, wood industry or agricultural residues became feasible and also higher energy yields were obtained by producing commercially valuable by-products. Progress was made in particular in carbonisation of small-sized biomass, in manufacturing charcoal briquettes and in the design of equipment for energy co-generation to produce mechanical, electrical or thermal energy, through the recovery of energy from pyrolysis gases.
The idea of this manual has been inspired by the Forest Industries Division of FAO with the purpose to inform and orient government agencies and managers of industries in developing countries concerned with improving the production and distribution of charcoal. The application of modern technology can make useful contributions in securing the supply of household or industrial fuels and in saving hard currency by substituting imported fossil fuels. The contacts with governmental planning authorities and private enterprises in developing countries show that the main factor obstructing the promotion and realisation of charcoal industries is the lack of knowledge of the existing charcoal technology. In many cases, assistance would also be needed in the preparation of a charcoal project.
This manual embodies the collective wisdom of charcoal makers of many countries and is offered in the hope that it will aid both to increase production of charcoal and, at the same time, to conserve forest resources by introducing more efficient methods of production.
The help of the consultants involved in the preparation of this manual is gratefully acknowledged, in particular that of Mr. Walter Emrich and Mr. Harry Booth who worked out the original ideas and to Mr. E. Beaumont who assisted in the final editing.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1. Industrial charcoal making technologies
1.1 What are industrial charcoal making methods?
1.2 The 'new' and the 'old' in the industrial technology
1.3 The trade-offs in charcoal making
1.4 Yield - Investment interactions
1.5 The importance of wood preparation costs
1.1 What are industrial charcoal making methods?
Charcoal making is an old and honourable trade. Its origins are lost in prehistory and the traditional methods of making it have changed surprisingly little -from ancient times till now. The only new factors are that the simple methodologies have been rationalised and that science has verified the basic processes which take place during carbonisation and spelled out the quantitative and qualitative laws which govern the process.
New methods which have been introduced in some parts of the developed world have supplanted the old technology. Their newness does not reside in the principle of carbonisation itself but in the rationalisation of the use of heat, materials handling and labour and in some instances the recovery of by-products from the smoke given off during carbonisation.
These 'industrial' methods, for want of an easier name, in contrast to those described in (15) are certainly more complex in almost every way.
Since 'new' in the world of advertising is automatically assumed to mean 'better' it is not surprising that there has been an upsurge of interest in these new technologies by the developing world in attempting to increase the availability of charcoal and wood fuels. This Forestry Paper tries to supply a rational answer to the question:- "How can the industrial charcoal making systems make a useful contribution to charcoal production in the developing world?"
1.2 The 'new' and the 'old' in the industrial technology
If one elects to make charcoal using one or other of the methods in this paper it will still be necessary to make use of the information in (15), specially chapters 1, 4 and 9, because with the Industrial technologies about 90% of the process from the growing and harvesting of the wood to the distribution and sale of the finished charcoal is still the same as with the traditional methods. The newness resides in the carbonisation step and the replacement of labour intensive methods of materials handling with capital intensive methods.
Some of the often-claimed advantages of the industrial methods are:
- The yield of charcoal from the wood is higher.
- Carbonisation is more rapid.
- Charcoal can be made -from raw materials that cannot be processed by traditional methods.
- Industrial chemicals and heat energy can be recovered from the smoke given off during carbonisation.
- By recovering by-products from the smoke there is less pollution of the environment.
Let us take a closer look at these claims.
- The yield of charcoal is higher.
In traditional charcoal making part of the wood is burned to dry out and carbonise the remainder. During carbonisation there is also an exothermic production of heat as the wood structure decomposes to form charcoal and this supplements the heat derived from burning part of the charge. The most efficient of the retort systems described later is capable of giving yields of about one ton of charcoal from about 3.5 tons of wood providing the wood is well dried and the retort operated properly. The best that can be achieved by brick kilns is about one ton from 4.5 tons of well dried wood.
Not all industrial methods however give such high yields and most will not work properly unless the wood is well dried. Traditional methods on the other hand will operate on substantially green wood but with much lower yield.
- Carbonisation is faster.
This is a rather meaningless claim. What one really needs to know about the system are answers to such questions as 'at what rate is charcoal produced per unit of capital invested?' or 'how much charcoal is produced per man year of labour employed?' That is to say at the end of the year how much charcoal do we have for how much investment in plant and working capital?
In the developing world capital is usually scarce and labour power abundant. When it is noted that industrial methods require massive investment, usually in off-shore borrowed funds and skilled labour; industrial methods lose a lot of their glamour and obviously call for careful pre-investment studies to see where they will really lead.
- New raw materials can be carbonised.
This is certainly proved for one industrial system, the multiple hearth rotary furnace. However, it is always necessary to ask if the new material can be 'successfully carbonised'. Many proposals have come to grief when this test has been applied. Nevertheless bark and sawdust and certain agricultural residues can be successfully carbonised now. But it is essential to ask before setting out to carbonise agricultural residues whether from all points of view this is the best use for them and if the resulting charcoal produced in the form of fine powder can be economically turned into briquettes and marketed in the particular developing country.
- Industrial chemicals can be recovered.
Most retort based industrial systems can allow the smoke given off during carbonisation to be captured and condensibles and gas recovered. The main problem in making this a success nowadays is the low price obtainable for these chemicals in relation to the high present day capital cost of setting up a recovery and refining system to process them.
- Industrial methods cause less pollution.
If the smoke from carbonisation is recovered then this source of environmental pollution is largely eliminated. This is a definite benefit where carbonisation is carried out in an urban environment. But industrial methods, especially where the smoke and fumes are captured for by-product recovery can pollute the environment in a more objectionable way. This can occur because inevitably in the process of by-product recovery, liquid effluents accumulate and have to be disposed of. If this is done carelessly then waste liquids toxic to fish and plant life escape into streams and waterways. Control of this pollution is not impossible - it just costs money.
1.3 The trade-offs in charcoal making
As in all industrial production processes, it is possible in charcoal making to trade-off part of an advantage in return for the reduction or elimination of a disadvantage.
To understand where such trade-offs may be worthwhile it is first necessary to understand clearly what the real objectives are in the charcoal making process. The first step to clearer thinking is to set-up a country-wide fuel energy policy or in this case a country-wide wood fuel energy policy which should be the framework within which all decisions of importance about charcoal making are made. The outline of how such a policy is drawn up is covered in (15) and will not be dealt with here since the main concern of this Paper is the carbonisation step and not the rest of the process which is more or less the same whatever carbonisation system is used. But the carbonisation step does reflect back and influence all other preceding stages and this has to be taken into account.
The factors which must be considered include: the yield of charcoal obtained from the wood; the capital investment required; transport economics for both the wood and charcoal; number of jobs created or lost; the relevance of attempting to recover by-products; the lift of the forest or other resource in relation to the time needed to recover the investment; the relative importance of the offshore content of loan and equity funds in the venture; and the capacity of the country to provide skilled technicians needed to operate the more complex 'industrial' types of charcoal making system. (34)
1.4 Yield - Investment interactions
The most powerful decision making parameter in choosing a carbonising system for charcoal for most developing countries is the interaction between the yield of a process and the capital necessary to install it. A process which has twice the yield of a traditional one would obviously be chosen if the capital investment of both systems were the same both in amount and origin of the investment funds. But life is not usually so simple and there is normally a trade-off between yield and investment. For example if the high yield process requires substantial offshore loan funds to establish then it may be a better option in terms of local development to use locally available capital and labour to grow more wood in high yield plantations and avoid a committment to an offshore loan for a process which would probably generate far less jobs than the lower yield process. But if as is usual there is a shortage of either established forests or land on which to establish plantations then
other factors being equal the capital intensive process may be attractive. Unfortunately in most developing countries which find themselves simultaneously short of land resource and foreign investment funds the decision is usually made for them and the best option they can follow is efficient use of available resources using the simple technology applied in the most efficient way. (15)
It is not proposed in this introductory note to pursue these difficult issues further but simply to emphasise strongly the need to be aware of the complexities of the situation which faces each country.
1.5 The importance of wood preparation costs
The final point requiring emphasis in this introduction is the matter of wood preparation costs.
Traditional methods are adapted to use wood in large pieces, in some of them whole tree trunks can be used. It is difficult to dry such large pieces before carbonising and so more wood is used up in the carbonising process to complete their drying before they carbonise. Thus the yield overall is lower but wood preparation costs are negligible. Industrial methods require the wood in small pieces of more or less constant size. Some retort systems even require the wood to be in the form of sawdust. Wood in smaller pieces is easier to dry in the air and hence the yield in carbonising is higher. Small dimension wood is also required for the mechanised feeding systems used in most industrial type carbonising processes. Where the wood is available already in finely divided form as sawmill waste, preparation costs are low. But in practice the amount of wood available in this form in the developing world in relation to the charcoal needed is quite small so that generally any
industrial system adopted must face quite large wood preparation costs. This factor can never be disregarded.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2. Wood carbonisation and the products it yields
2.1 Carbonisation
2.2 Efficiency in carbonisation
2.3 Measuring the yield
2.4 What happens during carbonisation
2.5 The stages in charcoal formation
2.6 Using heat efficiently in carbonisation
2.7 Continuous carbonisation
2.8 Classification of retort heating systems
2.9 Properties of carbonisation products
2.1 Carbonisation
Carbonisation is a particular form of that process in chemical technology called pyrolysis that is the breakdown of complex substances into simpler ones by heating. Carbonisation is the term used when complex carbonaceous substances such as wood or agricultural residues are broken down by heating into elemental carbon and chemical compounds which may also contain some carbon in their chemical structure. The term carbonisation is also applied to the pyrolysis of coal to produce coke.
2.2 Efficiency in carbonisation
The carbonisation stage in the charcoal making process is the most important step of all since it has such power to influence the whole process from the growing tree to the final distribution of the product to the user.
Yet carbonisation in itself is relatively not a costly step. Even though retorts may be of high capital cost they do not require very much labour per unit of production. Typically the carbonisation step may represent about 10% of total costs from growing and harvesting the tree to arrival of the finished charcoal into bulk store. But the conversion efficiency of the carbonisation step works its way back to the point where the wood is harvested. A high yield in conversion means that less wood has to be grown, harvested, dried, transported and loaded into the retort or other carbonising unit.
The specific way the wood is carbonised is also able to effect overall yield because of the effect it has on the amount of fines produced. Fines may have no market at all or may only be saleable after going through a fairly costly briquetting process.
The three major factors which influence the conversion yield are:
(a) The moisture content of the wood at time of carbonisation.
(b) The type of carbonising equipment used.
(c) The care with which the process is carried out.
2.3 Measuring the yield
Efficiency of carbonisation is expressed as the yield of charcoal in gross terms (at the side of the retort or kiln) expressed as a percentage of the wood charged or used-up to produce it. Normally only the wood actually used-up is reckoned. Thus unburnt wood which can be recycled is deducted from the wood used even though it represents a concealed form of inefficiency. On the other hand where indirect heating is used as in retorts or the Swartz type kiln, which employs an external fire grate, the amount of wood used-up in the heating must be included in the wood used to produce the charcoal. Account may be taken that in some cases this wood may be of lower quality.
Wood and charcoal must be measured using standardised methods. They need not be the same for both materials but they must be consistent so that results are comparable. In other words a consistent methodology of measurement must be adhered to. Properly measured conversion efficiencies allow different charcoal making methods to be compared. Also these measurements are essential in controlling large charcoal making enterprises.
The most accurate measuring system compares all quantities on a weight basis. To avoid complication due to differing moisture contents, the wood used is expressed on a bone dry basis and the charcoal is weighed bone dry and free of fines. where moisture is present it must be determined and allowed for. To apply such a system, equipment for weighing and determining moisture content of wood and charcoal must be available. Unfortunately this is rarely the case in most charcoal-making situations. It is the method most suitable for research on processing and for the large industrial enterprise. Being free of inbuilt errors it is the final reference system.
A practical method which has been widely standardized in South America, particularly in the steel industry of Brazil uses volume measurement. Both the wood used and the charcoal produced are measured in cubic meters corrected for stacking and compaction errors. The wood is measured in stores (stacked cubic meters) and each stere is taken an equivalent to 0.65 solid cubic meters. The system allows for the effect of shrinkage of the fuelwood on drying and the reduction in volume which occurs when charcoal is transported and handled due to settlement. This settlement is the result of abrading of sharp corners of the lump charcoal and the formation of fine charcoal which has practically no commercial value.
The shrinkage allowance for fuelwood is based on experiments on the effect of drying and destacking and restacking as happens when a pile of dry wood is transported from the forest to the charcoal plant. The results show that a pile of 100 stores of eucalypt wood shrinks to 84 stores after 3-4 months drying and when the same pile is restacked its new volume is only 79 steres. Thus a reduction of 15% is allowed for drying and 21% for drying and restacking. The true contents of a pile of fuelwood are also greatly influenced by the method of stacking. Experience is the only way to overcome this problem in order to tell if the volume of the wood has been inflated by dishonest stacking.
The charcoal volume is measured by placing it in a wire basket having the base one meter square and height somewhat more than a meter. A commercial cubic meter of charcoal is considered to have a true volume of one cubic meter only when measured at the side of the blast furnace, that is to say, in the bulk storage depot. At the side of the charcoal kiln a cubic meter of commercial charcoal is considered to have a true volume of 1.1 cubic meter. In this way the contraction of the charcoal in transport and the production of useless fines is allowed for. The standard yield of Brazilian charcoal kilns using this system is reckoned as 1 cubic meter of commercial charcoal from every 2.2 steres of fuelwood. Volume measurement for determining charcoal yield is subject to certain intrinsic errors but it is a simple method, easily understood and can be performed 'out in the open". It has a great advantage in the buying and selling of charcoal as it automatically discourages
adulteration by wetting the charcoal and mixing it with sand and earth. The reason is that these actions have no effect on the volume. Further there is an incentive for the charcoal to be transported carefully so the reduction in saleable volume by settlement and production of fines is minimized. The temperature to which the charcoal is taken to in the kiln affects the measure of the yield by changing its content of volatile tarry material. Soft burned charcoal produced when the temperature does not rise above about 400°C can have a volatile matter content of about 30% and this is equivalent to a yield of about 42% on a bone dry weight basis. At 500°C the volatile matter is only about 13% and the yield about 33% on a bone dry basis. Hence, to compare equals with equals different kinds of charcoal must have about the same volatile matter content.
2.4 What happens during carbonisation
During pyrolysis or carbonisation the wood is heated in a closed vessel of some kind, away from the oxygen of the air which otherwise would allow it to ignite and burn away to ashes. Without oxygen we force the wood substance to decompose into a variety of substances the main one of which is charcoal, a black porous solid consisting mainly of elemental carbon. Other constituents are the ash from the original wood amounting to 0.5 to 6% depending on the type of wood, amount of bark, contamination with earth and sand, etc. and tarry substances which are distributed through the porous structure of the charcoal. As well as charcoal. Liquid and gaseous products are produced which may be collected from the vapours driven off if the charcoal is made in a retort. The liquids are condensed when the hot retort vapours pass through a water cooled condenser. The non-condensible gases pass on and are usually burned to recover the heat energy they contain. This wood gas, as it is called,
is of low calorific value (around 10% of that of natural gas).
The products other than charcoal are usually referred to as by-products. Years ago recovery of the chemicals they contain was a flourishing industry in many developed countries. Since the advent of the petrochemical industry this by-product industry has become uneconomic since in most instances the chemicals can be produced from petroleum more cheaply. More information is given on this problem later.
2.5 The stages in charcoal formation
As the wood is heated in the retort it passes through definite stages on its way to conversion into charcoal. The formation of charcoal under laboratory conditions has been studied and the following stages in the conversion process have been recognised.
- at 20 to 110°C
The wood absorbs heat as it is dried giving off its moisture as water vapour (steam). The temperature remains at or slighly above 100°C until the wood is bone dry.
- at 110 to 270°C
Final traces of water are given off and the wood starts to decompose giving off some carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, acetic acid and methanol. Heat is absorbed.
- at 270 to 290°C
This is the point at which exothermic decomposition of the wood starts. Heat is evolved and breakdown continues spontaneously providing the wood is not cooled below this decomposition temperature. Mixed gases and vapours continue to be given off together with some tar.
- at 290 to 400°C
As breakdown of the wood structure continues, the vapours given off comprise the combustible gases carbon monoxide, hydrogen and methane together with carbon dioxide gas and the condensible vapours: water, acetic acid, methanol, acetone, etc. and tars which begin to predominate as the temperature rises.
- at 400 to 500°C
At 400°C the transformation of the wood to charcoal is practically complete. The charcoal at this temperature still contains appreciable amounts of tar, perhaps 30% by weight trapped in the structure. This soft burned charcoal needs further heating to drive off more of the tar and thus raise the fixed carbon content of the charcoal to about 75% which is normal for good quality commercial charcoal.
To drive off this tar the charcoal is subject to further heat inputs to raise its temperature to about 500°C, thus completing the carbonisation stage.
2.6 Using heat efficiently in carbonisation
In carbonisation there are substantial flows of heat into and out of the wood being carbonised. Correct control of them affects the efficiency and quality of charcoal production. The heat flows can be calculated and shown on a heat balance diagram of the process. This needs a knowledge of heat engineering but the basic principles are not hard to understand. A heat input must come from the burning of a fuel of some kind which will usually mean wood in the case of charcoal making. Even if we use the exothermic heat from carbonisation or the heat liberated by burning the off-gas from the retort any additional heat will come from burning some wood and hence represents a loss. Wood which is burned cannot be turned into charcoal.
The three main stages requiring heat inputs in charcoal making are:
- The drying of the wood.
- Raising the temperature of the oven dry wood to 270°C to start spontaneous pyrolysis which itself liberates heat.
- Final heating to around 500-550°C to drive off tar and increase the fixed carbon to an acceptable figure for good commercial charcoal.
An ideal carbonising process would be one which required no external heat to carry out the carbonisation. The exothermic heat of the process would be captured together with the heat produced by burning off-gas and liquid by-products and this in total would be sufficient to dry out the residual moisture in the wood, raise it to spontaneous pyrolysis temperature and then heat it to a temperature sufficient to drive-off residual tars. In practice due to losses of heat through the walls of the carboniser and poor drying of the feedstock it is almost impossible to achieve this aim. However some systems particularly the large hot rinsing gas retorts come close to the ideal where the climate of the locality permits proper drying of the wood raw material.
No wood will carbonise until it is practically bone dry. The water in green wood however is typically about 50% of the green weight of the wood and this must all be evaporated before the wood will start to pyrolyse to form charcoal.
It is most economic to dry out as much of this moisture as possible using the sun's heat before the wood is carbonised. In dry savannah regions this is fairly simple as the wood can be left 12 months or more to dry without serious loss due to insect attack or decay. In the humid tropics two or three months may be the practical limit before insect and decay losses become intolerable. The loss in charcoal yield due to excessive moisture content has to be balanced against the loss of wood substance due to biological deterioration.
The important factors in drying and storing the wood raw material are described in Chapter 4.
2.7 Continuous carbonisation
One of the most important steps forward in the production of charcoal was the application of the concept of continuous carbonisers. By causing the raw material wood to pass in sequence through a series of zones where the various stages of carbonisation are carried out it is possible to introduce economies in use of labour and heat thus reducing production costs and increasing the yield from a given amount of wood.
The concept of a continuous carboniser where the wood travels vertically downwards as it is heated and carbonised follows fairly obviously from the idea of the iron smelting blast furnace. But it proved necessary in order to get charcoal in lump form to abandon the idea of obtaining the heat for drying the charge and heating it to carbonisation point by burning part of the wood charged. This proved too difficult to control. The heating process had to be changed to use of hot oxygen-free gas produced externally and blown through the descending charge of wood. In this way the operation was under complete control and it proved possible to produce properly burned charcoal and yet ensure that it still emerged in lump form. Furthermore, the charcoal was never contaminated with ash since the carboniser always operates at a temperature below glowing combustion point.
Recovery of the heat emerging from the top of the carboniser was achieved by burning the gas and vapours under controlled conditions in hot blast stoves similar to those used in iron smelting and then blowing this hot gas into the retort at appropriate points so that carbonisation was completed by the hot gas first impinging on the charcoal emerging from the spontaneous pyrolysis zone. The gas then passed up the tower giving up its heat in countercurrent form to the descending charge of wood. The finished charcoal in the lower part of the retort was cooled before it reached the base by blowing in cold oxygen-free fuel gas and extracting it just below the point of entry of the hot gas coming from the hot blast stove. The fuel gas, warmed through cooling the charcoal then entered the hot blast stoves to be burned with air to produce the hot rinsing gas to be blown back into the unit to strip the residual tar from the charcoal and then proceed up the tower giving up its heat to
the descending charge of wood. The position of the different zones in the tower could be controlled by regulating the gas injection rate and its temperature and the rate at which wood was admitted at the top and the charcoal was removed at the base.
This type of retort known under the generic name of 'continuous vertical hot rinsing gas retort' is commonly called the Lambiotte retort after its inventor, (Lambiotte, 1942, 1952). It is probably the most sophisticated charcoal making process because of the quality and yield of the charcoal it produces but there are other continuous charcoal making systems which are in successful commercial use. The best known of these uses the continuous multiple hearth roasting furnace also known as the Herreshoff roaster after its inventor. Just as the rinsing gas retort borrows much of its technology from the blast furnace so the multiple hearth furnace is a simple transfer of technology from the chemical and metallurgical industries where it is a familiar unit used for roasting sulphide ores prior to further processing.
The Herreshoff roaster is at a disadvantage compared with the rinsing gas retort in that it can only process finely divided wood or bark, etc, and hence can only produce powdered charcoal which must be briquettes for sale. Such briquettes are of no use for ordinary metallurgical use. The only economic market is for barbecues which requires a fairly sophisticated consumer market.
The Herreshoff roaster produces powdered charcoal and a mixture of hot gases and vapours. This gas mixture is an environmental pollutant. Since it is uneconomic to recover by-products from it nowadays the only use is to burn it to produce process heat such as for driving briquettes or making steam which might be passed through turbines to generate power. If no economic use can be found for the heat then the gas is merely burned to waste in a tall chimney.
The Herreshoff roaster is of interest because of its simplicity. It operates continuously obtaining the heat needed for final drying and carbonisation of the feedstock by burning part of it by the controlled admission of air to the hearths as the material progresses from top to bottom. If it could handle wood in lump form it would be an ideal continuous system.
All other continuous systems proposed, and there are many, based on moving belts, screw conveyers, fluidised beds and the like, while they can prod