<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Twenty-first Session Rome, 7-25 November 1981</title>
<section>1</section>
I. COUNCIL (until 31 December 1982)
Independent Chairman: M.S. Swaminathan
Afghanistan^2
Germany, Fed. Rep. of^1
Pakistan^3
Angola^2
India^3
Panama^1
Argentina^1
Indonesia^1
Philippines^3
Bangladesh^1
Ireland^2
Poland^2
Barbados^2
Italy^3
Portugal^1
Brazil^2
Ivory Coast^1
Romania^2
Canada^2
Japan^1
Saudi Arabia^3
Cape Verde^3
Kenya^2
Sudan^3
China^1
Lebanon^2
Syrian Arab Republic^1
Colombia^2
Lesotho^3
Thailand^1
Congo^2
Malaysia^1
United Kingdom^3
Cuba^2
Mexico^2
United Republic of Cameroon^1
Ecuador^3
Morocco^2
United States of America^2
Egypt^3
New Zealand^3
Upper Volta^3
Ethiopia^3
Nigeria^2
Venezuela^1
France^3
Norway^3
Yugoslavia^1
Zambia^1
^1 Term of office until 31 December 1982
^2 Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-second Session of the Conference, November 1983
^3 Term of office until 31 December 1984
<section>2</section>
II. COUNCIL (as from 1 January 1983)
Seats falling vacant at the conclusion of the Twenty-second Session of the Conference, November 1983
Seats falling vacant on 31 December 1984
Seats falling vacant at the conclusion of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference, November 1985
Afghanistan
Cape Verde
Argentina
Angola
Ecuador
Bangladesh
Barbados
Egypt
Benin
Brazil
Ethiopia
China
Canada
France
Cyprus
Colombia
India
Germany Federal Republic of
Congo
Italy
Indonesia
Cuba
Lesotho
Iraq
Ireland
New Zealand
Japan
Kenya
Norway
Malawi
Lebanon
Pakistan
Malaysia
Mexico
Philippines
Panama
Morocco
Saudi Arabia
Rwanda
Nigeria
Sudan
Spain
Poland
United Kingdom
Thailand
Romania
Upper Volta
Venezuela
United States of America
<section>3</section>
III. Introduction
A. Twelfth McDougall Memorial Lecture
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1980 and 1981
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award for 1980-1981
D. Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent chairman of The Council
E. Retirement of dr. Ralph W. Phillips
F. In memoriam
A. Twelfth McDougall Memorial Lecture
1. The Twelfth in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by Her Excellency Shrimati Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India.
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1980 and 1981
2. The B.R. Sen Award for 1980 was presented to Mr. M. Muñoz Alaba (Chile) for the introduction of far-reaching technical innovations in Honduran forestry which included preparation and implementation of rational forest management plans for the first time. Mr. Muñoz Alaba was recruited in 1975 by FAO to become the project manager in Honduras of the FAO/UNDP Project for the Management, Production and Development of Forests and Forest Industries. As a result of initiatives through the project a strong awareness has been developed to diminish the uncontrolled cutting and burning of forests in Honduras, and to increase efficiency through the introduction of improved machinery and its handling. Results achieved by COHDEFOR (Corporación Hondureña de Desarrollo Forestal) with which Mr. Muñoz Alaba has been associated include a big industrial complex being installed in Olancho; a modern large-scale saw mill established at Siguatepeque, with other mechanical forestry industries at
the planning stage, among them a pulp mill and factory to produce wooden boxes with region-wide scope for Central America; over thirty small saw mills that have become more productive through the replacement of equipment; forest management plans being carried through in Las Lajas; Comayagua and other new areas being surveyed and management plans being prepared. Mr. Muñoz Alaba has been responsible, as project manager for technical innovations, institutional improvements, research and training, silviculture and forest management, organizing and supervising seminars on forestry, and assistance in improving saw-milling and wood industry design. Thus, a multifaceted programme to develop both the forests and the forest industries in Honduras has been launched.
3. The B.R. Sen Award for 1981 was presented to Mr. H. Brammer (United Kingdom) for his work in promoting the optimum use of land, specifically for training and advising on soil survey and land use planning in Bangladesh. Mr. Brammer joined FAO in 1961 as Deputy Project Commissioner in Bangladesh bringing with him the experience gained as a member of the Soil and Land Use Survey Organization in Ghana, which organization had gained international recognition as a pioneer in tropical soil surveys and land-use recommendations. Except for two years of service with FAO in Zambia, he continuously dedicated himself to the service of agriculture in Bangladesh. Mr. Brammer's achievements include the establishment of the Bangladesh National Soil Survey; completing reconnaissance soil survey of Bangladesh at a very high standard thus establishing the potential for improved land use including the growing of high-yielding wheat and increasing acreage and production of this crop. He has
prepared innumerable documents on diverse aspects of land resources and agricultural development in Bangladesh, many of them specifically aimed at development at the grass roots level, and translated into Bengali. His dedication to work and his technical competence received recognition when the Government of Bangladesh awarded him in 1978 the Presidency's Gold Medal for services to Bangladesh agriculture.
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award for 1980-1981
4. The A.H. Boerma Award was presented at this Conference for the second time. The Award-winner for the 1980-1981 biennium was Mr. Lester R. Brown, President of the World-watch Institute, Washington, D.C. A citizen of the United States of America, Mr. Brown's work has been reproduced in many languages, and has received wide publicity throughout both the developed and developing worlds. He writes for a large number of well-known periodicals and lectures widely. His latest book, "Building a Sustainable Society" draws particular attention to the prospect of growing food insecurity.
Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent Chairman of the Council
5. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 1/81
D. Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent chairman of The Council
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that the term of office of Dr. Bukar Shaib, Independent Chairman of the FAO Council since 1977, will expire at the close of the Twenty-first Session of the Conference,
Conscious of his close and active association with the Organization since 1962, especially during his four years as Independent Chairman,
1. Pays tribute to the wisdom and efficacy with which he has guided the debates of the Council, at all times, in a spirit conducive to friendly cooperation and consensus;
2. Expresses to Dr. Bukar Shaib its sincere thanks and warmest good wishes.
(Adopted 12 November 1981)
Retirement of Dr. Ralph W. Phillips
6. In tribute to the Deputy Director-General whose retirement would take place at the end of the current year, the Conference adopted the following resolution by acclamation:
Resolution 2/81
E. Retirement of dr. Ralph W. Phillips
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that Dr. Ralph W. Phillips will retire from the Organization at the end of December 1981, after four years of service as Deputy Director-General,
Mindful of his earlier services to the Organization, in particular as Deputy Director of the then Agriculture Division, and subsequently as Member and Chairman of the Programme Committee,
Recognizing his long and exceptionally outstanding services and unfailing dedication to the aims of the Organization,
Expresses to Dr. Ralph W. Phillips its thanks and deep appreciation of the distinguished contribution he has made to the work of FAO, and conveys to him its warm wishes for a continued active life, good health and happiness.
(Adopted 23 November 1981)
F. In memoriam
7. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since its Twentieth Session.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
C. Adoption of the agenda
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
E. Admission of observers
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
8. The Council had nominated, and the Conference elected Jorge Rubén Aguado (Argentina) as Chairman of the Twenty-first Session of the Conference.
9. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
Claude Batault (France)
Edward L. Senanayake (Sri Lanka)
Amer Mahdi Saleh Khashaly (Iraq)
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
10. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
China
Romania
Colombia
Tunisia
Kuwait
United States of America
Nigeria
Members of the Credentials Committee
Angola
Malaysia
Bangladesh
Switzerland
Czechoslovakia
Syria
Dominican Republic
United States of America
Ghana
C. Adoption of the agenda
11. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this report.
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Attendance during general discussion
Resolutions committee of the conference
Right of reply
Verbatim records
Verification of credentials
Voting rights
Informal meeting of international non-governmental organizations
12. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
13. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and III of the Agenda,
14. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the ORGANIZATION (GRO), the Eightieth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
Commission I: Joseph Tchicaya (Congo)
Commission II: Robert Steiner (Austria)
Commission III: Saeed Ahmed Qureshi (Pakistan)
15. the Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 (GRO), also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I: G. Stuyck (Belgium)
D. Noel (Grenada)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II: A.A. Khalil (Sudan)
N. Mapela (Zaire)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III: T.J. Kelly (Australia)
C. Muszalski (Poland)
Attendance during general discussion
16. The Conference also approved the recommendation of the Seventy-eighth Session of the Council that the office of the Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission I be discontinued. The Conference furthermore asked that Heads of Delegations ensure they have at least one member of their respective delegation present in Plenary throughout the General Discussion.
Resolutions committee of the conference
17. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Seventy-ninth Council Session to establish a Resolutions Committee composed of seven members, one from each FAO, region, and appointed the following:
Africa Benin
Asia India
Europe Norway
Latin America Mexico
Near East Libya
North America Canada
Southwest Pacific New Zealand
18. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee be chaired by the current Chairman of the Programme Committee, in order to have the full benefit of his experience.
19. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in document C 81/12, Appendix D.
Right of reply
20. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its previous seven sessions to the effect that, when a delegate wishes to reply to criticism of his Government's policy, he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so.
Verbatim records
21. According to Rule XVIII GRO, verbatim records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements might be inserted in the verbatim records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking however into consideration the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of credentials
22. The credentials of delegations of 145 Member Nations were found valid. Seven Member Nation. did not send a delegation to the Conference.
23. The credentials of the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO and those of the Palestine Liberation Organization were found valid.
24. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule III-2 GRO.
Voting rights
25. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III.4 of the Constitution, five Member Nations, at the beginning of the Session, had no right to vote in the Conference as the amount of their arrears of contributions to the (ORGANIZATION exceeded the amount of the contributions due from them for the two preceding calendar years. Subsequently two of these Member Nations regularized their positions.
Informal meeting of international non-governmental organizations
26. The Eightieth Council Session had nominated Michel Cépède, President of the French National Committee for the FFHC, to chair the informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Twenty-first Session of the Conference. The meeting was convened on Tuesday 10 November. The report on its deliberations was communicated to the Conference.
E. Admission of observers
Applicants for membership
27. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership (Bhutan, Equatorial Guinea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tonga and Zimbabwe) to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference approved the Director-General's action.
Liberation movements
28. The Conference approved the invitations issued by the Director-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and those African Liberation Movements recognized by OAU to attend the session in an observer capacity.
Intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
29. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, and invited the representatives of these organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in an observer capacity.
30. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII-3 GRO, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) address Plenary.
<section>5</section>
V. Major trends and policies in food and agriculture
A. Statements by heads of delegations in the general discussion
B. World food and agriculture situation
C. World food and agricultural development strategy
D. Energy in agriculture and rural development
A. Statements by heads of delegations in the general discussion
31. The Plenary General Discussion as opened by the Director-General. The text of his statement is given in Appendix D. Following this, 137 speakers participated in the discussion: the Independent Chairman of the Council, 126 -Heads of delegations - of which 100 were Ministers and Vice-Ministers - the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO, representatives of two bodies and one organization in the United Nations system, the European Economic Community and observers from one intergovernmental organization, three liberation movements and one international non-governmental organization having consultative status with FAO. The statements of one Member Nation and one international non-governmental organization having consultative status with FAO were inserted in the records.
B. World food and agriculture situation
State of Food and Agriculture
Progress in Implementation of the plan of action to Strengthen world food security
State of Food and Agriculture
32. The Conference reviewed the current food and agricultural situation as well as the long-term trends on the basis of the Director-General's report, the State of Food and Agriculture 1981, and its Supplement, and generally endorsed his assessment of the situation.
33. While the immediate threat of another world food crisis had been averted with a larger cereals harvest in 1981, the Conference considered the basic features of the food and agricultural situation as continuing to be generally unsatisfactory. It emphasized that the improvements in world food supply in 1981, welcome as they were, should not lull the inter-national community into a sense of complacency.
34. The Conference noted that food and agricultural production in the world was likely to increase by 2.5 percent and 2.7 percent respectively in 1981, after two years of increases of less than 1 percent. However, although the growth rates in 1981 were above the average for the 1970s, the output in 1981 was still below the longer-term trend level. The Conference drew attention to the gloomy economic situation, in the world, marked by economic recession, a slowdown in the growth of trade, a continuation of protectionist pressures and practices and widespread inflation and unemployment, which, along with the lack of a fully effective system of world food security, made the present period one of the most economically difficult since World War II. These problems plagued both developed and developing countries. The low-income, food-deficit countries in particular had limited capacities to face up to these problems and were thus more vulnerable.
35. The welcome improvements in food and agricultural production in 1981 were not shared equally by all countries in both the developed and the developing world. The Conference drew attention, in particular, to the setbacks suffered by some countries in Africa and the Near East, while noting that some countries in these regions had registered large increases in production or had had good crops. Significantly increased food and agricultural production also had been recorded in most developed regions in 1981 although, in one of them, the recovery failed to offset the declines of the previous two years, thus leading to a sizeable increase in cereal imports.
36. The expected increase of 2 to 3 percent in world production of cereals would permit some rebuilding of stocks during the 1981/82 season, which would be a welcome reversal of the trend in the previous two seasons when stocks had been drawn down. However, the Conference expressed concern that the carryover level forecast for the end of the 1981/82 season would still represent only about 16 percent of annual consumption requirement and would thus be lower than the minimum safe level for world food security as estimated by the FAO Secretariat. The increase in stocks would be mostly in the from of coarse grains and not as wheat which was of more direct use for human consumption in many countries and the stocks would be held mostly by major exporting and developed countries. The Conference voiced concern that despite efforts to increase cereal stock infrastructure in developing countries, the levels of stocks held by them remained inadequate. Attention was drawn to the large
amount of food lost after harvest and reiterated the need for continued improvements in storage facilities to minimize this waste.
37. The Conference welcomed the importance that the Cancún Summit had attached to the problems of world agricultural development as well as to measures for improving food security.
38. The continuing absence of a consensus which would prompt the resumption of negotiations or. a new Wheat Trade Convention was generally regretted.
39. It was emphasized that any lasting improvement in world food security could only be achieved with sustained, accelerated expansion of food production by developing countries them selves and the enhancement of their self-reliance in food. The Conference drew attention in this connection to the need for greater efforts by the developing countries, in particular the least developed and other low-income countries, especially in Africa, and at the same time emphasized the need for adequate international support to their efforts. In some countries this may call for review of strategies, plans and programmes for food production as well as economic and population policies; in others, the critical constraints may be in the design and implementation of agricultural policy, while in still others the requirements were for access to land and reforms in institutions and services.
40. Among policy measures the Conference attached particular importance to policies for maintaining adequate producer price incentives in developing countries for increasing food production by the farmers. In this connection the rising levels of agricultural production costs which were affecting the net incomes of farmers in both developing and developed countries were noted with concern.
41. The Conference drew attention to the need for intensified research to promote more efficient and economical use of inputs and energy in food and agricultural production. In particular, research should be undertaken to find alternative methods of feeding livestock.
42. The Conference noted that fertilizer prices had risen in 1980 and that the rate of growth in fertilizer consumption had declined significantly as a consequence. Higher prices were making it difficult for many developing countries, particularly low-income countries, to finance their fertilizer needs and hence to increase their food production. More recently, however, the export prices of the main traded types of fertilizers had tended to level off or even decline in terms of US dollars, particularly phosphatic fertilizers, although the simultaneous strengthening of the dollar against most other currencies meant that prices had continued to rise in terms of domestic currencies of most importing countries.
43. The Conference noted that the substantial bilateral aid provided to developing countries for fertilizers in 1978/79 had declined in 1979/80, as noted with concern by the Fertilizer Commission at its session in September 1981. It appreciated the recent new contributions made to the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme (IFS) by several countries, but drew attention to the continued declining trend, despite these pledges, of the annual contributions to the scheme to only a small fraction of the level of 1974/75. The Conference underlined the need to continue, on the one hand, to help developing countries to manufacture fertilizers economically, and on the other hand, when it was necessary, to provide developing countries, in particular the low-income countries, with fertilizer supplies and technical assistance. It urged donors to support fertilizer requirements in developing countries either bilaterally or in the IFS.
44. Emphasis was generally placed on the WCARRD mandate in alleviating poverty. improving the distribution of rural income while increasing agricultural production, in particular the need to address poor and disadvantaged rural groups through community action and increased services. The need for national monitoring and evaluation of progress was also brought out
45. Land distribution, proper use of land and agrarian reform were seen as major vehicles for increasing agricultural production in some developing countries. Particular emphasis was also placed on the need for improvements in rural infrastructure, including extension and agricultural education, cooperatives and credit. A number of members emphasized the need for designing policies arid providing services to reach small farmers and other disadvantaged groups including the establishment of a special fund for small farmers. By biasing institutions and input distribution systems towards, and promoting group activities among, small-scale farmers, much could be done to alleviate rural poverty.
46. The Conference appreciated the analysis of population trends in the documents Attention was drawn to the dynamic aspects of population such as its rate of growth and rates of migration within a country which might pose more serious problems than the size of the population itself. A number of members drew attention to the problems posed in balancing rapid population growth and rising incomes with the food supply; it was necessary to consider not only population growth but also the size, distribution, structure and movement of the population and its implications. Particular attention was drawn to the problems of rural-urban migration and employment in developing population activities. The need to integrate more population considerations into the agricultural development activities of the Organization was also suggested.
47. World Food Day was acknowledged by the Conference as a useful means of focussing attention to world food problems.
48. Although by and large world food supplies were statistically adequate to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition for everyone, the Conference noted with concern that there was unequal distribution of available food supplies both between and within countries. Governments would have to pay increased attention nationally and internationally to the distribution aspects of food and to policies to increase the purchasing power of the poor and to reduce poverty.
49. The Conference noted that food balance sheets were currently the only available comprehensive source of information on food supplies. While their limitations were fully recognized, they did permit regular assessments to be made on progress at the country level in meeting estimated average nutritional requirements from food supplies, although they did not cover the distribution of food intake among individuals and households.
50. In view of this, the Conference noted the necessity to improve the quality to and coverage of information at the country level on the nutritional status of different groups of the population. It urged governments to make particular efforts to collect and analyse data on food consumption through household surveys and to make them available to TAO.
51. The reference to child nutrition in the documents was welcomed, given the susceptibility of this vulnerable group of the population to nutritional deficiencies. The need to consider the dynamic aspects of this issue was underlined: namely, the effects of changing patterns of land use and hence food availabilities, the time available to mothers for child care, availability of safe drinking water and other changes wrought by agricultural development on the welfare of the child.
52. Members repeatedly referred to the roles of improved yet appropriate technologies both to increase food and agriculture production and to introduce more efficient methods of preservation and processing of foods to improve nutrition.
53. The Conference expressed concern at the recent trends in the flow of official external assistance especially to agriculture which, although higher in nominal terms, had declined in real terms in 1980 for the second consecutive year It urged donor countries and international financial institutions to increase the flow of financial recources to developing countries in support of their measures to increase substantially investment in agriculture, as recommended in the international Development Strategy for the Third UN Development Decade, and invited developing countries to devote to agriculture an appropriate amount of non-project aid and externally borrowed funds.
54. The Conference welcomed the increase in the flow of external assistance to agriculture in the Least Developed Countries. It also welcomed the commitment of donors in their agricultural development assistance programmes to give priority to this group of countries, as had been recommended by the UN Conference on the Least Developed Countries held in September 1981.
55. The Conference noted that while food aid was not a substitute for increased food production and was essentially a means to development and not an end in itself, nevertheless it performed a vital need in meeting emergency food needs, covering food supply gaps in low-income countries and supporting specific food production programmes. In view of continuing large food aid requirements, it expressed concern that food aid shipments had stagnated and even declined in 1980. It noted that food aid was covering a declining proportion of the cereal import needs of low-income countries, reflecting temporary and specific problems affecting some countries. It urged all current and potential donors to increase their efforts to meet the minimum annual target of 10 million tons of food aid agreed at the World Food Conference, in the same spirit that had been recently shown by donors, including the EEC and the OPEC Special Fund, to ensure this year's fulfilment of the IEFR target.
56. The Conference noted with particular concern the adverse effects of the slowing down of the world economy on agricultural trade. Although the value of this trade in 1980 had increased by 11 percent, this was well below the average annual rate of increase for the 1970s and, in real terms, registered practically no growth. Attention was drawn to the declining terms of trade of agricultural products of export interest to developing countries. This was making it particularly difficult for them to finance their development efforts at a time when aid flows were sluggish and rates of interest on commercial loans were high. While productivity gains could offset the effects of price declines on farm net incomes, these would not improve the purchasing power of agricultural export earnings of developing countries.
57. Much of the expansion in agricultural trade recorded in 1980 had been due to increased shipments of cereals, including feed grains. Concern was expressed over the growing food import burden of low-income, food-deficit developing countries. Indeed, among all the developing marketing economy regions, only Asia had achieved a small gain in agricultural export earnings in real terms in 1980.
58. The reason for this slowing down of agricultural trade which had affected some developed countries as well, was primarily depressed demand because of continuing economic recession, particularly for agricultural raw materials and tropical beverages. Concern was expressed that the increasing prevalence of protectionist policies and/or measures, with livestock products and sugar receiving particular attention, had seriously impeded on a number of occasions and might similarly impede in the future, the expansion of trade in these commodities. The Conference noted the measures taken by several developed countries to improve and facilitate the access to their markets of agricultural commodities from developing countries. One member stated that among developing countries themselves, some had reached the stage which allowed them to make progress along the same lines as developed countries. The mutual interests of developed and developing countries in promoting free trade were
recognized as were the opportunities for expanding trade between developing countries themselves. In this connection some members suggested the establishment of a generalized system of trade preferences among developing countries for their benefit alone.
59. Recognizing the importance of stabilizing prices of commodities traded by developing countries, the Conference underlined the potential value of the Common Fund for commodities The Conference urged members who had not yet signed or ratified the agreement establishing the Fund to do so. Attention was called to the potential for expanding technical and economic cooperation amongst developing countries, particularly in sharing experiences in disseminating technical information and in promoting trade and investment.
60. With regard to fishery resources, the Conference expressed concern about the stagnation in the world catch in 1980. Mention was made of th