<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Twenty-third Session Rome, 9-28 November 1985</title>
<section>1</section>
I. COUNCIL (until 31 December 1986)
Independent Chairman: Lassaad Ben Osman
Austria*
Afghanistan**
Argentina*
Australia**
Bangladesh**
Brazil *
Bulgaria*
Cameroon***
Canada*
China***
Colombia*
Congo*
Cuba*
Czechoslovakia*
Denmark*
Ecuador**
Egypt**
France**
Gambia*
Germany, Federal Republic of***
India**
Indonesia*
Iraq**.
Italy **
Japan***
Lebanon*
Liberia**
Malaysia***
Mexico*
Nicaragua*
Niger***
Pakistan*
Philippines**
Sao Tome and Principe*
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of**
Senegal**
Tanzania**
Thailand***
Trinidad and Tobago*
Tunisia*
Turkey*
Uganda*
United Kingdom**
United States of America*
Venezuela***
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of*
Yugoslavia*
Zambia***
Zimbabwe*
* Term of office until 31 December 1986.
** Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fourth Session of the Conference, November 1987.
*** Term of office until 31 December 1988.
<section>2</section>
II. COUNCIL (as from 1 January 1987)
Independent Chairman: Lassaad Ben Osman
Afghanistan*
Algeria***
Argentina*
Australia*
Bangladesh*
Brazil***
Cameroon*
Canada***
China**
Colombia***
Cuba***
Denmark*
Ecuador*
Egypt *
France*
Gabon***
Gambia***
Germany, Federal Republic of**
Hungary*
India*
Indonesia*
Iraq**
Italy*
Japan
Lebanon***
Liberia*
Libya***
Madagascar*
Malaysia*
Mexico**
Nicaragua*
Niger**
Pakistan*
Philippines*
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of*
Senegal*
Spain***
Switzerland
Tanzania*
Thailand**
Trinidad and Tobago***
Turkey**
United Kingdom*
United States of America***
Venezuela**
Yugoslavia*
Zaire***
Zambia*
Zimbabwe*
* Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fourth Session of the Conference, November 1987.
** Term of office until 31 December 1988.
*** Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fifth Session of the Conference, November 1989.
<section>3</section>
III. Introduction
A. Fourteenth McDougall Memorial Lecture
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1984 and 1985
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award 1984-85
D. In Memoriam
E. Volcanic Eruption in Colombia
F. Tribute to Dr M.S. Swaminathan as Independent Chairman of the Council
G. Retirement of Mr Edward M. West
H. Tribute to the Memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz
A. Fourteenth McDougall Memorial Lecture
1. The fourteenth in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by His Excellency Alan Garcia Pérez, President of Peru.
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1984 and 1985
2. The B.R. Sen Award was presented to Mr. Alfred G. Scherer (Federal Republic of Germany) for his work in the strengthening of the organization and management capabilities of the Nepal Food Corporation. Mr Scherer's association with FAO started in 1964. In 1965 he was FAO/OPAS (Operational Assistance) Horticultural and Marketing Adviser to Uganda and, in 1970, while retaining the position of Special Adviser to the Government, he was appointed Project Manager of the UNDP (United Nations Development Programme)/FAO Marketing and Storage Development Project, and in that capacity made a major contribution to the improvement of the operational and managerial efficiency of the Produce Marketing Board of Uganda. Mr Scherer was transferred to Brazil in 1975 as FAO Marketing Economist associated with the Companhia Brasileira de Alimentos (COBAL); in 1978 he became the Senior Marketing, Management and Training Adviser/Team Leader of the UNDP/FAO Project "Centre for Human Resource
Development in Agricultural Marketing" attached to COBAL where he distinguished himself in the organization of the COBAL training centre which offered in-service training programmes for 10 000 staff members. In 1983, Mr Scherer was transferred to Kathmandu as Team Leader/Management and Organization Adviser to the UNDP/FAO Technical Assistance Project for Strengthening the Nepal Food Corporation where he developed an improved system for operational and statistical data collection and management information and contributed to the improvement of communications between the Corporation's Headquarters and its field offices. He was also instrumental in developing a suitable planning methodology for maintaining optimal inventory levels at various procurement and distribution stores, for minimizing transportation costs, and determining staff training needs and the development of a comprehensive training programme. In this work, Mr Scherer gave particular emphasis to the practical
training and development of middle-level management and operational manpower indispensable to the efficient implementation of the government food policy; he thus made a significant contribution in strengthening the food security policies and programmes of Nepal. His outstanding technical competence displayed throughout his career coupled with his continuing efforts in promoting small farmer development through an integrated and practical marketing/production approach, led to the achievements which culminated in the bestowal of the award.
3. The B.R. Sen Award for 1985 was presented to Mr Lawrence Kwadjo Danso (Ghana) for improving the productivity of forest lands in North East Thailand through integrated rural development. When first employed by FAO in 1980, Mr Danso was appointed to the post of Forestry Officer/Chief Technical Adviser on the Project for the Development of Reforestation in North Eastern Thailand, with duty station in Korat. Mr Danso, responsible for advising and assisting the government in the overall planning, as well as the implementation and direction of all project activities, designed and helped to execute under difficult circumstances various preparatory activities, and guided the identification, demarcation and mapping of the pilot area. In cooperation with other government and non-government agencies, he carried out analytical studies of the project area as a basis for the preparation of a realistic work plan comprising institutional arrangements and changes in organizational
structures and procedures. He also designed and implemented a training programme for the project's national staff with an aim to make their involvement more productive. In order to ensure more effective on-site management and technical guidance, Mr Danso moved the site of the project to Khao Poo Luang, about 150 km from Korat, for over a year. The work undertaken by Mr Danso had broken new ground in the application of rural sociology to the problems of settlement in forest areas. He had demonstrated through personal achievement the appropriateness of FAO's policy of forestry for rural development.
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award 1984-85
4. The A.H. Boerma Award is presented biennially to a journalist or journalists whose work has helped to focus public attention on important aspects of the world food problem, with the likely result of having increased public support of measures leading to its solution.
5. On this, the fourth occasion, the Award for 1984-85 was shared by a noted television cameraman and producer, Mr Mohamed Amin of Kenya, and a distinguished journalist and writer, Ms Claire Brisset of France.
6. The Awards were presented by the Director-General to Mr Amin for his widely televised news coverage of the famine in Ethiopia, and for his documentary film on the famine afflicting more than 20 African countries, "African Calvary: Uncertain Redemption". Ms Brisset received the Award for her coverage of the problems of the Third World in many French-language journals of repute over a period of many years, with particular emphasis on the malnourished, especially children.
D. In Memoriam
7. The Conference observed one minute of silence in memory of staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since the Conference last met.
E. Volcanic Eruption in Colombia
8. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 1/85
AID FOR COLOMBIA
THE CONFERENCE,
Deeply touched by the extremely large number of human lives, property and crop losses that have recently struck Colombia due to the eruption of the volcano "Nevado del Ruiz",
Concerned with the suffering of thousands of people left without means of subsistence and shelter,
Recognizing the dimension of the tasks that Colombia has to initiate without delay,
1. Expresses its solidarity to the people and the Government of Colombia;
2. Commends the efforts made by the authorities and the people of Colombia to conduct urgently an assistance programme in the affected areas;
3. Notes with satisfaction the quick action taken by FAO and WFP in assisting the populations of the affected areas;
4. Urges all Member States, the United Nations System Organizations concerned and the International Community as a whole, to offer to the Government of Colombia the necessary aid to enable it to meet the critical situation of the people affected and the hard task of reconstruction;
5. Encourages the Director-General of FAO and the Executive Director of WFP (World Food Programme) to take additional steps on request in order to assist the Government of Colombia in appropriate ways, in the sectors of food and agriculture, to enable the Government to meet the needs of the severely affected population.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
F. Tribute to Dr M.S. Swaminathan as Independent Chairman of the Council
9. The Conference paid tribute to the outgoing Independent Chairman of the Council and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 2/85
TRIBUTE TO DR M.S. SWAMINATHAN, AS INDEPENDENT CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that the term of office of Dr M.S. Swaminathan, Independent Chairman of the FAO Council since November 1981, expires at the close of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference, Conscious of the fact that the outgoing Independent Chairman had been actively associated with the work of the FAO Council since 1979,
1. Pays tribute to the guidance he has given to the Council in its debates during the four years of his Chairmanship;
2. Expresses to Dr M.S. Swaminathan its sincere thanks and warmest wishes.
(Adopted 25 November 1985)
G. Retirement of Mr Edward M. West
10. In tribute to the Deputy Director-General whose retirement would shortly take place, the Conference adopted the following Resolution by acclamation
Resolution 3/85
RETIREMENT OF MR EDWARD M. WEST
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that Mr Edward M. West will shortly retire from the Organization after four years of service as Deputy Director-General,
Mindful of his earlier services to the Organization as a member of the Programme Committee and Vice-Chairman of the Fifteenth Session of the Conference and subsequently as Assistant Director-General of the Office of Programme, Budget and Evaluation,
Recognizing his long and exceptionally outstanding services and unfailing dedication to the aims of the Organization,
Expresses to Mr Edward M. West its thanks and deep appreciation of the distinguished contribution he has made to the work of FAO, and conveys to him its warm wishes for a continued active life, good health and happiness.
(Adopted 25 November 1985)
H. Tribute to the Memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz
11. The Conference observed a minute of silence in memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz, Assistant Director-General of the Fisheries Department, who died on 25 November 1985. The Director-General and delegations paid tribute to his outstanding contribution and the dedication he had shown throughout his career in the Organization.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
B. Appointment of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee
C. Adoption of the Agenda
D. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
E. Admission of Observers
A. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
12. The Council had nominated and the Conference elected Jean Baptiste Yonke (Cameroon) as Chairman of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference.
13. Upon recommendation of the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council, and in order to facilitate the election of the Vice-Chairmen, the Conference decided to suspend, during its Twenty-third Session, the application of the provision of Rule VIII of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO) which established at three the number of Vice-Chairmen of the Conference.
14. The Conference then approved the appointment of the four Vice-Chairmen of the Conference recommended by the Nominations Committee, as follows:
L.P. Duthie (Australia)
R.L. Cheltenham (Barbados)
S.B. Singh (India)
A.O. Dawarda (Libya)
B. Appointment of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee
15. The Nominations Committee recommended and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
China Norway
Cyprus United States of America
France Venezuela
Morocco
Members of the Credentials Committee
Austria Tonga
Burkina Faso United Arab Emirates
Costa Rica United States of America
Czechoslovakia Zambia
Thailand 
C. Adoption of the Agenda
16. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this report.
D. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
Right of Reply
Verbatim Records
Verification of Credentials
Voting Rights
Informal Meeting of Observers from International Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
17. The Conference adopted the arrangements and Timetable proposed by the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
18. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and III of the Agenda.
19. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and Rule XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the Organization, the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
Commission I: Roger Martin (Belgium)
Commission II: Gonzalo Bula Hoyos (Colombia)
Commission III: Gamal Ahmed (Sudan)
20. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 GRO, also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I: J. Ladan (Nigeria)
A. Khaled (Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II: J. Winkel (Germany, Federal Republic of)
A. Qadir (Pakistan)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III: I.P. Alvarenga (El Salvador)
L. Zelko (Hungary)
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
21. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council to establish a Resolutions Committee of seven members, one from each FAO region, and appointed the following:
Africa: Liberia
Asia: Indonesia
Europe: Turkey
Latin America and the Caribbean: Cuba
Near East: Iran, Islamic Republic of
North America: Canada
Southwest Pacific: New Zealand
22. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee should be chaired by the current Chairman of the Programme Committee, in order to have the full benefit of his experience.
23. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as given in document C 85/12, Appendix D.
Right of Reply
24. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its nine previous sessions to the effect that, when a member wished to reply to criticisms of his Government's policy, he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to speak.
Verbatim Records
25. As provided for in Rule XVIII GRO, verbatim records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements could be inserted in the verbatim records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking into consideration, however, the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of Credentials
26. The credentials of delegations of 150 Member Nations were found valid. Eight Member Nations did not send a delegation to the Conference.
27. The credentials of the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO and of the Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Sovereign Order of Malta were found valid.
28. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies were duly deposited as prescribed under Rule 111-2 GRO.
Voting Rights
29. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III-4 of the Constitution, ten Member Nations at the beginning of the Session had no right to vote in the Conference as the amount of their arrears of contributions to the Organization exceeded the amount of the contributions due from them for the two preceding calendar years. Subsequently, seven of these Member Nations regularized their positions. In addition, the Conference decided to permit two Member Nations (Chad and Paraguay) to vote after having adopted resolutions 3/ permitting the liquidation of their arrears over a period of ten years. One Member Nation in arrears (Democratic Kampuchea) had no right to vote at the Conference.
Informal Meeting of Observers from International Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
30. The Eighty-seventh Session of the Council had suggested that an informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Twenty-third Session of the Conference should be convened on Tuesday 12 November. The meeting elected Mrs Sarojini Pillay (International Alliance of Women) as Chairman, and the report of its deliberations was communicated to the Conference.
E. Admission of Observers
Applicants for Membership
Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
Liberation Movements
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
Applicants for Membership
31. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership (Cook Islands and Solomon Islands) to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference approved the Director-General's action.
Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
32. The Conference confirmed the invitation sent by the Director-General to the Government of the USSR to attend the session in an observer capacity.
Liberation Movements
33. The Conference approved the invitations issued by the Director--General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and those African Liberation Movements recognized by OAU (Organization of African Unity) to attend the session as observers.
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
34. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, and invited the representatives of those organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference as observers.
35. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII-3 GRO, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) and the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) should be granted speaking time to address Plenary.
Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
36. The Constitution of FAO was signed by the original Member Nations in Quebec City, Canada, on 16 October 1945, thereby bringing the Organization into existence. The date is commemorated annually as World Food Day, following a decision of the FAO Conference in 1979.
37. The Conference noted that the Fortieth Anniversary of FAO was celebrated worldwide on World Food Day 1985. Regional events were organized by the FAO Regional Offices for Africa in Buea (Cameroon), for Latin America and the Caribbean in Santiago (Chile); and for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok (Thailand), while national events took place in more than 140 countries.
38. At FAO Headquarters, a special ceremony was addressed by His Excellency Francesco Cossiga, President of the Italian Republic. Before the ceremony President Cossiga had unveiled a plaque to mark the start of work on an extension of the Headquarters buildings. These new buildings would permit all FAO staff in Rome to work at the Terme di Caracalla complex, and would avoid the need to rent accommodations in other parts of the city. The Conference was informed that the Italian Government had budgeted 25 000 million lire to finance the work.
39. Messages were sent to the Director-General by more than 80 Heads of State and Government, Ministers and other prominent personalities conveying their congratulations and good wishes on the occasion of the anniversary.
40. A series of exhibitions on the history and work of FAO were arranged on the FAO premises. One traced the founding of the International Institute for Agriculture established in Rome in 1905 at the instigation of David Lubin, and which was the precursor of FAO. A booklet entitled "FAO - the First Forty Years" was prepared, reviewing the main themes of the Organization's work in the past four decades. A special number of CERES, the FAO Review on Agriculture and Development, was devoted entirely to interviews with Heads of State or Government.
41. On 10 November, the first Sunday after the opening of the Conference, a special Mass was held at St. Peter's Basilica to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Organization and of the United Nations. In his homily on that occasion, His Holiness Pope John Paul II paid tribute to the work of FAO, and voiced his strong support for multilateral cooperation in the search for international social justice.
42. In the course of the Conference, the City of Rome inaugurated an FAO Park planted with trees chosen to represent different FAO regions. Member Nations were invited by the Mayor of Rome to contribute additional trees, both to beautify the park and to express its character as a symbol of global cooperation.
43. The Conference set aside one day - 14 November - to commemorate the anniversary. On that day, addresses were delivered by two specially invited Heads of State: His Excellency President Soeharto of Indonesia, and His Excellency President François Mitterrand of France.
44. President Soeharto, after congratulating FAO on its anniversary, described the way in which Indonesia had more than doubled its food production in 15 years, thus achieving self-sufficiency. He announced a gift of 100 000 tons of paddy rice to FAO, collected by Indonesian farmers for the benefit of families suffering from hunger in other countries, especially in Africa.
45. President Mitterrand recalled the origins of FAO, and reiterated the commitment of France to finding solutions for the problems of developing countries. He felt that three main directions should be followed: reform of the international monetary system; full participation by developing nations in multilateral trade negotiations; and a global approach to the problems of debt and development.
46. Following the addresses by the two Heads of State, statements were made by the Director-General and by Heads of Delegation on behalf of the various regions. It was generally stressed that substantial progress had been made toward the goals established in 1945, but that even more remained to be accomplished before the age-old scourges of hunger and malnutrition could be vanquished. The tasks ahead might well be even more difficult than those in the past, as a result of increasing pressure of population on land resources. FAO and its Member Nations, as well as all concerned with food problems, would need to intensify their efforts in the years to come.
47. The Conference extended its thanks to all who had commemorated the anniversary in ceremonies held round the world. The Conference expressed its deep appreciation to President Cossiga of Italy, President Soeharto of Indonesia and President Mitterrand of France for honouring the Organization by their participation in the anniversary celebrations at FAO Headquarters. The Conference also expressed its deep appreciation to President Alan Garcia Pérez of Peru, whose participation in the Conference as the McDougall Memorial lecturer represented an important contribution to the celebration of the fortieth anniversary.
48. The Conference expressed its appreciation to the Director-General and staff of the Organization for having taken the initiative for this celebration, and expressed its satisfaction with the way in which it had been organized.
<section>5</section>
V. Major trends and policies in food and agriculture
A. Statements by Heads of Delegations in the General Discussion
B. World Food and Agriculture Situation
C. Progress Report on International Agricultural Adjustment including Agricultural Protectionism
D. Report of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development (June-July 1984)
E. Adoption of the World Food Security Compact
F. Programme for the 1990 Census of Agriculture
A. Statements by Heads of Delegations in the General Discussion
49. The Plenary General Discussion was opened by the Director-General. The text of his statement is given in Appendix D. Following, this, 138 speakers participated in the discussion: the Independent Chairman of the Council, 124 Heads of Delegations - of which 98 were Ministers or Vice-Ministers, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO, representatives of four UN bodies (United Nations, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), World Food Council (WFC)), the European Economic Community (EEC), the Organization of African Unity, the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (African liberation movement) and observers from three international non-governmental organizations having consultative status with FAO. The statements of six Member Nations and one international nongovernmental organization in consultative status with FAO were
inserted in the records.
B. World Food and Agriculture Situation
State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA)
Critical Situation in Africa
Study of Agricultural Price Policies
Importance and Complexity of Price Policies
Key Domestic Issues in Pricing Policy
Agricultural Pricing Policies in Developed Countries
Follow-up to the Report
Forestry: The Manifesto of Mexico (Ninth World Forestry Congress, July 1985)
State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA)
50. The Conference reviewed the world and regional food and agricultural situation on the basis of the Director-General's Report, The State of Food and Agriculture 1985 and its Supplement. It concurred with his assessment of the situation.
51. The Conference agreed that the early 1980s had been dominated by the economic recession that had had very negative consequences for food and agricultural production and food consumption, especially in developing countries. While the economic recovery had been strong in some industrialized countries, it had been less so in the majority of developing countries and had affected them unevenly. It was noted that this recovery in the developed countries had not had a beneficial effect on the growth of most developing countries. The problems of external debt in those countries, a decline in their flows of financial resources, declining international prices of their main export commodities and contracting export markets for agricultural products contributing to declining terms of trade, continued to pose serious obstacles to the resumption of widespread economic growth.
52. The Conference underlined the problems currently affecting agricultural commodity markets and the links between more liberalized trade, the expansion of export earnings and adequate servicing of international debt. The Conference called on Member States to reduce protectionism, including export subsidies and similar measures in agricultural markets, so that producers of agricultural products could expand their output and trade. It looked to the prospective round of multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) to resolve these grave problems.
53. Recognizing the difficulties in overcoming problems of financing international debt, the Conference also called for solutions that permitted economic adjustments to take place without jeopardizing the standard of living of the more economically vulnerable populations.
54. The Conference welcomed the longer-term analysis presented in the documents as well as the regional coverage. It noted that the regional experience during the early 1980s, both with regard to economic issues and progress in the food and agricultural sectors, had been extremely diverse, having been very negative for some regions but more positive in others.
55. There was continued and unanimous concern for Africa. The region had experienced average annual declines in per caput income and merchandise exports of nearly 2 percent and 3 percent respectively in the early 1980s. During this time, its debt-service ratio had nearly doubled. This overall situation had been accompanied by a decline in per caput food and agricultural production of nearly 2 percent a year, largely as a consequence of drought. Despite rising food imports, per caput food supplies had steadily declined. The Conference welcomed the widespread improvements in the food and agricultural situation in Africa during the current crop year, although it noted that economic problems continued at crisis levels and rendered the region still vulnerable to unfavourable weather conditions.
56. The Conference drew the attention of the international community to the need for continued support for long-term development efforts in Africa, although emergency aid would still need to be maintained in some cases. Support was expressed for FAO's efforts in the field of rehabilitation of agriculture in Africa. The Conference stressed the need for an early and adequate replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), with its emphasis on small farm agriculture, typical in much of Africa. Support was also given to other initiatives, both bilateral and multilateral, aimed at financing the development of Africa over the long term.
57. The Conference also stated that food aid should play a continuing and important role in agricultural development in Africa. Seven million tons out of the total shipments of more than 12 million tons of food aid in cereals had been devoted to meeting Africa's food aid needs in 1984/85, but emergency needs in 1985/86 would be significantly lower.
58. The recent economic and agricultural situation also had been very discouraging in Latin America and the Caribbean in the early 1980s. Per caput incomes also had declined in the region, the growing external debt was US$360000 million, debt-service ratios were at very high levels (more than 40 percent of export earnings) and inflation rates had soared. Following the increases in the 1970s, agricultural production per caput and exports also had fallen. The problems of protectionism and extreme competition in agricultural markets, which caused the displacement of exports from low-cost producing countries, were particularly stressed. Similarly, declining food imports pointed to a deteriorating nutritional situation.
59. Some difficulties were being experienced in the Near East Region, although in part this stemmed from the worsening external economic environment. Declining agricultural production of some countries confronting rising demand for food had led to greatly increased food imports. Declining export earnings made the continued financing of such imports difficult and budgetary constraints were leading to pressures to reduce food subsidies, which contributed to social tensions in the region.
60. The Conference welcomed the progress that had been achieved in China and the Far East despite the recent difficult economic environment. Although deep-seated problems remained, incomes had increased significantly as had agricultural production. Per caput farm income had reportedly increased in China by 15 percent in 1084-. Overall per caput incomes 