<title>Labor-intensive harvesting of tree plantations in the southern Philippines </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication is one in a series initiated by FAO to promote forest harvesting systems, techniques, and methods that are environmentally, socially, and economically sound. The aim is to encourage systems that are appropriate for local conditions, make the best use of local technologies, and emphasize harmony between people and their environment.
Many foresters and development officials share common misconceptions that simple, labor-intensive timber harvesting and wood transport systems are outdated, inefficient, and costly. This is far from true. Recent experience has demonstrated that traditional indigenous or modified systems of timber harvesting and transport are often more efficient and less environmentally destructive than so-called "modern" systems. This is particularly true in areas where there is excess labor capacity and where labor costs are low. Moreover, traditional systems can often be modified or improved to further reduce waste and improve efficiency and performance.
This publication presents the experiences of simple, labor-intensive harvesting of timber from tree plantations in the southern Philippines. The case study clearly illustrates the potential for supplying large volumes of industrial wood to modern processing mills using simple tools and techniques in a cost-efficient and environmentally sound manner. In the process, jobs are provided for thousands of people, helping to satisfy social objectives in areas of few alternative livelihood opportunities.
It is hoped that, by increasing awareness of the experiences in the southern Philippines, foresters and development officials in other areas will recognize the potential of simple, labor-intensive systems as viable options for timber harvesting and job creation.
FAO is grateful to Mike Jurvlius for compiling this case study, based on his many years of work in the southern Philippines.
Soetatwo Hadiwigeno
Assistant Director-General and
Regional Representative for
Asia and the Pacific
<section>2</section>
List of abbreviations
ADB
Asian Development Bank
BFD
Bureau of Forest Development
DBP
Development Bank of the Philippines
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FMB
Forest Management Bureau
FORI
Forest Research Institute
FTP
Forestry Training Programme
ILO
International Labour Organisation
LGU
Local government unit
MIRDC
Metal Industries and Research Development Center
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NPA
New Peoples Army
PICOP
Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines
PO
People's organization
TLA
Timber License Agreement
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
UPBL
University of the Philippines at Los Baños
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WEP
World Employment Programme
WFP
World Food Programme
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Before the Second World War, the Philippines had more than 20 million hectares (ha) of dipterocarp forests, commercially known as "Philippine mahogany." During and shortly after the war, the forests were heavily exploited and agriculture expanded significantly, reducing the forest to only 12 million ha.
The man considered to be the "Father of Philippine Forestry," Mr. Florencio Tamesis, received his Masters of Forestry in the United States of America in 1923. After his return to the Philippines, he developed forest management systems for dipterocarp forests. In the late 1940s, he began to worry about the future of the indigenous tropical forests in the Philippines. Large North American forestry enterprises were already heavily engaged in the exploitation of the rich dipterocarp forests in the Philippines. By this time, the traditional technologies, that used hand tools for felling and crosscutting, and water buffaloes (carabaos) to transport logs, were gradually being replaced by chainsaws and cable yarding systems.
After seeing those wasteful new technologies in operation, Tamesis seriously began to consider the establishment of large-scale tree plantations. He selected a site for fast-growing trees on the eastern side of the southern island of Mindanao. The plantation site lay along the Agusan River, which had already become one of the main centers for wood processing and export in the Philippines.
The very first plantations had been established in the Philippines at the turn of the century, when teak (Tectona grandis) and mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) were planted in Luzon and the Visayas. Trials using potted seedlings were carried out as early as 1928. Unfortunately, all data and research results from these early plantations were destroyed during the Second World War. Thus, when the new plantation era started in the mid-1950s, no data on the previous plantation work in the country were available. The same applied to genetic data and data on seed sources. Therefore, the whole process of plantation establishment had to be based on new biological research.
The first of these new trial tree plantations was established in a place called Tuñgao, on patches of former "kaingin," or shifting cultivation areas, which had previously been logged over. The viability of the new plantation scheme was based on five years of research work that started in 1954. By 1961, large-scale plantation establishment was initiated, and by 1968 more than 5,000 ha containing 85 species had been established.
One of the main incentives for starting the plantation work in eastern Mindanao was the almost total absence of typhoons. While most of the Philippines is affected by an average of 12-16 typhoons per year, the frequency of strong typhoons in eastern Mindanao is only about once every 40 years. This was important because the fast-growing tree species that were chosen for planting were not very storm resistant, whereas the indigenous species generally tolerate typhoons quite well (as evidenced during the 1981 typhoon when the east coast of Mindanao was hit by 180 km/h gale-force winds).
In the early 1960s, the experiments with tree plantations spread from Agusan del Norte to Agusan del Sur, through the activities of a large foreign company. Soon after, the trials spread further south to Surigao del Sur, and finally to the Bislig Bay area, where a large integrated industrial wood complex, the Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines (PICOP), was operating.
The wood industries in the Bislig Bay area had, in the meantime, expanded into pulp and paper manufacturing. PICOP was the first company in the world to use mixed tropical hardwoods as raw material in making paper. Nonetheless, in anticipation of raw material scarcity from natural forests, PICOP also started a plantation program in its forest concession area.
Despite widespread development of forest plantations in the Philippines in the 1960s, little thought was given to the harvesting of these plantations. The tree-growing schemes were primarily pursued because of government requirements to reforest areas that had been severely damaged in the process of logging the dipterocarp forest rather than because of any conscious strategy for future utilization of plantation-grown wood. Gradually, however, as the extent of the plantations increased, the future potential could clearly be seen.
<section>4</section>
Tree farming and large-scale plantations
The Philippines has the dubious distinction of being one of the first tropical countries to have its forest area severely reduced in large part by modern logging technologies and agricultural expansion. The mechanization of the logging industry closely mirrored North American operations, with heavy, powerful and expensive logging equipment. Another system called the "Bataan," or winch-lorry system, was based on surplus US-military trucks left in the Philippines after the Second World War. The use of hand tools and water buffaloes declined dramatically after 1945.
Philippine exports of tropical hardwoods grew at an incredible rate after the Second World War. This resulted in logging operations steadily expanding into less accessible areas. To reach such areas, heavier and more powerful equipment was employed, largely at the expense of environmental concerns.
The combined effects of opening up forest areas with powerful equipment, over-harvesting of timber, and aggressive agricultural expansion subsequently reduced the country's forests to 10 million ha, and then gradually to 8 million ha. Some foresighted foresters, including some from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP), the World Employment Programme (WEP), the International Labour Organization (ILO), and the World Bank, who visited the Philippines in the mid-1960s, were already warning about the unsustainability of Philippine forestry. With the realization that the Philippine forests were not inexhaustible, the government slowly started to reduce the number of forest concessions - Timber License Agreements (TLAs) - in the country.
It is likely that due to this outside pressure, what is one of the world's first and most efficient local community programs in forestry was launched. The program came into being in 1967, and was called simply "tree farming." The idea was to encourage local people to plant a portion of their farms with trees, in addition to their traditional agri-livestock activities, in order to supplement their livelihood.
The idea of "private" tree farming was well received, since it was generally recognized that government forests could not be adequately protected even by well-armed guards. It was hoped that private forest ownership would solve the problem of denudation. The only remaining problem was how to secure the livelihood of the people before trees could be harvested. In those early days, no private farmers had funds available for the very uncertain tree-growing business, which required waiting eight years for the final harvest and income.
By 1972, the World Bank was convinced of the feasibility of the tree farming scheme and allocated US$2 million to support the program. The loan scheme set up to finance the farmers' tree-growing activities was called a "Tree Plantation Lease Agreement," and was carried out under the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP). The WFP and the WEP also assisted the Philippines in its efforts to curb future food shortages and unemployment through this tree farming scheme.
To better assess the actual potential of this tree farming scheme, ILO sent a team of experts under the WEP to look into the employment potential in Philippine forestry. Already, one could foresee that the primary employment opportunities in forestry were related to plantation forestry, as the semi-mechanized dipterocarp-based forestry was showing signs of decline. Thus, these activities no longer had the potential of employing additional people. The WEP study tried to develop ways and means of replacing machines in plantation operations with manual harvesting systems.
Meanwhile, some of the large TLA holders in the southern Philippines had been continuously expanding their plantation areas. They realized that the exploitation of the natural forests was being carried out on "borrowed time." Therefore, the plantations expanded very fast and large amounts of plantation-grown wood were further processed by the industry. By 1980, sawn timber and fiberboard were produced from three-year old thinnings of plantation-grown wood.
Private landowners, who became known as tree farmers, also intensified their tree growing activities. The first few pilot tree farmers who had started their operations in the early 1970s had already harvested one rotation of Paraserianthes falcataria. They were now visibly spending their new "fortunes" in the local communities, thus encouraging many more farmers to become involved in tree farming.
Because of the strong support from the international community for the pilot tree farmers, many more farmers became interested in growing trees. The number of farmers grew from an initial 20 families in 1976 to more than 300 families in 1981. The plantation area increased from 20 ha to more than 4,000 ha.
Unfortunately, an unexpected typhoon hit the east coast of Mindanao in 1981. No one was prepared for the onslaught which caused many casualties. The plantation forests of PICOP and surrounding farmers were essentially wiped out, with 1.5 million m^3 of wood on the ground. In addition, news spread that PICOP would not buy any windthrown trees less than five years of age. Many tree farmers lost their entire fortune. Under very hazardous working conditions, many lives were lost while trying to harvest what was left of the plantations within three months after the typhoon, before the wood started to decay, became fungi-infected, or was rendered useless through insect attacks.
The wood industry busily engaged in trying to salvage as much wood as possible. North American-made equipment, suitable for tree-length harvesting, was sent, including giant 50-ton portable tower yarders (mobile spars), 120-ton Kenworth trucks and large truck-mounted grapple loaders. However, the plantation trees were soon found to be far too brittle to be handled by the mechanized equipment designed to handle single, large-diameter logs. Landings, and indeed entire forests, were full of small pieces of wood measuring from 30 to 300 cm in size. The logs at the landings were generally damaged and only good for pulp.
The small-scale tree farms were hardly any better off. Outside contractors moved in with their own chainsaw crews and winch-lorries to drag the logs to the roadside. Their technology was very functional, but costly to operate. After paying off the contractors, most tree farmers were left with very little or no profit from the sale of their wood.
Basically, only the farmers who had harvested and sold their crops prior to the typhoon managed to get through this ordeal successfully. Very few farmers were able to continue their operations, and these more by chance, because they went on harvesting their farms with only axes, machetes and water buffaloes. In the end, only a small number of farmers continued planting trees, and the entire area went into large-scale coffee growing. From a financial point of view, the first large-scale tree farming initiative was a disaster.
The years between 1982-1986 were the last years of the Marcos administration, and much of the national budget was spent on political events. With negative economic growth for many years, the economy of the country was in ruins, and likewise most of the forestry businesses. By 1987, however, a slow recovery started to take place under the Aquino administration. Along with the recovery, a new optimism slowly started to spread, and new tree farms were established.
Today, tree farming is an accepted alternative to traditional agriculture in the provinces of Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Davao del Norte, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Misamis Occidental, and Cotabato. In these provinces there are now more than 100,000 ha of forest plantations. For the most part, it is fair to say that this area is both the last bastion and the last frontier of forestry in the Philippines.
Plantations are financially attractive, produce much needed wood for industry, and create a considerable number of jobs (Table 1). If plantation growth averages 25 m^3 of wood per year, then 100,000 ha produce 2.5 million m^3 per year. The value of this plantation-grown wood ranges from US$10-40 per m^3. Assuming that the average price is US$20 per m^3, a revenue of US$50 million per year is generated. If the wood is further processed for export, then the benefits are much greater.
Table 1. Labor Inputs for Plantation Establishment and Management
Activity
Labor input in person-days/ha^1
Clearing and land preparation
Raising and transporting seedlings
Planting
Weeding and maintenance
Harvesting (250 m^3)
Manual loading
Total^2
1 A person-day has approximately eight hours
^2 Wood loaded on to a truck
11-year old Paraserianthes falcataria before the 1981 typhoon
The same forest after the typhoon
Treefarm with coffee and Acacia mangium
<section>5</section>
Evolution of harvesting methods
Traditionally, timber harvesting operations in the Philippines were based on a system of manual felling and bucking, with the use of water buffalo or gravity for land transport, and water transport for longer distances. These practices were mostly based on shortwood methods, where trees were cut into lengths which could then be handled by man or animal power. Such practices were used all over Southeast Asia for centuries. Tree felling was mostly done with axes, machetes, or jungle knifes. These techniques were normally environmentally sound, and caused only minor damage to residual stands and soils and minimal disturbance of biodiversity.
In the 1920s, two-man raker tooth saws replaced axes in felling and crosscutting operations. In the early 1960s, crosscut saws were in turn replaced by power chainsaws, and a new era in safety and ergonomics began. The problems of noise pollution and vibration became a concern.
Cable harvesting systems were originally introduced to the Philippines from North America. Under these systems, trees are delimbed and topped, after which the stem is dragged to the road by cable. Normally tree-length logs are transported, but in the case of very large trees, the stem is crosscut into two or more logs, depending of the diameter of the trunk.
A main objective of cable systems is to reduce the need for road construction. By using this method, it is also possible to minimize soil erosion associated with roads. The usual technique in cable harvesting is to lift one end of the log in the air and drag it from the felling site to the road or landing.
The cable harvesting systems introduced in the Philippines after 1945 were the so-called "highlead" type. These systems lift only one end of the log into the air, while the major part of the stem is dragged along the ground. These harvesting systems were originally developed and adapted for the temperate and boreal northern forest soils with only moderate rainfall, and ground surfaces which are often frozen or snow-covered. In introducing these systems to the Philippines, little thought was given to their suitability in areas of high rainfall and soft soil.
The Philippine forests were harvested by these technologies for more than 35 years. With the drastic reduction of natural forests, however, the highlead systems became unacceptable. The adverse environmental impacts were finally recognized as very severe. Damage to the forests could be seen everywhere. After logging, the badly torn forest landscape threatened not only the biodiversity of plants and animals, but also the livelihood of forest dwellers. In 1980, due to the obvious damage in the logged-over forests, legislation was passed reducing the maximum horse power allowed in cable harvesting operations in natural forests.
By 1980, the government plantations in the Philippines should have been quite extensive, since between 50,000 and 100,000 ha had been planted annually for many years. However, many of these plantations had been destroyed or severely damaged. The government therefore was discouraged from developing harvesting technologies for plantations since few of the remaining government plantations required thinning or harvesting.
Fortunately, the efforts of ILO, FAO, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and USAID in promoting plantation forestry resulted in a budding interest within the private sector for developing appropriate technologies for plantation-grown wood. The southern, and particularly the southeastern, part of the Philippines thereafter became the main focus in the development of plantation forestry, with a large number of people growing trees on their own land.
In 1976 and 1977, an ILO/Finland project, implemented in cooperation with the Bureau of Forest Development (BFD), sought to develop appropriate technologies for manual harvesting of plantation trees in the southern Philippines. The core project had two sites, one in Tuñgao and the other in the Bislig Bay area, extending in a radius of approximately 120 km from each of the two towns. Primarily, the project covered the provinces of Agusan, Surigao and small portions of Davao and Misamis.
By the end of Phase I of the ILO/Finland project, it was clear that interest in manual harvesting technologies was limited and technology dissemination and transfer had been unsuccessful. There were numerous reasons for this lack of success. For example, by 1977, not a single study related to forest harvesting technology had been carried out by the Philippine Forest Research Institute (FORI). Most attention was directed at silvicultural problems and expertise was focused on natural forests. In addition, weak coordination between FORI and BFD often resulted in research that was considered impractical and irrelevant for field application. Moreover, it was commonly argued by senior staff of FORI and the University of the Philippines at Los Baños (UPLB) that new tools and more efficient harvesting techniques and methods might have a negative impact on the remaining dipterocarp forests. It was reasoned that the estimated 200,000 (in 1976) upland families practicing shifting
cultivation might adopt these new technologies to cut more timber and expand their fields. The new tools, techniques and methods introduced by the ILO/Finland project were thus deemed to be inappropriate at that time by mainstream forestry organizations.
Interestingly, however, the results were taken up by several international organizations, among them FAO, which started to disseminate the findings from the first phase of the project in several other tropical countries. Based on their successes, a second phase of the project in the Philippines was then conducted between 1980-1982. An important lesson learned from the first phase was the need to manufacture the improved implements and tools for manual and animal-based harvesting locally.
Slowly, during the second phase, more Filipino foresters started to favor the idea of developing technologies appropriate for harvesting plantation-grown forests. At the same time, more ordinary people and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) supported expanded efforts to shift wood production away from the depleted natural forests by increasing plantation forests.
However, strong opposition still existed within the government itself, vis-à-vis the utilization of these plantations of fast-growing tree species. One major obstacle lay in the forestry legislation of the Philippines, which at that time strictly prohibited the use of manual and animal-based forest harvesting technologies, the use of circular sawmills, etc. Still, with the support of a few younger foresters in high positions in the BFD, by then renamed the Forest Management Bureau (FMB), the process of reformulating and amending the country's forestry legislation began in 1981. This gradual change in thinking and legislation paved the way for subsequent introduction and adoption of manual and animal-based harvesting technologies.
<section>6</section>
Appropriate technologies
"Appropriate technology" can best be defined as fulfilling two essential criteria: 1) it must be sustainable; and 2) it must be locally accepted and adapted. Sustainability implies that whatever implement, tool or machine is added to a system to improve efficiency should be locally available, or can be produced locally. Sustainability also refers to the possible damage to, or disturbance of, the environment (e.g., to biodiversity).
The traditional forest harvesting technologies used in the Philippines were generally environmentally sound but they were inefficient. Many accidents occurred using these technologies and they led to an enormous amount of wood waste. In the natural forest, the felling and crosscutting losses were often more than one cubic meter per tree felled - a financial loss of between US$500 and US$1,500 per ha at today's market values. The wood waste in plantation forests was equal to US$20 per ha - as much as the price of a new two-man handsaw for each hectare harvested.
The problems and deficiencies of using water buffaloes and traditional sleds are easy to overcome by replacing the sleds with animal sulkies (small log arch) or animal-drawn log trailers. The trailers may be equipped with a mechanical loading crane, or even with a hydraulic knuckle-boom loader powered by a chainsaw engine or a similar small petrol or diesel engine.
In the Philippines, improvements in technology and efficiency proved difficult to achieve. The traditional ways of doing things, and faith in "Filipino ingenuity," hindered attempts to change things between the years 1976 and 1992.
Tree farmers, especially those of the older generations, seem to have difficulty understanding the concepts of "depreciation" and "cost-efficiency." Thus, they only tend to look at the speed with which chainsaws cut wood. They do not fully consider the time and cost of going to the nearest town to buy fuel and lubricants for their chainsaws. When the farmers are questioned about this, they say that the chainsaws give them a good excuse to go to town for other shopping or diversions. The repair and down time of the chainsaws are often not of great concern.
Under the ILO/Finland project, felling operations were developed to become as efficient as possible, without the use of chainsaws. Early research showed that chainsaws were three times more costly to use (per cubic meter harvested) compared with manual saws. This ratio has not changed since the initial studies were made 20 years ago. Yet farmers still have difficulties believing that chainsaws, which cut wood three to five times faster than handsaws, are two to three times more expensive to use per cubic meter. If economic efficiency is a main concern, then farmers should not be using chainsaws. However, this message is a difficult one for farmers to accept.
If properly trained, both manual-saw and chainsaw operators can work safely in the forest. The chainsaw is a dangerous tool if misused, but the ax can also be extremely dangerous. To ensure the safety of fellers and to minimize damage to residual trees, appropriate felling operations are required, particularly directional felling. This means that the actual felling procedure is but one small part of a well-planned operation, where the routes for the land transport of wood are carefully planned during pre-felling operations. Successful operations therefore require that all trees in the stand be felled in a pre-determined direction, without being tangled up with, or damaging, other trees, agricultural crops, or other objects. The skills involved in directional felling are very important on tree farms, since many other agricultural crops are growing under and among the trees. Farmers are quickly discouraged from planting more trees if their coffee bushes and other crops are
damaged during tree felling activities.
This is where the importance of quality training comes in. It is necessary to know how to change the center of gravity of trees to be felled. This is done by removing a portion of the tree at its base, called the "felling sink," "notch," or "front cut." After this, the "felling cut" or "back cut" is started from the opposite side of the trunk, slightly above the level of notch. The difference ratio depends on the diameter of the tree (e.g., for a 20 cm tree - 2 cm above; for a 70 cm tree - 7 cm above, etc.). The felling cut continues exactly opposite from the desired felling direction, until an even, uncut portion of wood remains in the center. This "hinge" of uncut wood is intentionally left in the center, and is the cutter's life insurance! If this hinge is damaged in the cutting process, then the tree may fall in any direction, and the cutter's life could be in danger.
Trees seldom grow uniformly, nor is the ground in the forest always level. Therefore, additional tools are often necessary to achieve the desired felling direction. The most simple, inexpensive and reliable of all helping tools is the felling wedge. The cheapest manual saw is the two-man crosscut saw, which is very durable. Its use is now quickly spreading into all plantation forests in the southern Philippines. New two-man crosscut saws are different from the old two-man raker tooth saws, in that they are of the so-called "peg-tooth" or "triangular tooth" type. This newer version is much easier to maintain compared to the older model.
Crosscutting with a bow saw
The bow saw (shaped like a reversed bow) with a thin blade would be the most efficient harvesting tool, but high-quality bow saws are no longer available. The small hobby saws, common in most developing countries, have frames that are too weak for professional felling or crosscutting of trees. The tension of the blade is not sufficient for stems larger than 10 cm in diameter. The professional bow saw has to be able to maintain a tension of 200 kg; the small hobby saw can only manage 40-70 kg.
For felling leaning trees, or trees growing at the edge of riverbanks, gullies, steep slopes, or near electrical installations or houses, a special tool, the "felling tongs," is recommended. The tongs can be attached to a long wooden pole, which then is clamped onto the stem 6-8 m^3 above the ground. The tongs are spring loaded and are attached to the tree while being anchored to the ground. A rope, 1.5 times the length of the tree (35-45 m^3), is attached to the tongs. When a team of people pull the rope, the tree can easily be maneuvered against its lean. The tongs provide up to two tons of pulling force. They are particularly effective for felling trees away from coffee and fruit trees grown under timber trees.
Another harvesting operation is debarking. This activity depends very much on the end-use of the wood. The most important reasons for debarking are to allow easy assessment of the quality of the wood and to minimize the risk of insect damage. In pulp and paper manufacturing, the bark is not desired. In the southern Philippines, more than half of all plantation-grown wood is debarked. If, however, the bark is to be used as fuel for boilers or for wood fibers, then the bark is not removed until the wood reaches the mill. The same applies to veneer or peeler logs, which are protected by the bark during transport.
Tree felling with a bow saw
Traditionally, debarking was done with a machete. Although very cheap, the machete has one big disadvantage in that it is not designed for debarking. It forces its user to "work on four legs," an ergonomically very uncomfortable position. Limited by the short handle, the wielder is forced to work with his back bent. Likewise, the jungle knife, used for turning the logs, also forces the worker to debark in difficult positions, with the blade often pointing toward the body or leg, causing frequent injuries.
The improved tool is called the debarking "spud" or "spade." It consists of a blade shaped like a spade, attached to a long handle. Also attached to the side of the blade is small hook for turning the logs. The additional weight of the handle, in combination with the upright working position, allows for a more comfortable working condition compared to the machete. The correct debarking sequence also minimizes the incidence of accidents since the log, placed in front of the worker, diverts the tool away from workers' legs. Nevertheless, it is obvious that efficient training in the use of the debarking spud and all other tools is essential.
Traditional debarking by boys using machetes
Training farmers in the use of debarking spuds
In transporting logs overland, the felled trees or crosscut logs are conveyed to the nearest road, landing or waterway. In the southern Philippines, this job has traditionally been carried out by water buffalo, also known as carabao. A major limiting factor for using carabao, however, is the availability of water in the harvesting area. The carabao, or swamp-water buffalo, is different from the common water buffalo found elsewhere in Asia. This animal has to bathe every two hours or so, to cool down its body. It lacks pores in the skin to control excessive heat through sweating. Therefore, the water buffalo may suffer from sun stroke unless it can cool its skin.
During muddy conditions after rains, the hoof of the carabao spreads like a snowshoe, allowing this stocky animal to walk across soft mud, whereas most other animals would sink. However, during dry spells, the carabao is much less effective. Studi