<title>ADCP/REP/76/2 - Aquaculture Planning in Asia. Aquaculture planning in Asia Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture </title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Aquaculture is an age-old industry in Asia and about 80 percent of current world production through aquaculture comes from this region. However, the industry has suffered from inadequate recognition and support for a long time and it is only in recent years that the governments have begun to devote attention to this important means of food production. Increased fishing pressure on natural fish stocks and the reduced yield from some of the conventional fisheries, together with expected changes in the Law of the Sea have served to focus special attention on aquaculture as a means of meeting fish production requirements in most countries of the region. Preliminary analyses of supply and demand for fishery products have shown that aquaculture is an effective means of filling the gaps in current and future supplies of many of the favoured aquafoods. The role of aquaculture in integrated rural development has also been recognized and the development of rural communities dependent
on aquaculture as the main economic activity has received active consideration. The culture of species with export potential, like shrimps and prawns, is being attempted in a number of countries of the region. Thus large-scale development of aquaculture is being considered and included in many national development plans. However, it was deemed necessary to examine the current programmes in the light of medium- and long-term food production and economic development requirements in different countries and the basic requirements for sound development of the industry. The Second Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning was therefore organized by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme in Bangkok, 1-17 October 1975 in cooperation with the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Far East and the Government of Thailand, to cover the Asian region. As in the case of the First Regional Workshop held in Accra, Ghana, 2-17 July 1975, the objectives of the Workshop
were to:
(a) discuss the basic data required for the formulation of sound aquaculture development plans;
(b) consider the levels of aquaculture development suited to different socio-economic and ecological situations;
(c) evaluate organizational, financial and technological requirements for the implementation of development programmes, with special reference to the production and distribution of inputs, training of manpower and building of extension services;
(d) consider ways and means of overcoming legal and environmental constraints on aqua-culture development;
(e) formulate and discuss phased outline development plans for each of the participating countries; and
(f) identify external assistance required for the implementation of aquaculture development in each of the participating countries and discuss the national, regional and inter-regional elements of the required assistance.
It was held in the FAO Regional Office, Bangkok, and was attended by participants from ten selected countries of the region (see Annex I). The agenda followed is given in Annex II.
The Workshop was opened by Mr. S.H. Prakoso, Deputy Regional Representative for Asia and the Far East in Bangkok. He emphasized that "from the environmental, social, economic and technological points of view Asia is well suited to maintain and enhance its leadership" in the aquaculture field. Better scientific understanding of traditional Asian practices can lay the foundations for new technologies as has been exemplified by the rediscovery of culture systems such as polyculture and cage culture of fish, combination of fish farming with agriculture and animal husbandry, etc., in other parts of the world. He pointed out that greater national efforts supported and fostered through regional and inter-regional cooperation are required to facilitate the improvement and transfer of such technologies. Although aquaculture can be developed in different ways and at different levels, integration of aquaculture with rural development has special importance in Asia with its large
population of small farmers and small fishermen living in rural areas seriously affected by unemployment and underemployment. He emphasized the need for cooperation between national governments and agencies concerned with rural development and the coordination of current and future activities in this sector.
As in the case of the First Workshop, this one was also organized in two stages. Stage I was attended by all the participants, who discussed the following basic considerations with a view to clarifying national policies and development strategies in the participating countries:
(i) Basic data required for aquaculture planning
(ii) Levels and patterns of aquaculture development
(iii) Role of public and private sectors in aquaculture development
(iv) Organization of aquaculture services for small- and industrial-scale development of aquaculture
(v) Research support and extension services for aquaculture development
(vi) Manpower requirements and training of personnel
(vii) Market surveys for aquaculture planning
(viii) Handling and marketing of aquaculture products
(ix) Development of auxiliary or supporting industries
(x) Financing and credit for aquaculture development
(xi) Legal and environmental aspects of aquaculture development
(xii) Incentives for aquaculture development
(xiii) Bilateral and multilateral assistance for aquaculture development
(xiv) Regional and inter-regional cooperation in aquaculture.
In Stage II of the Workshop, draft outlines of national aquaculture development plans for the participating countries were prepared (Annex III) and discussed. The national development plans set a targeted production of about 3.0 million tons in a period of ten years as follows:
Country
Tons
Bangladesh
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Nepal
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Total
<section>2</section>
2. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA
According to the estimates made on the basis of data collected in 1971-72 the total aqua-culture production in Asia and the Far East region is about 4.0 million tons. But the bulk of this production comes from three or four countries and in others it still remains relatively low. Much of the aquaculture at present is practised on a small scale, often at a subsistence level, and it may continue to be so for some time to come. However, in a number of countries larger commercial-scale culture operations are being promoted.
Increase in aquaculture production is being attempted through both the expansion of areas under culture and the intensification of existing practices. Extensive areas of wastelands appear to be available for aquaculture in most countries of the region, except in Singapore and Hong Kong. According to rough estimates the area under culture has increased about 25 percent in the last three years. The available area for future expansion is estimated to be around 20 million hectares. Detailed site surveys, including studies of alternate uses of such areas, are required to determine whether all these can be used and are available for aquaculture purposes.
Significant advances have been made in some of the countries in developing more intensive and high density culture systems. For example, techniques have been developed to increase production in pond culture of milkfish from an average of 600 kg/ha to 2 000 kg/ha. Similarly, polyculture methods have been devised to increase production of carp ponds from an average 900 kg/ha to 8 000 kg/ha. But the application of these techniques in the field has not kept pace or contributed substantially to increased production. Well organized extension services and provision of inputs and credit were considered the major constraints. The availability of trained technicians varies considerably between countries, but in almost all there is an urgent need for field personnel with adequate practical experience and ability to establish and manage aquaculture enterprises. Fish farmers in some of the countries of the region have shown their receptiveness to new technologies and have even brought
about innovations of their own to suit local conditions. On the other hand, in some countries the farmers have been reluctant and slow to change the traditional methods and adopt improved techniques, particularly when additional inputs are required. This attitude is not always because the economic viability of the operations has not been demonstrated. In countries like Thailand it has been shown that the average income of a fish farmer is about six times more than that of an agricultural farmer and substantially higher than that of a coastal small-scale fisherman. This fact has to be given better publicity, particularly because most countries of the region wish to develop aqua-culture as a means of generating employment for the unemployed and underemployed people in the rural sector or as a means of employment for people who have to be relocated or rehabilitated, e.g., coastal fishermen losing employment due to changes in the fishing industry or people displaced due to river
basin or industrial development projects.
The most significant constraint to expansion or intensification of aquaculture in the region is the production and distribution of seed. Most countries experience difficulties in even maintaining the present level of seed production, and still depend to a large extent on collection of wild seed even where methods of artificial propagation have been developed. Suitable organization of fish breeding, larval rearing, transport and distribution need high-priority attention in most countries of the region. Technical assistance and cooperation between countries in the exchange of expertise, pituitary material for breeding fish, brood fish and even fry, were measures considered by the Workshop to be -important in solving this problem.
Many government stations are engaged in seed production and distribution and this has come to be accepted as a major activity of most aquaculture units. The question whether government stations can, and should, undertake large-scale production and distribution of seed to meet the future needs of the industry was discussed by the Workshop in some detail. The existence of successful seed trade in the private sector in some of the countries was cited, and the fact that many private hatcheries employing relatively complex techniques have recently been established successfully in some countries was noted. The general consensus was that government agencies should initiate seed production and distribution, and where feasible, attract private producers to establish seed production and distribution industries. It will be the responsibility of research institutions to develop technologies that can be adopted by private producers.
<section>3</section>
3. BASIC DATA RELEVANT TO AQUACULTURE PLANNING
A number of countries in the region have short-term programmes underway for aquaculture development as part of their fishery development plans. However, the medium- and long-term requirements of the industry and the policies to be adopted for fulfilling these need to be examined in detail. Further, measures to achieve higher production than targeted and in shorter time than originally envisaged need to be considered. An analysis of the projected future demand for fishery products based on the rate of increase of population and income, the required increase in per caput consumption of fishery products to meet nutritional needs, and the possible expansion of capture fisheries, clearly show that large-scale development of aquaculture is essential to meet the expected deficit in fish products. There is also considerable interest in increased production of prawns, shrimps and eels for export.
The economic as well as social benefits of aquaculture need to be taken into account in formulating plans Though the economic profitability is known among aquaculturists, this has not been sufficiently well-documented and publicized with the result that questions are often raised regarding the economics of operation. As 'bankable project' economic criteria may not sometimes be fully applicable in aquaculture ventures, attempts should be made to quantify the social benefits to facilitate proper evaluation of projects by planning authorities. Financial support for aquaculture has suffered from lack of appropriate feasibility studies and project analyses by competent teams of specialists. In this connexion, participants from many countries adversely commented on the long time lag and multiplicity of missions undertaken by international and regional bank groups and the small number of loans that materialize from these. All the countries would benefit if the services of a
multidisciplinary team of specialists could be made available to undertake coordinated feasibility studies and prepare bankable projects.
The availability of seed has been recognized as one of the most crucial factors in the expansion and intensification of aquaculture and so detailed estimates of the seed requirements on an annual basis have to be made.
Many systems of culture are adopted in the region, but large-scale production in the short and medium term may need to be based on the systems that have proved to be highly productive and profitable. New and improved systems of culture can be expected to be developed as a result of research. Adequate provision has to be made in development plans for pilot-scale operations to test the technical and economic feasibility of such systems before they are utilized for large-scale production.
Considering the species suited for culture, the Workshop recognized the special importance and value of species with short food chains from the point of view of economy and efficiency of food utilization. It was also pointed out that mollusc culture remains an under-utilized source of food production in most of the Asian countries. Greater efforts need to be provided for in the plans to investigate the feasibility of this form of culture. In fact, coastal aquaculture presents greater opportunities for large commercial-scale aquaculture in the region.
In reviewing the data on the availability of sites for aquaculture, the Workshop discussed the problems related to the present practice of using existing water areas, particularly village ponds and multipurpose community-owned water bodies. While the reduced capital investment needed is a major advantage, the management of such areas presents problems and there is a need for more critical examination of the cost and benefits of such practices.
The Workshop recognized that there are major deficiencies in the available basic data for aquaculture planning and that plans have to be formulated on the basis of a number of assumptions. A system of data collection and analysis directed toward refinement and periodic revision of planned targets and production procedures has therefore to be established. Expertise in aqua-culture planning has to be developed for this purpose in fisheries administrations.
<section>4</section>
4. PATTERNS AND LEVELS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
Subsistence-level and small commercial-scale aquaculture currently dominates the industry in most countries of the region. With the emphasis now laid by governments and international agencies on the development of the rural sector, the integration of aquaculture in rural development is receiving greater attention. As mentioned earlier, some of the countries, for example Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, are considering aquaculture as an alternative form of employment for the excess manpower in the coastal fishing industry. Considering these factors, future development is likely to be based to a greater extent on small-scale enterprises.
Strict classification into small- and large-scale enterprises is often difficult and there are many intermediate categories. Production can be organized through small farmers, with a large company directly undertaking purchase of harvest, processing and marketing. The concept of a fish pond estate, a small holding to improve the standard of living of rural people, similar in character to a land reform programme, is under investigation in the Philippines. Fish culture has also been successfully integrated in community development programmes at the 'village' and 'block' levels in India.
In aquaculture development plans in Indonesia, the culture programmes have been classified into commercial and non-commercial and implemented accordingly. Export-oriented aquaculture in all the countries is commercial in nature and generally has to be organized on a large scale.
Large-scale culture operations have certain inherent advantages such as possible vertical integration, but it will ordinarily need large areas for culture and more capital and management skills. Due to the need for diversification, large companies that were in no way concerned with fisheries till recently are becoming involved in aquaculture production and marketing. Some government corporations are also already undertaking, or plan to start, such operations. The cooperative form of aquaculture development has been tried with a certain amount of success in some countries.
Fish seed production lends itself very well to large-scale development, although in countries like Indonesia a fish seed industry based on small subsistence-level operations exists. In fact, seed production has often been demonstrated as even more profitable than the production of table fish under certain circumstances.
The Workshop discussed in some detail the role of public and private sectors in aquaculture production, provision of support services and the development of auxiliary industries. Heavy involvement of the public sector in the organization of infrastructure and support services was considered essential for rapid development of the industry in all the countries. Auxiliary industries such as manufacture of feeds and aquaculture equipment and supplies may in most cases develop in the private sector, but governments have to provide the necessary incentives and research support, for example in the formulation of feeds and the design of equipment.
In the production phase of the industry, public, private and cooperative sectors can play major roles in the region. In the existing and future plans of development for most countries the public sector assumes a dominant role in the production and distribution of seed. As mentioned earlier, private and cooperative sectors will eventually become responsible for large-scale production, but even then government institutions will have the significant role of improving or maintaining the genetic quality of the seed and ensuring freedom from communicable diseases. Many of the countries in the region have established public sector corporations for fishery development and these corporations have many distinct advantages in undertaking large-scale culture, including joint ventures with the local or foreign companies. Successful state farms in China and East European countries indicate the level and pattern of operations possible in such enterprises.
The small farmer will continue to be the backbone of the aquaculture industry in the private sector and, as the cooperative movement becomes successfully established, the cooperative sector will become increasingly important. In this context the Workshop recognized the crucial importance of managerial skills in medium- and large-scale aquaculture ventures.
The possibilities for integrating aquaculture with agriculture and animal husbandry have special importance in this region as the majority of aquaculturists are also part-time farmers. Duck-cum-fish farming introduced in Nepal has yielded very encouraging results. The traditional practices of combining livestock rearing or rice cultivation with fish farming, which are on the decline, need to be revived and redesigned to suit modern culture requirements. It is estimated that there are about 10 million ha of deepwater rice in the region, most of which may be suited for fish culture as a combined culture or rotation crop. The heavy use of pesticides that is responsible for the decline of ricefield fish culture may cease to be a major constraint if stricter anti-pollution regulations are enforced.
As mentioned earlier, large private companies are getting interested in aquaculture and in a few countries small companies have been established for the culture of export-oriented crops. Government policies support the formation of such companies in most countries and the land reforms and land consolidation programmes mostly favour the establishment of such companies for aquaculture purposes.
The Workshop took note of the many opportunities for joint ventures in the aquaculture industry. The possibilities of joint ventures with private companies abroad are mainly for exportable products. The need for careful negotiations with foreign partners in order to protect the interests of the home country was stressed.
<section>5</section>
5. SUPPORTING SERVICES
The Workshop discussed in some detail the different types of supporting services required for aquaculture development in the region. In view of the fact that the bulk of production will be on a small scale, the importance of such services becomes specially significant.
As discussed earlier, effective extension services are of the highest priority. The backbone of such services is the extension worker who needs special training in extension techniques, besides adequate training and practical experience in aquaculture techniques.
Some of the countries have tried to utilize agricultural extension personnel for aqua-culture extension work, but the experience so far indicates that specialized staff at an appropriate level are essential if aquaculture has to be developed rapidly.
Certain countries have established specialized training programmes for extension staff, but these programmes need strengthening. In countries where training facilities do not exist, new training centres have to be created. Taking into account the educational background and language proficiency of the candidates to be trained and the specific local conditions in which they have to work, it was considered essential to organize the training of extension personnel on a national basis.
The discussions in the Workshop clearly showed that so far inadequate attention has been devoted to the current and future manpower requirements of the industry. Assessment of the needs of trained manpower of different categories is an essential step in development planning. This would show whether ad hoc or permanent training facilities have to be provided in the country, and whether group country or regional training programmes are required. The Workshop noted that there are as yet no suitably staffed and equipped training centres in the region offering specialized multidisciplinary training in all aspects of aquaculture. Besides facilities for theoretical instruction, such a centre will have to provide adequate opportunities for the trainees to carry out practical farming operations in order to acquire the necessary knowledge and experience for initiating and managing aquaculture enterprises. The establishment of such centres is expensive and the hiring of suitable
training staff on a national basis may prove extremely difficult. In the circumstances there is a need to consider the establishment of subregional or regional training facilities offering a well rounded specialized training in aquaculture. There are many obvious advantages in organizing such a training programme in conjunction with a research centre.
The role of research in aquaculture development has received considerable attention in the region and almost all the countries have fish culture research stations. However, many of the stations are poorly equipped and inadequately staffed with the result that they function primarily as demonstration or seed production centres. Through streamlining the many diffuse efforts, strengthening of facilities and the adoption of realistic research programmes, scientific support for aquaculture development can be substantially improved. A "systems approach" in research directed toward the solution of all the inter-dependent problems hindering increased aquaculture production would more effectively serve the needs of the industry.
The provision of necessary inputs in adequate quantities at appropriate times is an essential requisite for expanded aquaculture. Among the many inputs, highest priority was given to seed as mentioned on page 3. The need to develop seed production as a separate auxiliary industry in the public or private sector was repeatedly emphasized by the Workshop. Fish feed is another input which needs special attention. The existing animal feed industry can possibly cater to the needs of aquaculture if suitable feed formulations can be recommended and the necessary incentives to compensate for the small initial demand can be offered. If simple feed preparation techniques can be adopted, it should be possible to develop the industry also on a cottage-industry basis.
As regards other inputs like fertilizer and chemicals, when internal supplies in a country are inadequate, it may often be necessary for the government to allocate the necessary quantities for the needs of aquaculture. In the initial stages governments should also provide incentives to develop the manufacture of various types of equipment required in aquaculture installations.
<section>6</section>
6. MARKETING ARRANGEMENTS
The Workshop reviewed the principal aspects of marketing and utilization of aquaculture production and discussed in detail the salient features to be incorporated in the individual country plans for aquaculture development. There was a general consensus that the demand for fish in Asia was very strong, that it exceeded supplies, and that there were no constraints for aquaculture development from this angle, in particular because capture fisheries could not be expected to yield enough to match projected future demands. However, in countries planning a significant increase of aquaculture production such as India, Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand, it was deemed necessary to take due account of the marketing structure and logistics required. These may differ according to the production systems involved and the markets supplied (whether rural areas, urban centres or export markets).
Fish marketing organizations or other government agencies involved in fish marketing exist in several countries of the Asian region and it should be possible for these to undertake the marketing of farmed fish and shellfish. This particularly applies to India, Malaysia and Sri Lanka. In the other countries the existing trade channels were reported to be adequate to handle increased production through aquaculture. Some instances of localized overproduction, such as of catfish in Thailand, have been overcome through the relocation and streamlining of production.
The consumer acceptance of aquaculture products has been greatly enhanced by their steady availability in the fresh or cured state. It was pointed out that specific consumer education and promotion programmes may not always be required, but availability and effective marketing may largely reduce consumer resistance, if there is any.
In certain areas in the Asian region the bulk of aquaculture production for domestic consumption would mainly be destined for the lower income market segment, hence production and marketing costs have to be kept at conforming low levels. Specific information relating to the operations and costs of processing and marketing of aquaculture products would be of considerable value in this connexion.
The Workshop was of the view that marketing of aquaculture products could be organized within the existing fish marketing systems in the countries of the region. However, as output increase becomes substantial, expansion of capacities and extension of operations would become necessary. With increasing magnitude of the aquaculture sector, marketing of seed, feed and other inputs could also warrant Specific arrangements.
In some of the countries of the region, aquaculture production for export purposes is gaining importance. The expansion of processing facilities and quality control will be of special significance in promoting this sector. Further, information on product specification, prices and markets should also be made available to the industry on a continuing basis.
<section>7</section>
7. FINANCING AND CREDIT
The ten-year national development plans prepared by the participants would require considerable financial investment for implementation. It was agreed that a good part of the financing has necessarily to be raised internally from government and commercial sources. However, because of the high profitability of certain culture systems and the significant socio-economic benefits that may be derived by small farmers and fishermen by the adoption of aqua-culture as an integral part of rural development (a priority area for financial support by the World Bank Group), there are definite possibilities for attracting external financing for aqua-culture development. As already stated in section 2, only very limited financial assistance has so far been provided for aquaculture by the World Bank Group, and one of the reasons for this is the lack of expertise and basic economic data in the countries for preparing bankable projects based on detailed feasibility studies. The need for
FAO/UNDP assistance in this regard was again emphasized in the Workshop while discussing this topic. The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) should consult with international banking agencies and try to establish simpler and quicker means of project formulation for financing. Assistance should be offered by the ADCP and other FAO/UNDP projects in formulating suitable project proposals and to obtain aid from bilateral and multilateral agencies. It was also suggested that greater use should be made of the FAO Bankers Group for financing large-scale farming. The Workshop noted that greater difficulties are experienced in obtaining finance for the farming of aquafoods for domestic consumption, compared to that for export.
Ways and means of distributing credit to farmers were discussed in some detail. Although credit is available, credit costs are in many cases prohibitive to prospective fish farmers. Other difficulties arise from a lack of appreciation of the aquaculture problems on the part of bankers, requirements for collateral securities, insufficient duration of lease of aqua-culture sites granted to farmers and the fact that bankable project criteria are sometimes applicable to aquaculture ventures only on a limited scale.
In several countries insecurity of land tenure and ownership of water bodies are detrimental to a wider use of credit facilities. The Workshop was informed that in Indonesia national banks would accept feasibility and prospects of a project in lieu of collateral and that in the Philippines long lease of sites would be similarly accepted. In Nepal the government stands surety for loans taken by new graduates who enter fish farming.
In order to integrate aquaculture fully into the rural sector, the implication of the present institutional framework and the difficulties of cooperative organizations need to be considered. Credit programmes for fish farming in rural areas are being implemented in Indonesia and the Philippines, with cooperation from the government and banks. Experience so far shows the importance of linking credit for aquaculture development with technical assistance and extension work among farmers, as in the case of agricultural credit.
The Workshop discussed in some detail the advantages and disadvantages of joint ventures with foreign partners. While appreciating the opportunity offered to attract financial resources and managerial expertise, reservations were expressed because of the vested interests that are at times involved. Successful joint ventures, as in the case of eel culture in Thailand, have shown the benefits that can be derived from joint venture arrangements if the interests of all the partners are suitably safeguarded.
In order to overcome the difficulties that aquaculture development faces in the Asian region in respect of credit and financing, the Workshop agreed on the need for external assistance for undertaking feasibility s