<title>Carrying Capacity Assessment of Pulau Payar Marine Park, Malaysia - Bay of Bengal Programme</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The Pulau Payar Marine Park is a treasurehouse of marine wealth. Its four islands are blessed with clear-water coral reefs. The Park has also been provided with other tourist facilities and attractions that delight nature-lovers, sightseers, sunbathers and snorkellers.
The Park obviously fulfils the cherished role of conserving the marine wealth of the area - all fishing activity within two nautical miles of the park is banned. Malaysia plays a pioneering role in the Bay of Bengal region in the use of marine parks for resource conservation. All its activities concerning the Park are therefore being watched with interest throughout the region.
The Marine Park came into being in 1989. It has spurred a 5,000% increase in visitors to the area over a period of seven years. The reefs therefore face increasing pressure from tourism development and related activities. How to sustain tourism development and maintain "visitor satisfaction" without endangering the Park's ecological environment is a matter of concern to the authorities.
This report reflects the concerns from growing use pressure. It is based on a coral reef survey and a land-based survey. It documents the rationale, results and recommendations of both surveys. The report says that a two-pronged approach is needed to manage the park - a strategy for the park itself, and a strategy for sustainable tourism. It also says that the management strategy for Pulau Payar Marine Park should be integrated with the overall planning and management of Pulau Langkawi.
In sum, we find this document to be very useful - both informative and thought-provoking. We are sure it will lead to action that makes the park an even more valuable resource than it is now.
Kee-Chai CHONG
Programme Coordinator, BOBP
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study would not have been possible without the cooperation of the Department of Fisheries Malaysia. I would like to thank Dato' Mohd. Mazlan Jusoh, Director-General of Fisheries, for his support. Grateful thanks are also extended to Mr Lui Yean Pong, former Head, Resource Management Branch and Encik Ahmad Hazizi Aziz, Fisheries Officer (Resource Management), Resource Management Branch. Mr Kevin Hiew Wai Phang, Head, Marine Parks Branch, kindly granted permission for use of the facilities at Pulau Payar Marine Park and offered logistical support.
Support while in the field is also gratefully acknowledged. Thanks especially to Encik Salehan Lamin, former Director, Department of Fisheries Kedah/Perlis; Encik Suhaimy Sulong, Head, Pulau Payar Marine Park and all the staff of the Park. Encik Faudzi Saad deserves a special mention for helping in the coral reef surveys.
Grateful thanks to Encik Ibrahim Salleh, Director, Fisheries Research Institute and Encik Zainuddin Ilias, Fisheries Research Institute, for information generously provided.
Dr Kee-Chai Chong, Programme Coordinator, Bay of Bengal Programme and Ms Donna J. Nickerson, Coastal Zone Management Adviser, Bay of Bengal Programme, are both thanked for their support, guidance and encouragement throughout the project.
At WWF Malaysia, thanks are gratefully extended to Dr Isabelle Louis, Deputy Executive Director, who commented constructively on the draft manuscript and was a constant source of ideas. Thanks also to Encik Hymeir Kamaruddin, and his wife, Puan Zuraidah Abdullah, for their hospitality while I was in Alor Setar. For help with the questionnaire database, the services of Ms Jane Tan and Ms Khoo Ming Ghee are gratefully acknowledged. Cik Noor Liza Ahmad Zahari kindly translated the Executive Summary into Bahasa Melayu.
For her help in conducting the questionnaire surveys and inputting data into the database, Raja Ainun Shafina Raja Ahmad Sheridan is sincerely thanked. Thanks also to Mr Nathaniel Spring for graciously undertaking the multiple tasks of conducting questionnaire surveys, helping with the coral reef surveys, inputting data into the database, analyzing the reef data and helping with the report writing.
The assistance of Mr David Yap is gratefully acknowledged for translating the questionnaires used in the surveys into Japanese.
A big thank you also goes out to all the dive and tour operators at Pulau Payar Marine Park for all their cooperation and help.
For financial support, the following are gratefully thanked:
FAO Bay of Bengal Programme for Integrated Coastal Fisheries Management
United Nations Development Programme
Malaysian Wildlife Conservation Foundation
<section>3</section>
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Pulau Payar Marine Park is a very popular tourist destination located to the north-west of Peninsular Malaysia, off the west coast of Kedah. It is situated between the islands of Pulau Langkawi and Pulau Pinang, themselves popular tourist destinations. The Marine Park consists of a group of four islands - Pulau Payar, Pulau Kaca, Pulau Lembu and Pulau Segantang - the largest of which is Pulau Payar at 31.2 hectares. The islands are uninhabited, and since being afforded Marine Park status in 1989, the area has not been utilized by fishing communities.
The main attraction of the Marine Park to tourists is its coral reefs, which cater mostly for snorkellers, although some diving activity does occur in the area. The Marine Park has seen a tremendous increase in visitor numbers over the years. Annual visitors have increased from 1,373 in 1988 to 70,419 in 1995, representing a 5,000% increase in seven years. As such, the reefs are under increasing pressure from tourism development and related activities.
This study was undertaken to address some of the issues at Pulau Payar Marine Park with regard to carrying capacity. There were two components to the study; a survey of the surrounding coral reefs which are popular dive sites, and a land-based survey which involved distributing questionnaires and conducting interviews with tourists, divers, tour operators and dive operators.
The carrying capacity concept stresses the need for managing desired environmental and social conditions, and can be utilised to identify thresholds that require attention. Carrying capacity implies that there is a threshold limit for use, beyond which the reef environment is degraded, facilities are saturated and visitor satisfaction is lost. These are key elements for a sustainable tourism industry and should be safeguarded. As any human use of the natural environment inevitably results in some change to that environment, the focus would be to identity how much change is acceptable for a given setting, and to highlight actions that may be taken to minimise or limit adverse anthropogenic impacts on the coral reef environment.
Visitors to Pulau Payar Marine Park are mainly foreigners, with the Taiwanese and Japanese being the largest nationality groups. Most of these visitors depart from Pulau Langkawi, and since there are no accommodation facilities at the Marine Park, they only stay for the day. The results of this study show that the diving industry at Pulau Payar Marine Park is relatively unsaturated. However, snorkelling is an extremely popular activity and is concentrated at the Marine Park Centre House Reef and the Langkawi Coral Pontoon House Reef. The influx of large numbers of tourists to the area and their activities can cause direct physical damage to the reef environment, in addition to generating a host of other related problems such as pollution from tourism.
Given the increasing numbers of tourists to Pulau Payar Marine Park, and the increasing trends in visitation, further expansion of tourism development and related activities is not acceptable. This is due to the potential negative impacts on the marine environment, especially coral reefs; the physical limitations to space already experienced; the inadequacy of facilities available - especially toilets, sewage and solid waste disposal - and increasing visitor dissatisfaction with some aspects of the Marine Park. While steps to increase carrying capacity can be taken, this does not imply steps to increase the number of visitors to the Marine Park. Instead, increasing carrying capacity means taking appropriate management actions which will ensure minimal degradation to the coral reefs despite their being exploited as a tourist attraction, that visitors remain satisfied and that adequate facilities are provided.
The Marine Park is thus in need of a detailed management strategy which ensures that tourist activities cause minimal damage to the coral reef environment. A two-pronged approach is necessary for the management of the Marine Park - a strategy for the Marine Park itself, and a strategy for tourism which promotes the Marine Park in such a way that it complements Marine Park objectives.
The management strategy for Pulau Payar Marine Park should be integrated with the overall planning and management of Pulau Langkawi, given its close proximity and potential downstream effects. Positive management actions that can be taken for a period of at least five years include zoning the Marine Park; gazetting the islands as a State Park; implementing a comprehensive education and awareness programme; enforcing Marine Park regulations; limiting visitor use; training Marine Park managers, tour and dive operators; as well as establishing monitoring and evaluation programmes. Problems of solid waste and sewage disposal at the Marine Park must be addressed immediately; if not, they will result in adverse effects on the reef, besides engendering dissatisfaction among tourists. The provision of proper reception and disposal facilities at Pulau Langkawi, Pulau Pinang and Kuala Kedah is integral to the proper management of solid waste and sewage for Pulau Payar Marine Park.
Efforts must also be made to monitor activities at the Langkawi Coral Pontoon and to ensure that they are complying with Marine Park regulations. Monitoring should also be conducted around its house reef area to ascertain if there are any adverse impacts on the reef due to the presence of the pontoon itself.
Tourism promotion for the Marine Park, for Pulau Langkawi, for Kedah and the north-west region of Peninsular Malaysia should incorporate the conservation objectives of the Marine Park and target tourists who are more environmentally aware and responsible. The paucity of information on the Marine Park and the marine environment should be addressed and this information should be effectively communicated to visitors and tour operators. Alternative activities, such as the nature trails on Pulau Payar, should be promoted to disperse visitor pressure on the reefs. Alternative islands around Pulau Langkawi such as Pulau Singa, Pulau Dayang Bunting and Pulau Beras Basah should be promoted to the non-reef user. Other islands around Pulau Langkawi with reefs should be identified and the feasibility of diverting tourists there explored.
Action must be taken now to ensure that the conservation objectives of Pulau Payar Marine Park are not compromised by tourism activities. Tourism planning for the Marine Park must be well integrated with the overall plan for tourism in the north-west region. The sustainability of the tourism industry in the Marine Park and the surrounding region depends on the well-being of its marine environment, specifically coral reefs. The tourist industry of Pulau Langkawi especially could be affected as Pulau Payar Marine Park is an important attraction for many tourists to Pulau Langkawi. Tourism must be made environmentally, socially and economically sustainable; it should also benefit all stakeholders.
<section>4</section>
RINGKASAN EKSEKUTIF
Taman Laut Pulau Payar yang terletak di luar pantai barat negeri Kedah di barat laut Semenanjung Malaysia, merupakan sebuah destinasi pelancongan yang terkenal. Ia terletak di antara dua buah destinasi pelancongan yang juga terkenal iaitu Pulau Langkawi dan Pulau Pinang. Taman Laut ini terdiri daripada sekumpulan empat pulau - Pulau Payar, Pulau Kaca, Pulau Lembu dan Pulau Segantang - Pulau Payar adalah yang terbesar dengan keluasan 31.2 hektar. Sejak dijadikan Taman Laut pada 1989, pulau-pulau yang tidak berpenghuni ini tidak digunakan oleh kaum nelayan.
Tarikan utama para pelancong ke sini ialah terumbu karangnya yang dapat memenuhi keperluan para pensnorkel terutamanya. Terdapat juga kegiatan menyelam di sekitar Taman Laut ini. Sejak beberapa tahun yang lalu, Taman Laut ini menyaksikan pertambahan bilangan pengunjung yang amat besar. Pertambahan ini telah meningkat secara tahunan daripada 1,373 orang pada tahun 1988 kepada 70,419 orang pada tahun 1995, iaitu sebanyak 5,000% dalam tempoh tujuh tahun. Tekanan terhadap terumbu-terumbu karang turut meningkat akibat pembangunan pelancongan dan kegiatan-kegiatannya.
Kajian ini telah dijalankan untuk mengutarakan beberapa isu berkaitan dengan keupayaan daya tampung di Taman Laut Pulau Payar. Kajian ini terbahagi kepada dua komponen; iaitu kajian ke atas terumbu-terumbu karang yang merupakan kawasan menyelam yang popular, serta tinjauan darat yang melibatkan pengedaran borang soal selidik kepada para pelawat, para penyelam, pengusaha pelancongan dan pengusaha penyelaman.
Konsep keupayaan daya tampung menekankan kepada pengurusan keadaan-keadaan sosial dan alam sekitar yang diingini dan boleh digunakan untuk mengenal pasti ambang-ambang yang memerlukan perhatian. Keupayaan daya tampung membayangkan bahawa terdapat had ambang terhadap penggunaan, jika terlampau, keadaan di persekitaran terumbu karang akan terjejas, kemudahan-kemudahan akan menjadi tepu dan rasa puas hati di kalangan pengunjung akan hilang. Ini merupakan ciri-ciri utama bagi industri pelancongan yang mapan dan harus dipelihara. Lazimnya, setiap penggunaan manusia terhadap alam sekitar yang semula jadi pasti akan mengakibatkan beberapa perubahan kepada alam sekitar. Tumpuan konsep ini ialah untuk mengenal pasti berapa banyak perubahan yang boleh diterima bagi sesuatu persekitaran, dan mengutarakan tindakan-tindakan yang mungkin boleh diambil untuk mengurangkan atau menghadkan kesan-kesan antropogen yang buruk terhadap persekitaran terumbu karang.
Kebanyakan para pengunjung ke Taman Laut Pulau Payar terdiri daripada orang asing dengan rakyat Taiwan dan Jepun merupakan kumpulan-kumpulan yang terbesar. Para pengunjung yang kebanyakannya datang dari Pulau Langkawi, cuma datang untuk sehari kerana Taman Laut ini tidak menyediakan kemudahan-kemudahan penginapan. Hasil kajian ini menunjukkan bahawa industri menyelam di Taman Laut Pulau Payar masih tidak tepu. Walau bagaimanapun, mensnorkel merupakan aktiviti yang paling digemari dan ianya tertumpu di 'Marine Park Centre House Reef' dan 'Langkawi Coral Pontoon House Reef'. Pemasukan bilangan pelancong yang besar serta kegiatan-kegiatan mereka boleh mengakibatkan kerosakan fizikal secara langsung terhadap persekitaran terumbu di samping menimbulkan masalah-masalah lain yang berkaitan seperti pencemaran akibat pelancongan.
Berikutan dengan peningkatan dalam bilangan pelancong dan arah aliran kunjungan mereka ke Taman Laut Pulau Payar, perubahan seterusnya untuk meningkatkan pembangunan pelancongan dan kegiatan-kegiatannya tidak dapat diterima. Ini adalah berdasarkan kepada potensi kesan-kesan negatif terhadap alam persekitaran marin terutama sekali terumbu-terumbu karang, kesempitan ruang secara fizikal, kekurangan kemudahan-kemudahan yang disediakan terutama tandas, pembuangan kumbahan dan sisa pepejal serta peningkatan rasa tidak puas hati para pengunjung terhadap beberapa aspek Taman Laut tersebut yang kini sudah mula dialami. Walaupun beberapa langkah boleh diambil untuk meningkatkan keupayaan daya tampung, ini bukan bermakna mengambil langkah untuk meningkatkan bilangan pengunjung ke Taman Laut. Sebaliknya meningkatkan keupayaan daya tampung bererti mengambil langkah-langkah pengurusan yang sesuai untuk memastikan terumbu-terumbu karang mendapat kerosakan yang minima walaupun telah
dieksploitasikan sebagai daya tarikan pelancong, memenuhi rasa puas hati para pengunjung dan memastikan bahawa kemudahan-kemudahan yang disediakan adalah mencukupi.
Taman Laut ini memerlukan satu strategi pengurusan yang terperinci untuk memastikan bahawa kegiatan-kegiatan pelancong mendatangkan kerosakan minima kepada persekitaran terumbu karang. Pendekatan dua penjuru bagi pengurusan Taman Laut ini diperlukan - satu strategi untuk Taman Laut itu sendiri, dan satu lagi untuk penggalakkan pelancongan dengan memenuhi matlamat-matlamat Taman Laut tersebut.
Berdasarkan kedudukannya yang berhampiran dengan Pulau Langkawi serta potensi kesan-kesan hilirannya, strategi pengurusan Taman Laut Pulau Payar harus disepadukan dengan perancangan dan pengurusan Pulau Langkawi secara keseluruhan. Langkah-langkah pengurusan positif yang boleh diambil dalam tempoh sekurang-kurangnya lima tahun termasuklah pengezonan Taman Laut; mewartakan pulau-pulau tersebut sebagai Taman Negeri; melaksanakan satu rancangan pendidikan dan kesedaran yang menyeluruh; melaksanakan peraturan-peraturan Taman Laut; menghadkan penggunaan pengunjung; melatih para pengurus Taman Laut, pengusaha pelancongan dan pengusaha penyelaman; dan juga mewujudkan rancangan-rancangan pengawasan dan penilaian. Masalah-masalah pembuangan kumbahan dan sisa pepejal di Taman Laut harus diberi perhatian segera; jika tidak, ini akan membawa kesan-kesan buruk kepada terumbu di samping menimbulkan rasa tidak puas hati pelancong. Penyediaan kemudahan-kemudahan penerimaan dan pembuangan
sisa pepejal dan kumbahan yang berkesan di Pulau Langkawi, Pulau Pinang dan Kuala Kedah adalah penting bagi pengurusan yang betul di Taman Laut Pulau Payar. Usaha-usaha harus dibuat untuk mengawasi bahawa kegiatan-kegiatan di 'Langkawi Coral Pontoon' adalah mengikut peraturan-peraturan Taman Laut. Pengawasan ini juga harus diadakan di sekitar kawasan terumbunya untuk memastikan sekiranya terdapat sebarang kesan buruk terhadap terumbu akibat kehadiran pontoon itu sendiri.
Pengalakkan pelancongan bagi Taman Laut Pulau Payar, Pulau Langkawi, Kedah dan kawasan barat laut Semenanjung Malaysia harus mengandungi matlamat-matlamat pemuliharaan Taman Laut dan ditujukan kepada para pelancong yang lebih sedar dan bertanggung jawab terhadap alam sekitar. Kekurangan maklumat mengenai Taman Laut dan persekitaran marinnya mesti diatasi dan maklumat ini mesti diberitahui kepada para pengunjung dan pengusaha pelancongan. Kegiatan-kegiatan lain seperti denai-denai semula jadi di Pulau Payar harus dipromosikan untuk mengurangkan tekanan pengunjung terhadap terumbu-terumbu karang. Beberapa buah pulau yang terdapat di sekitar Pulau Langkawi seperti Pulau Singa, Pulau Dayang Bunting dan Pulau Beras Basah harus diperkenalkan kepada para pengunjung yang bukan pensnorkel atau penyelam. Pulau-pulau lain yang terdapat terumbu-terumbu karang di sekitar Pulau Langkawi harus dikenal pasti dan kemungkinan untuk mengalihkan tumpuan para pelancong ke sana patut diterokai.
Langkah untuk memastikan tujuan-tujuan pemuliharaan Taman Laut Pulau Payar tidak dijejaskan oleh aktiviti-aktiviti pelancongan harus diambil sekarang. Perancangan pelancongan bagi Taman Laut ini harus disepadukan dengan baik bersama-sama keseluruhan rancangan pelancongan bagi kawasan barat laut tersebut. Kemapanan industri pelancongan di Taman Laut dan kawasan sekitarnya bergantung kepada kesejahteraan persekitaran marinnya terutama sekali terumbu-terumbu karang. Industri pelancongan, terutama sekali ke Pulau Langkawi, mungkin akan terjejas oleh kerana Taman Laut Pulau Payar merupakan satu daya tarikan yang penting bagi kebanyakan para pelancong ke sana. Di samping menguntungkan kesemua pihak yang berkepentingan, pelancongan juga boleh mendatangkan faedah seandainya dilaksanakan secara mapan dari segi alam sekitar, sosial dan ekonomi.
<section>5</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Coral reefs
1.2 Carrying capacity
1.3 Objectives of the study
1.4 Background information on Pulau Payar Marine Park
1.1 Coral reefs
A coral reef ecosystem consists of an assemblage of a variety of plants and animals in tropical waters where corals form the dominant components. Hard corals, which form the most visible part of a reef, are constructed by minute marine animals called coral polyps that secrete a calcium carbonate exoskeleton around themselves. They do this by precipitating calcium ions from the sea water. The polyps sub-divide as they grow, and form complex coral colonies which are made up of millions of polyps fused together by their skeletons. In addition to corals, coralline algae also produce limestone skeletons and help build and consolidate coral reefs.
The polyps of true reef-building or hermatypic corals contain unicellular dinoflagellates called zooxanthellae within their tissue, and this symbiotic association is mutually beneficial. The zooxanthellae use the sun's energy to photosynthesise, providing food for themselves and the coral polyps, thus enhancing the production of the calcium carbonate skeletons and the coral structures. The polyps themselves normally remain in their skeletons during the day, and feed at night using tentacles to capture their prey which subsequently filter into their stomachs. They can also absorb dissolved food from the water.
Coral reefs flourish in the warm shallow waters of tropical seas that optimally have temperatures between 26°C and 27°C (Wells & Price, 1992). The shallow waters allow sufficient light penetration for the zooxanthellae and other primary producers to photosynthesise. They need constant high salinity and pollution-free waters to thrive. There is an estimated 600,000 km^2 of coral reefs worldwide, 25-30% of which are located in South East Asia. Malaysia has coral reefs on both the East and West coasts of the Peninsula, as well as off Sabah and Sarawak.
Coral reefs are amongst the most biologically diverse and productive ecosystems on Earth. Associated with coral reefs are a myriad of organisms; fish and invertebrates, especially molluscs, crustaceans and echinoderms predominate, and algae are also abundant. Coral reefs are the feeding, breeding and nursery grounds for many fish and invertebrate species, many of which are commercially important. They are thus crucial for supporting the fisheries sector, and it has been estimated that reef fisheries have the potential to contribute approximately 12 per cent of all fish caught annually throughout the world (Wells & Price, 1992).
Coral reefs act as a natural protection between the open seas and coastlines by acting as wave breaks, thus effectively preventing coastal erosion. They may also perform a vital role in protecting coastal areas from the consequences of predicted sea level rise such as storm flooding (Markham et al, 1993). Furthermore, there is increasing evidence of the potential of reefs to act as bio-indicators for climate change, as they are sensitive to sea level rise and sea temperature. In addition, reefs are good indicators of coastal pollution, as they are sensitive to changes in their ambient environment.
Coral reefs are also a potential storehouse of medicinally valuable species, many of which have yet to be discovered. Several reef-dwelling organisms have been found to produce highly active biochemical compounds with antibiotic, antileukumic, anticoagulant and cardioactive properties (De Silva & Ridzwan, 1982). In addition, reef-related tourism such as SCUBA diving and snorkelling plays an important role in the economies of many countries. Nevertheless, exploitation of reefs for tourism purposes must be sustainable, and be appropriately managed to ensure that the reefs are not damaged.
Coral reefs are thus extremely beneficial to humankind, providing a variety of ecological and physical services which are also economically important. Box 1.1 presents a brief summary of these benefits. The productivity of a coral reef relies upon an intricate recycling process that passes nutrients through the ecosystem via a complex web of food chains. Unfortunately this characteristic means that a reef is vulnerable, and its finely balanced ecosystem can be easily disrupted by anthropogenic activities. As such, the conservation and protection of coral reef ecosystems are becoming increasingly urgent efforts, crucial to ensure that we do not lose their intrinsic values and resources.
BOX 1.1 BENEFITS OF CORAL REEFS
· Biologically diverse and productive
· Feeding, breeding and nursery grounds for many fish and invertebrate species, thus supporting the fisheries sector
· Natural protection between the open seas and coastlines
· Act as wave breaks and prevent coastal erosion
· Protect coastal areas from the consequences of predicted sea level rise
· Potentially act as bio-indicators for climate change
· Indicators of coastal pollution
· Potential storehouse of medicinally valuable species yet to be discovered
· Reef-related tourism plays an important role in the economies of many countries
1.2 Carrying capacity
1.2.1 Definition of carrying capacity
1.2.2 Coral reef carrying capacity
1.2.3 Determinants of reef carrying capacity
The concept of carrying capacity is one which exemplifies the need to maintain development and activities at a level that is both ecologically and socially sustainable. It is related to the concept of resilience, and implies that there are limits, or thresholds, beyond which a system will not facilitate further changes or increase (Getz, 1982). This concept is increasingly applied to tourist destinations following the realisation that these places have a certain 'carrying capacity', that is, a level of tourist and recreation development and activities beyond which environmental degradation occurs, facilities become saturated, or visitor enjoyment diminishes (e.g. Hovinen, 1982; Mathieson & Wall, 1982). The concept of a tourist destination having a carrying capacity thus embodies the assumption that eventually, a threshold will be reached after which the destination will be decreasingly desirable.
Birthed from the study of animal populations, the carrying capacity concept now goes beyond estimating mere numbers; it has increasingly evolved as a planning and management tool to enable planners and managers to determine, not, "How much is too much?", but rather, "How much change is acceptable?" (Williams & Gill, 1991). As any human use of the natural environment inevitably results in some change to that environment, the focus would be to identify how much change is acceptable for a given setting (Stankey & McCool, 1992). The concept thus stresses the management of desired environmental and social conditions, which can be expressed using the Limits of Acceptable Change (LAC) planning system (Stankey & McCool, 1984). For carrying capacity to be a useful tool for tourism planning and management, it should not be approached in a mechanistic manner (i.e. trying to determine a "magic number"), but should rather be seen as a means of identifying thresholds that require
attention, and as an optional form of controlling the system through the imposition of partial or complete limits (Getz, 1983). The traditional concept of carrying capacity is not without its limitations, and is modified here to highlight actions that may be taken to minimise or limit adverse anthropogenic impacts on the coral reef environment. While recognising the limitations of the traditional carrying capacity concept, the concept can be used to help identify factors that impact negatively on the marine environment, and to generate management recommendations that may alleviate the tourism pressure on reefs. The focus is thus to highlight possible actions that may be taken to minimise or limit adverse impacts on the coral reef environment.
Carrying capacity can be broken up into its fundamental components of ecological, physical, social and economic carrying capacities. Nonetheless, the estimation of carrying capacity or limits of acceptable change is not an easy task, as many factors operate. Furthermore, there is no set method or formula available, and each case study should be viewed separately. For further information on the concepts and analysis of carrying capacity, please refer to Lim (1995a & 1995b). A framework guideline based on Lim's (1995a) recommendations is presented in Appendix 1.
1.2.1 Definition of carrying capacity
A carrying capacity that needs to be established for Pulau Payar Marine Park is the tourism carrying capacity, that is, its capacity to accommodate visitors and development without detrimentally affecting the marine environment and its resources, or effecting a decline in visitor satisfaction (WTO & UNEP, 1992). Carrying capacity for tourist destinations implies that there is a limit to the amount of tourism development and activity that can occur in an area, beyond which facilities are saturated, visitors become dissatisfied and environmental degradation occurs. Tourism carrying capacity can be further broken down into its fundamental components of ecological or environmental, physical, social and economic carrying capacities.
The physical carrying capacity is the threshold limit for space, beyond which facilities are saturated (Getz, 1982). The social carrying capacity can be looked at from two perspectives; one is the capacity of the host population to tolerate the presence of tourists, the second is the level at which visitor enjoyment diminishes and dissatisfaction sets in (O'Reily, 1986). Graefe et al (1984) define social carrying capacity further as "the level of use beyond which experience parameters exceed acceptable levels specified by evaluative standards". Economic carrying capacity is the level at which tourism interference with non-tourism activities becomes economically unacceptable.
1.2.2 Coral reef carrying capacity
The coral reef ecosystem is extremely vulnerable to changes in the environment. Globally, reefs are now receiving increasing pressure from both the expansion of reef tourism, and land-based activities. The concept of carrying capacity can be utilised for reef ecosystems to identify reef capacity determinants, and subsequently for the reduction or elimination of the causes of damage. This approach, if appropriately applied during the planning and management stages of coastal and marine resources use, can effectively raise reef carrying capacity (Salm, 1986) to an acceptable level, enabling the reef to be used for recreation purposes without compromising its ecological integrity.
The carrying capacity of one reef vis-à-vis other reefs should be looked at within the scope of a broader management strategy. Therefore overall reef carrying capacity is not determined on the basis of one reef and its individual factors alone but would depend on a variety of other interlinked factors.
Reef carrying capacity can be further examined from the perspectives of ecological, physical and social carrying capacities. The ecological carrying capacity of the reef is the threshold limit for visitor use and consequent incidental damage that the coral reef ecosystem can sustain without being degraded. Furthermore, coral reefs are only able to tolerate a certain amount of change in ambient qualities, and factors such as pollution, siltation and exploitation affect them adversely. Nevertheless, reef ecological carrying capacity is difficult to establish; this is an aspect of carrying capacity that would require in-depth long-term study of the reef ecosystem, which was not possible to do in this instance. The physical carrying capacity of the reef relates to the availability of boats which ferry divers and snorkellers to the reefs, as well as the number of mooring buoys available; space on the reef is also considered. The size and shape of the reef, as well as the
composition of the coral communities also determine physical carrying capacity. The social carrying capacity of the reef is the limit to visual contact between divers and snorkellers beyond which they become dissatisfied (Salm, 1986).
1.2.3 Determinants of reef carrying capacity
The concept of carrying capacity can be utilised for reef ecosystems to identify reef capacity determinants, and subsequently enables the reduction or elimination of the causes of damage. In addition, proper management will help ensure that user-related damage is controlled and minimised.
Reef capacity determinants are discussed briefly as follows:
(a) Size and shape of the reef
Large reefs can accommodate more divers and snorkellers than small ones (Salm, 1986). Divers or snorkellers swimming over uniform flat shallow reefs are limited in opportunities because of the homogenous nature of t