<title>Inter-Asian Training on Rural Youth Population Programmes</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
1.1. Project background
The idea of FAO participating in population education for rural youth had its earliest beginnings in an Expert Consultation on Rural Youth and Young Farmers in Developing Countries that was held in 1985 at FAO Headquarters in Rome as part of the United Nations International Youth Year. The relationships among youth, rapid population growth and rural development was considered. Later that same year, these issues were also discussed at a national workshop in Zimbabwe, sponsored jointly by FAO and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).
Over the following years, discussions with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) resulted in the first inter-regional rural youth population education project, Integration of Population Education into Programmes for Rural Youth in Low-Income Countries, INT/88/P98. The project began in early 1987 and ran through 1991. During the project, existing population education materials were collected, reviewed and analysed. Core educational concepts relating to population education issues were selected to eventually form the basis of the FAO prototype leader guides. The methodology is based on an experimental educational model using adult local volunteer leaders to facilitate a series of learning activities with groups of rural youth. This activity-based educational methodology comes from extensive experience with successful out-of-school rural youth programmes around the world.
Early in the project, workshops were held with youth workers, leaders and rural young people in Swaziland, Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe in Africa. The purpose was to discuss the appropriateness of the selected topics and determine how they could be most effectively introduced into ongoing programmes for out-of-school rural youth. Based on the conclusions reached at these workshops and a collaborative effort with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, prototype leader guides were prepared and printed. They were then introduced to national youth professionals in a series of regional workshops in Chile, Kenya and Thailand. Field tests of the materials were carried out at village level in Kenya, Sierra leone and Zimbabwe in Africa and Chile, Colombia and Guatemala in Latin America.
The leader guides consist of an introduction and ten self-contained booklets or modules on basic concepts of population education, including: (1) Population and Agriculture, (2) Population, Employment and Income, (3) Population and Environment, (4) Population and Nutrition, (5) Population and Health, (6) Family and Family Size, (7) Responsible Parenthood, (8) Human Growth and Development, (9) How the Population Changes, and (10) Community Involvement. After completion of the prototype leader guides, they were field tested in the respective languages in English and French-speaking Africa, and in Spanish in Latin America.
Based on the success of the introduction on a pilot basis of the FAO population materials in Africa and Latin America, a Sub-Regional Workshop on Population Education for Rural Youth was held in Bangkok, Thailand, from 30 September to 4 October 1991. Participating countries included China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. During the workshop a number of innovative programmes for rural youth in different countries of the region were discussed, both in population education and other linked aspects of concern to the participants, such as employment and income generation. A strong recommendation coming out of the workshop was for an exchange of visits by the participating countries to study the programmes in each country concerned, since there are many similarities among the countries of the region which would allow the replication of successful ideas.
As a result of this recommendation, project TCP/RAS/2255, Population Education Methodologies for Out-of-School Rural Youth, was developed and approved for funding. The original design called for a Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries (TCDC) arrangement where representatives of the five countries would participate in a four-week training workshop; two weeks in the Philippines and a further two weeks in Thailand. Both workshops were to include field visits to observe successful rural youth programming related to population education.
There were many delays in making the final arrangements for implementing the project, with subsequent adjustments in design. A major change occurred when the Government of Thailand informed FAO that, not having made prior budget allocations, this country would not be able to host the rural youth population workshop. At that point, a decision was made to hold the training only in the Philippines.
1.2. Outline of official arrangements
The workshop and study tour, titled Inter-Asian Training on Rural Youth Population Programmes, was held from 16 to 29 October 1994 at the Philippine Centre for Economic Development on the campus of the University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City. The organizers of the workshop were the Population Commission of the Government of the Philippines, in coordination with the Presidential Commission for Youth Affairs. A three-person delegation came from each of the five countries of China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam.
The total FAO contribution was $US 56000 and the Commission on Population (POPCOM) of the Government of the Philippines, the executing agency of the project, made all the logistical arrangements and prepared the entire three-week programme activities, including the workshop sessions and a three-day field trip.
The national government's commitment to enhancing youth welfare, with support from local and community leaders, and the private sector of POPCOM's Agenda for Adolescent Development, made POPCOM a fitting and responsive partner in this inter-Asian subregional programme for rural youth. POPCOM is the overall coordinator of the Philippine Population Management Programme (PPMP), which seeks to promote improved quality of life by ensuring a balance between and among, population, resources and environment to achieve sustainable development.
PPMP's thrust on adolescent development constitutes a major component of the national population education programme. It supports rural development, recognizing heavy rural to urban migration, largely among young people. POPCOM coordinates rural youth programmes to provide opportunities and resources for empowering the growing number of rural youth as active agents of development.
1.3. Objectives of the project
The objectives of the project were to:
- assist the governments of China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam to identify and better understand suitable youth programmes and activities which could be used in rural youth population education, vocational training and employment programmes;
- enable China and Viet Nam to share the rural youth population education activities being undertaken in the respective countries under the FAO/UNFPA-funded project INT/92/P94, Integration of Population Education Programmes for Rural Youth;
- introduce the FAO population education methodologies and materials; and
- lay the groundwork for possible initiation of rural youth population education activities in Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand, using funds from INT/92/P94.
<section>2</section>
2. Results and conclusions
2.1. Initial preparation
As part of the workshop, each country prepared a paper which included a country profile; the demographic and socio-economic situation of rural youth; government policy on youth and youth development; current rural youth programmes; problems and issues; and future plans. POPCOM prepared a special country report on Philippine youth programmes from the perspective of youth organizations, government organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Several months prior to the workshop and study tour, POPCOM formed a national advisory committee and management team to oversee the implementation of project activities. It provided advisory services and was responsible for the planning and conceptualization of the workshop processes; logistics and methodologies; identification of resource persons, training facilitators and choosing country report writers; recommending appropriate sites for the study tour; and monitoring and evaluating the entire process.
FAO Representatives in each of the five countries assisted with the identification and selection of appropriate candidates to participate in the training.
2.2. The workshop
The workshop was officially opened by the Executive Director of POPCOM. She gave a brief overview of the Philippine Population Management Programme, emphasizing the programme's main objective of achieving a sustainable balance among population, resources and environment to meet the national development goal of a better quality of life for every Filipino family.
The FAO Programme Officer in Manila welcomed the participants on behalf of FAO and encouraged them to continue to study youth programmes with a view to having young people more effectively involved in nation building.
The keynote address was presented by the Chairman of the Presidential Council for Youth Affairs. He urged all participants to give emphasis to the identification of the special needs of the youth population and to establish suitable programmes in response to these needs. Such programmes include support mechanisms for the education and counseling of youth in areas of gender relations and equality, violence, responsible family planning, family life, reproductive health, sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS prevention.
The Chief of the POPCOM Information Management and Research Division and overall project coordinator introduced the participants, the training facilitators, the secretariat and the guests.
After the opening session, the rest of the first day was devoted to an overall orientation of the workshop. It also included get acquainted and team building activities. On the second day, each national delegation presented a paper describing the situation of rural youth programmes in their respective countries.
The rural youth Officer from FAO Headquarters led a day-long workshop that included four main sessions:
- an explanation of the early development of FAO population education programmes for rural youth, including a presentation of the 11 FAO prototype rural youth population education leader guides in English;
- briefing on the current status of the UNFPA-funded projects in Africa, Asia and Latin America;
- an examination of educational design elements and principles of teaching and learning for integrating FAO population education materials into rural youth programmes; and
- a work group session for country teams to develop strategies for integrating FAO materials into rural youth programmes.
Other major presentations during the week included: The Population Education Programme; Adolescent Health, Sexuality and Development Programme in the Philippines; National AIDS-STD Prevention and Control Programme; Technical Vocational Education and Training; Income-Generating Projects; Lessons in Rural Financial Mobilization; and Social Services.
2.3. The study Tour
The three-day study tour included visits to project sites of the Agricultural Research and Development Foundation (ARDF) in Nueva Ecija and Bulacan. Income-generating projects of women and youth groups were observed, including swine fattening, poultry, Tilapia breeding, food processing, sewing, duck raising, carabao breeding, and dairy. The areas of rural credit, income-generating projects and social services were presented, along with general information about the project activity.
A visit was also made to see work of the International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (IIRR) in Silang, Cavite, to learn about the incorporation of reproductive health, AIDS and family planning into rural development programmes. The work of IIRR includes developing, demonstrating and promoting globally adaptable rural reconstruction approaches, including integrated programme development, community organization and external linkages. For the benefit of the participants, emphasis was given to the community health, reproductive health and nutrition component of IIRR work.
2.4. Country proposals for rural youth population education project
As a result of the workshop, each country team drafted and submitted to FAO Headquarters proposals on rural youth population education with programmes in their respective countries, for possible funding from the FAO INT/92/P94 project. Although there is no additional money immediately available for Viet Nam and China, they both prepared proposals on strategies for follow-up activities to build on population education work for rural youth already under way in their countries.
Representatives from China, which has completed most of the population education activities under INT/92/P94, were able to share recent first-hand experiences which benefited the other four countries. Viet Nam is still in the very early stages of implementing its population activity with INT/92/P94. From the workshop these participants gained special skills and knowledge that can be used immediately as they return to work on their rural youth population education project.
Based on the participants' evaluations and all other indications, the workshop was a success in terms of accomplishing the intended objectives. In fact, the training went beyond the original objective of assisting the government representatives of China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam to identify and better understand suitable rural youth programmes and activities which can be used in rural youth population education, vocational training and employment programmes. As a result of the workshop, at least two of the three countries - Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand - will implement an FAO rural youth population education activity under INT/92/P94. Proposals have been written and submitted by all three countries.
<section>3</section>
3. Recommendations
An overall recommendation is to build on the momentum generated by this workshop to continue to strengthen and expand rural youth population education activities in Asia. The following specific recommendations are proposed:
3.1. Governments in the region should consider the provision of additional funding to support the strengthening and expansion of rural youth programmes as effective vehicles for delivering critical population education messages to out-of-school boys and girls living in rural areas.
3.2. The Governments of China and Viet Nam, based on the positive experiences in working with FAO/UNFPA population education methods and materials, should explore ways of expanding the work in other priority regions of their respective countries.
3.3. The Governments of Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia should prepare and submit to FAO proposals for funding of pilot rural youth population education activities under the FAO/UNFPA inter-regional project INT/92/P94, Integration of Population Education for Rural Youth.
3.4. Governments should work with UNFPA Country Programmes Officers to incorporate activities for rural youth as part of a comprehensive strategy for population education in their countries.
