<title>Organization, operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes - FAO irrigation and drainage paper 40. Organization, operation and manintenance of irrigation schemes</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Good management of irrigation schemes is becoming increasingly recognized as an essential means to achieve successful irrigated agriculture. Consequently, in recent years, there has been a noticeable interest in studying existing irrigation schemes in order to learn where improvements can be made in their operation and maintenance. However, much of the recent literature on the topic tends to concentrate on the description and analysis of case studies in one or a few countries in a region. This paper is intended to fill a gap by taking a more global look at the experience gained in several places in various parts of the world and drawing some generalized conclusions.
Part I of the text is mainly concerned with organizational and management issues. An attempt has been made to provide a spectrum of the possible alternatives with some analysis of their pros and cons. Although it is recognized that local circumstances have a strong influence on defining the project organizational structure, improvements can be made based on experience gained somewhere else under similar circumstances.
Broad guidelines are provided in Part II for the activities that should be carried out in an irrigation scheme. Each of the chapters provides guidance, but they are not intended to be used as a manual. Each country or region must prepare its own operating manuals in the light of its specific circumstances.
During the long preparation of the publication, the author was exposed to a certain amount of experience at first hand and also had the opportunity to read many unpublished papers and reports. He received generous help from many professional people and institutions. It would be impossible to thank them individually without risking regrettable omissions, but the opportunity is taken here to thank them all.
Special thanks are due to Mr. A. Bottrall, Organization and Management Specialist, Overseas Development Institute, London, for his considerable contributions to Chapters 2 and 4, and subsequent reviews. The research work and fruitful cooperation with Mr. G.O. Uittenbogaard, Associate Expert, Irrigation Engineer, should also be acknowledged.
Finally, the author wishes to thank Ms. H. Tonkin for her commendable and dedicated work in editing the publication, and Ms. H. Smith Redfern and Ms. C. Tomalino Ricco for typing the publication.
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations
FSDC
Farm Systems Development Corporation
IA
Irrigation Association
IAS
Irrigation Assistance Service
IMS
Irrigation Management Service, USA
MPIS
Multi-purpose Public Irrigation Schemes
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
PIM
Programming and Implementation Management
PIS
Public Irrigation Scheme
PLAMEPA
Plan de Mejoriamiento Parcelario, Mexico (On-farm Improvement Plan of Mexico)
SAM
Sistema Alimentario Mexicano
SARH
Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos, Mexico
T&V
Training and Visit (system of extension)
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Rapid increases in the world's population have made the efficient use of irrigation water vitally important, particularly in poorer countries, where the greatest potential for increasing food production and rural incomes is often to be found in irrigated areas. It has therefore become a matter of serious concern in recent years that, despite their very high costs, the performance of many irrigation schemes has fallen far short of expectations.
It is becoming increasingly recognized that poor performance is not only a consequence of technical deficiencies in the design of irrigation systems (though this is also sometimes an important factor), but that many of the problems stem from weaknesses in the organization and management of the scheme. The measures most commonly favoured as a means of remedying these problems have often been incomplete, largely because issues of organization and management have not been analysed in a detailed and systematic manner. There has been a tendency to examine problems of water management at two levels: the very highest level - the national administration of water resources, river basin management; and the very lowest level - water management within individual farms and under conditions of small farm agriculture. The management of irrigation at the project level has, however, received scant attention.
It is important to have a rational overall framework for water administration which is consistent with the promotion of national objectives and policies. However, the development of such a framework may often entail major reorganization at the ministerial level, and this can take a long time to implement. It cannot be assumed that the most important micro-problems can be solved by concentrating attention exclusively on improving farmers' water management capabilities at the field and watercourse^1 levels. Support for such an assumption is sometimes sought by reference to the fact that technical irrigation efficiencies tend to be much lower at the watercourse and farm levels than in the main water delivery system. This, however, ignores the numerous reasons which may have contributed to these low efficiencies, including weaknesses in management of the main system. Only a comprehensive analysis of all the factors that may be contributing to poor performance at the lower levels
of the system can indicate the correct mixture of remedies required, in the correct sequence. In other words, organization and management at the project level needs to be fully reviewed, as well as constraints at the farmers' level.
^1 The term 'watercourse' meaning a tertiary canal is predominantly used in the Indian subcontinent.
The purpose of this paper is to help correct some of the imbalances commonly found in current thinking about irrigation organization and management by focussing on the provision of services at the project level. It aims to demonstrate to planners (whether they are concerned with new projects or older projects requiring improvement) the importance of an appropriate organizational structure, the application of suitable management methods and the provision of technically adequate services as factors determinant of good project performance. It also indicates, often in considerable detail, the guidelines to be followed in the course of any evaluation and/or planning exercise.
The focus on the project level is not meant to imply that improvement at the farm and watercourse levels is necessarily a less important issue. The need for farmers to be provided with effective irrigation assistance and extension services is strongly emphasized in the paper and, wherever justified, such services should be an integral part of water management organizations. There are, however, important implications on the sequence of action which can only be clearly understood if management problems at the field and watercourse levels are examined in the broader context of project management as a whole. For example, many recent studies of irrigation projects have indicated that (for various reasons, some of them connected with the technical skills of operating staff, some with social factors) main system water distribution is frequently very unsatisfactory. Where this is the case, it follows that proposals to improve water management practices at the field and watercourse
levels, in the absence of simultaneous or prior measures to improve practices or the irrigation system at the project level, will lead to disappointing results.
Water distribution is clearly of central importance in any irrigation project, but many other aspects of project organization and management also have a profound influence on performance. These include the project's organizational structure, its overall direction and coordination, and the provision of other services such as operation, maintenance, irrigation assistance to farmers, finance and administration.
Considerable emphasis has been placed on the establishment of a suitable organizational structure because in many instances poor performance of irrigation schemes is due to inappropriate organizational structures. Unsuitable organizations can be found in countries with little experience in irrigation, and sometimes organizational structures are tried out on the basis that they were successful somewhere else. Such structures are also found in countries with a long tradition of irrigation where obsolete water laws limit the planners' possibilities to introduce more dynamic or more suitable organizational forms. The paper provides some general criteria and guidelines to help planners to identify a suitable organization. Specific guidelines cannot be given since local conditions will bear strongly on decisions regarding the structure of the organizations.
Technical activities related to operation, maintenance, irrigation assistance to farmers, administration and finance are covered in the paper in considerable detail. Organizational aspects related to the management of these services, such as manpower requirements and possible alternatives for the organization of the technical services, are discussed as well. Therefore the paper should also be of interest to the technical and administrative staff engaged in these functions, and their observations on the text would be highly appreciated.
The gathering of data to provide some standards for manpower needs and the use of machinery has been a long and difficult process since data often differ greatly due to wide variations in local circumstances. The standards provided are reasonable averages of the most consistent data that could be obtained through personal experiences and communications. Nevertheless, they should be taken as orientations which must be tested and verified locally before project implementation. There is still considerable scope for detailed research in this field at country level, and for different agro-climatic regions.
There is a great need to train professionals and medium level technicians in matters related to organization and management. Unfortunately, with very few exceptions, the subject is largely neglected in the curricula of universities and postgraduate courses. The present paper, since it deals with the subject in a rather comprehensive manner, should be useful to introduce the subject to students. In order to introduce the paper to a wider audience, efforts have been made to reduce the use of mathematical formulae or detailed technical discussions in the main text. For those interested in the detailed discussions of some of the technical issues the annexes and references provide further information.
<section>4</section>
1. Goals and irrigation organizational structures
1.1 Associations, institutions and organizations
1.2 Goals, objectives and targets
1.3 The organizational hierarchy of goals
1.4 Main types of organizational structures
1.5 Segregated organizational structures
1.6 Integrated organizational structures
The theory of goals has become a useful tool in water resources planning. Some of the ideas developed are used here to visualize interrelationships that can occur within the organizational framework of an irrigation scheme. Some terminological distinctions appear necessary before initiating the exercise.
1.1 Associations, institutions and organizations
When individuals establish agreements among themselves to achieve a common goal, an association is born. One or several groups of individuals is then vested with the responsibility for implementing the agreements. These groups are the executive bodies of the founded association.
While the term "association" is linked to the desire of a group of individuals to act in common, the term institution originates generally from the desire of the government to achieve a certain goal. In many instances the government delegates authority to a group of individuals with the responsibility of achieving this goal. The way in which this group of individuals organize themselves to pursue the goal constitutes the new institution.
Though the above illustrates some distinctions between the terms "institution" and "association", the difference is far from clear. Some authors, such as Hutchins (1952), use the term "institution" for any kind of social organization. However, in the present paper the term "institution" is used mainly in relation to government concerns, and "association" in connection with farmers' groups.
The term organization is perhaps the most complex of all and is used with a variety of meanings. It is used here in a generic sense as the design of any kind of social arrangements between individuals - regardless of whether they are farmers or government officials - to achieve a goal or set of goals. Therefore the term is used recurrently in this text to define any kind of association, institution or possible combination of these.
1.2 Goals, objectives and targets
Goals are defined as positive attributes or characteristics which individuals or groups of individuals strive to achieve. The term is therefore used for attributes of a very general nature which are beyond precise definition as, for example, promotion of social welfare, maintenance of security, environmental enhancement. They are human aspirations held by individuals or societies sufficiently broad and multifaceted to ensure unanimity as to their appropriateness but perhaps there is disagreement as to how they are explicitly defined.
The achievement of a goal implies the realization of other goals, which in turn can only be achieved by surmounting others of lower rank. Thus, in a structural sense, goals can be arranged in an order of hierarchy where a higher position conveys a greater generality. Some authors differentiate between "ultimate aims" and "goals" by saying that ultimate aims are goals of greater universality. The distinction appears rather arbitrary and the term goal is preferred in the text.
In a strict sense, an objective is a goal of lower rank in the hierarchy of goals. This is why both terms are frequently used interchangeably in water resources literature. However, objectives, contrary to goals, connote a more specific relationship to a particular policy, programme or project, such as building a dam, appropriate use of water, etc.
Targets are quantified objectives. The establishment of targets implies a formal commitment to reach a clearly specified objective and should be preferred, where possible, to objectives. In establishing a target it is not only important to know what is to be reached but also the starting point.
1.3 The organizational hierarchy of goals
Statements such as "betterment of farmers' welfare" are indisputable goals but are operationally meaningless. Thus there is a need to translate this human aspiration into more tangible objectives, which in turn can be converted into measurable targets.
The division of the goal "betterment of farmers' welfare" into other subgoals is subject to many considerations of a socio-political nature. For the purpose of the model developed here the traditional idea that farmers' welfare has its origin in the following two subgoals has been adopted:
- a higher income level
- improvement of social facilities (education, sanitation, recreation, housing, etc.).
For the purpose of the present chapter the way in which the main goal has been subdivided is not so important as the fact that it has to be subdivided into more explicit objectives. In fact one of the tasks of the planner would be to identify the relative importance of these goals in increasing farmers' welfare. For instance, the improvement of housing facilities may be highly relevant in continental climates where the climate is rigorous, but this is certainly not the case where a tropical climate imposes less heavy requirements on the housing facilities.
In theory, the higher income level derives from an increase in agricultural production sold at remunerative and relatively constant prices.
Greater production is only possible when water, other inputs and resources are available at the correct time and are all used in an appropriate way.
In summary, the improvement of the farmers' welfare can be subdivided into goals of minor order indicated in Figure 1. The most important consequence of the diagram is that the objectives at different levels are hierarchically dependent and no single objective at a superior level can be fully reached without achieving those at the immediately lower level. An example well known to farmers is that the higher income necessitates an increase in production but greater production is not always a guarantee of greater income.
The figure illustrates that there are four main goals, which are classified from the low to high level:
- appropriate use of water
- appropriate use of other agricultural inputs
- remunerative selling of agricultural produce
- improvement of social facilities
for which it may be necessary to provide some kind of institutional support if the final goal is to be achieved. One can reasonably assume that the remaining goals, such as greater agricultural production, greater income and betterment of the farmers' welfare will be automatically reached if the others are achieved.
Fig. 1 The organizational hierarchy of irrigation schemes
Indeed, the achievement of these four goals implies the existence of certain prerequisities such as 'know-how' by the farmers and the availability of capital. Should these prerequisites not exist, the corresponding institutional support will have to be provided in terms of extension, research and credit.
1.4 Main types of organizational structures
The foregoing ranking of goals indicates that there are two main approaches to achieve a given goal:
A. The Segregated Approach: This approach assumes that the final goal selected - betterment of the farmers' welfare, the increase of production or any other - can be reached by the interaction of individual organizations having as main objectives some of those illustrated in Figure 1, i.e. appropriate use of water, appropriate use of other agricultural inputs, remunerative selling, etc. Thus the organizational structure of the project is made up of a number of organizations acting independently but in a coordinated manner. This is called a "Segregated Organizational Structure".
B. The Integrated Approach: On the contrary, this approach assumes that the final goal can only be achieved by an organization having different departments or sections whose tasks are the achievement of the independent objectives formerly mentioned. This is called an "Integrated Organizational Structure".
In fact, these two approaches represent two different philosophies. The segregated approach implies the existence of dynamic social groups capable of developing their own organizations according to their needs and the organization develops from the bottom to the top. The second approach recognizes that, in the absence of such groups, it is necessary to have a centralized management providing for the needs of the individuals, and the organization develops from the top to the bottom.
1.5 Segregated organizational structures
As stated earlier, a segregated organizational structure is made up of a number of units acting independently, but in a coordinated manner, to achieve the final goal of the betterment of the farmers' welfare. In other words, there is one organization that provides for the appropriate use of water, another, or several, for the appropriate use of other inputs, and others for the remunerative selling of the produce, etc. Figure 2 illustrates a typical segregated organizational structure. Although this appears a highly desirable approach since it allows the development of each organization according to the specific needs, experience shows that all too frequently the establishment of the organizations related to inputs other than water never materializes. The reason for this is that water is needed by every farmer and the corresponding organization is established in one way or another as soon as water becomes available; however, the need for the other organizations (marketing,
cooperatives, etc.) is felt in so many different ways by the individual farmers that the sheer diversity results in the fact that they are not established. This, indeed, handicaps the achievement of the final goal. In order to get a segregated organizational structure working properly, it is necessary to motivate and promote the formation of the organizations that provide the other needed supporting services, and this often has to be done by the government.
The characteristics of the organizations needed to achieve an appropriate use of water will be described later in the text. Other organizations, such as cooperatives for different purposes: marketing, machinery, production, savings, social organizations, etc., will not be dealt with since they go beyond the scope of this publication and have already been described and studied by many other authors.
Fig. 2 Typical segregated organizational structure
Fig. 3 Typical integrated organizational structure
1.6 Integrated organizational structures
Integrated organizational structures are those where the final goal is achieved through the interaction of several departments or organizational units, each one aiming at lower goals, all connected through a clear line of command (Figure 3). These organizational structures are frequently referred to as "project authorities" or "project organizations", since they deal with most of the socio-economic issues of an irrigation project in an integral manner.
An organization aiming at covering all the many aspects of irrigated crop production, marketing and socio-economic factors must have a very complex structure to cover all the different situations. Therefore the first, and perhaps, most important, condition for the establishment of these organizations is a certain degree of homogeneity in the socio-economic conditions of the farmers. This is the main reason why this type of organization is mostly found in settlement projects, state farms, state cooperatives, and suchlike. Otherwise the complexity of the administration is such that the chances for failure are too high to be taken.
Integrated organizational structures are useful to overcome difficulties in coordination at national level. For instance, it is frequently mentioned in project evaluations that the credit system through normal banking' institutions only reaches a minority of the irrigators, due to lack of sufficient coordination between the banking institutions and the irrigation projects. To remedy this, in some settlement projects, the organization provides the farmer with all the necessary inputs on a credit basis and at the end of the harvest all the credited inputs are subtracted from the total income and the rest returned to the farmers. Such measures are indeed a guarantee that all irrigators enjoy equal opportunities, as far as credit is concerned. The same can be said about other necessary services such as extension, applied research, etc. However, because the establishment of integrated organizational structures may duplicate the functions undertaken by existing institutions,
special care should be taken to analyse the potential risks of overlapping of any functions and activities.
Integrated organizational structures may be a good way to solve problems of coordination at the national level, but in order to be able to do so they must be well-organized and equipped with competent technical staff and sufficient financial means to undertake their many responsibilities successfully. This implies firstly that there must be a central/national institution capable of procuring the technical and financial support necessary at the project level and, secondly, that the government must be willing to delegate a considerable amount of authority and autonomy to the individual project authorities. Otherwise there will be permanent conflict between the project authority and the departments of the national institutions dealing with credit, research, extension, etc.
<section>5</section>
2. Planning the project organization
2.1 Organizational structure at the project level
2.2 Organizational structure at the small group level
2.3 Organization at the government level
The success of an organization depends partly on its structure (the way in which tasks and responsibilities are formally allocated among its members) and partly on its management process (the way in which decisions are taken within the existing structure). This chapter and the next are concerned with questions of organizational structure. The management process will be considered in Chapter 4.
In the planning of an irrigation organization the most important questions about structure arise at the project level itself and also - particularly in small-farmer agriculture - at the level of the small local group.^1 In each case, the choice of an appropriate structure will depend on a large number of factors specific to the particular objectives and context of the organization concerned. In other words, there is no single "ideal" structure which is best for all organizations in all circumstances. The principal factor affecting choice of structure at the project level will be discussed first and then those affecting choice at the small local group level.
^1 The expression "small local group" is used here to designate those groups of farmers (informal associations) which are formed on the basis of the watercourses and are characteristic of many irrigation projects in the Far East and Asia.
2.1 Organizational structure at the project level
2.1.1 The organization of water management activities
2.1.2 The distribution of responsibility
Organizational structure has a horizontal and a vertical dimension. The horizontal dimension is concerned with the way in which the various activities essential to the achievement of an organization's objectives can best be differentiated (in accordance with the specialist skills required for each activity) and then coordinated in order to produce the necessary unity of effort among the resulting specialist units. The vertical dimension is concerned with the way in which responsibilities are distributed among members working at different levels of the organization and its component units, from the project to the small group level. We will deal first with horizontal dimension and later with the vertical dimension.
i. Large projects: alternative forms and functions
Two of the most "important factors affecting the choice of an appropriate form of horizontal organization at the project level are the size of the project area and its level of economic development. Other important factors include the objectives of government and the character of existing institutions in the area concerned.
Large projects (usually greater than 200 ha and/or more than 500 farm units) can be defined as projects which require a substantial professional staff to manage them. A survey of existing large project organizations would show that all of them concern themselves with certain central water management activities. These activities include water distribution and system maintenance (always); assessment and collection of water charges or similar fees and taxes (nearly always); and assistance and extension to farmers on water management at the local level (sometimes). Certain general management services - finance, personnel, planning and monitoring - are also provided.
However, many irrigation organizations also embrace other sets of activities: agricultural services (agricultural extension, possibly with research support); commercial services (input supplies, credit, marketing); and basic infrastructure and social services (housing, roads, schools, health services, etc.).
The case for including commercial services within the project organization is usually very strong in new settlement schemes. It is also very important that, on new projects in already settled areas, the project management should ensure satisfactory provision of commercial services. If other existing agencies in the area are poorly developed, the project should be invested with the responsibility for these services, at least initially until the other agencies acquire greater strength. The provision of adequate marketing facilities is likely to be particularly needed in many new projects, because the introduction of irrigation will create a potential for cultivating crops which have previously been unknown in the area; if farmers lack reliable marketing outlets for these crops they will not be prepared to take the risks of adopting them.
In certain types of project (usually settlement projects) the government may have to pay particular attention to making commercial services an integral, indeed central, part of the project organization. The key to these "integrated management" schemes is the project management's ability to control a single-channel marketing outlet. Such an organizational pattern is usually feasible only when the project has been established for the primary purpose of producing high-value cash crops, often for export. The farmers' obligation to sell their produce through the project organization makes it possible for the management to deduct a sufficient amount from the farmers' final payment to cover the cost of the other services it provides - water distribution, agricultural extension, credit, input supplies, in some cases even mechanized land preparation - and management's direct control over these activities can be used to ensure greater timeliness of throughput as well as quantity and
quality of production.
Where conditions for an "integrated management" approach do not exist, i.e. in areas where farmers are allowed a relatively free choice as to the crops they cultivate, the reasons for wishing to include commercial services as one of the continuing activities of project management are much less compelling. The establishment of single-channel control is extremely difficult in conditions of multichoice cropping, especially if food crops predominate. Over time, as farmers become increasingly familiar with irrigated agriculture and alternative commercial service institutions develop in response to the new production patterns, the need for the project organization to concern itself directly with commercial services will decline.. This does not mean that it can afford to abandon its responsibilities in this area altogether. To give one example, it is an important function of irrigation management at all stages of small-farmer development to ensure the timely supply of other inputs
besides water. However, once other specialist agencies are in a position to take direct responsibility for such services, the best results may be achieved through good coordination between them and the project organization.
The inclusion of responsibility for basic infrastructure, social services and commercial services within the irrigation organization (in addition to water management and agricultural services) is usually necessary where the area to be irrigated has hitherto been little developed and there are no other institutions in the area capable of performing these tasks satisfactorily.
The project organization must almost inevitably take direct responsibility for providing the necessary infrastructure and social services on new settlement schemes. In the case of projects whose purpose is to supply irrigation water to already settled areas, there will usually be less need for this. There may well be a need for the project management to participate in decisions concerning infrastructural development (particularly roads) but it should often be possible for direct responsibility for planning and implementation in these fields to be left to other agencies which are already in existence.
This raises the question as to when water management and agricultural extension activities should be combined within one organization and when a specialized organization should be established for water management activities alone, with agricultural extension and all other service activities being performed by separate agencies.
Again, this is partly a question of the level of economic development of the area concerned and of the farmers' experience with irrigated agriculture. Where the farmers' level of education and technical knowledge is low, there are usually considerable advantages in combining agricultural extension and water management activities within the same project organization. There are additional 