<title>Report of the 19th FAO Regional Conference for Africa (ARC/96/REP)</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary of the main recommendations
Country Statements and General Debate on the Food and Agriculture Situation in the Region
For the Attention of Governments
The Conference:
1. recommended that the related necessary education programmes and policies be implemented by countries (programmes and policies that are related to increased women's participation in policy and decision making); (para. 17f)
2. recommended that neighbouring countries and the international communities cooperate in finding common solutions (solutions to the varied conditions that led to internal upheavals, internal and external migration which had adverse implications for food security) (para. 17h).
For the Attention of FAO
The Conference:
3. urged FAO to assist countries with their research and technology transfer/exchange in these areas, for example, in the use of draught power for irrigation (land preparation and water lifting); (para. 17g)
Report on FAO Activities in the Region 1994-95 (ARC/96/2)
4. recommended that the Programme (Special Programme on Food Production in support of Food Security in LIFDCs) be expanded to cover more countries in the region; (para. 18a)
World Food Summit and Report of the Technical Committee For the Attention of FAO
5. recommended that the document be revised to include the points listed in paragraph 20. (para. 20j)
Future Ministerial Meetings in Conjunction with Sessions of COFI and COFO (ARC/96/8)
For the attention of FAO
6. called for FAO's financial support to facilitate participation as required in such meetings. (para. 22e)
Any Other Business
For the attention of Governments
7. appealed to FAO member states to ratify the International Convention on Desertification so as to ensure the release of necessary funding for the programme. (para. 26b)
Date and Place of the Twentieth FAO Regional Conference for Africa For the Attention of FAO
The Conference:
8. noted the offer of Ethiopia to host the Twentieth FAO Regional Conference for Africa which would be conveyed to the Director-General of the FAO, who would decide on the date and place of the Conference in consultation with Member Governments (para. 27).
<section>2</section>
I. Introductory items
Organization of the conference
Inaugural ceremony
Election of chairman. Vice-chairmen and appointment of rapporteurs
Adoption of the agenda and timetable
Organization of the conference
1. The Nineteenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa was held in the Conference Hall of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, from 16 to 20 April 1996.
2. The Conference was attended by 148 delegates from 44 Member Nations of the Region, 29 of which were represented at ministerial level; 11 observers from Member Nations outside the Region, two observers from the Holy See, 15 representatives of the United Nations Specialized Agencies, 67 observers from intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. A list of participants is given as Appendix B. The list of the documents is given in Appendix C.
3. The Independent Chairman of the FAO Council, Mr J.R. Lopez-Portillo also attended the Conference.
Inaugural ceremony
4. The inaugural ceremony was held in the same venue and the Conference was formally opened by the President of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr Blaise Compaore. Opening statements were also made by the Director-General of FAO, Mr Jacques Diouf, by the OAU Representative, Dr I.M. Nur, on behalf of the Secretary-General of the OAU, and by Mr. Adama Ouedraogo, "Grand Passage", a peasant farmer from the Yatenga District of Burkina Faso.
5. In his opening address, the President affirmed the relevance of organizing the 19th Regional Conference in Burkina Faso and reiterated the commitment of the Conference to provide solutions to the problems of hunger and poverty as well as to the struggle against under-development in the region.
6. He paid tribute to the Director-General of FAO for his efforts in championing the concerns of Africa at a time of difficult circumstances, particularly when multilateral cooperation was on the decline and commended him for his initiative to convene the World Food Summit. He expressed the hope that this Nineteenth Regional Conference would establish an enabling environment to highlight African dimensions of the problems of food in general, including the concerns of farmers, women and children. He referred to the experiences of Burkina Faso in solving food security problems through water control measures, prevention of youth migration and women's contribution to increased food production. He also thanked FAO for the confidence shown by inviting him to join the International Board of Patrons of the World Food Summit. The full text of the statement of His Excellency the President is contained in Appendix F.
7. The FAO Director-General, in his opening statement, expressed his gratitude to the Government and people of Burkina Faso and reiterated his concern regarding the agricultural situation in Africa. He enumerated the enormous difficulties confronting the continent and said that it was the reason why FAO decided to launch a large-scale operation to engender a solemn commitment at the highest level to eliminate hunger and malnutrition and to undertake concerted action at global, regional and national levels to ensure food security for all. He explained that this was the underlying aspiration behind the organization of the World Food Summit which would be held in Rome from 13 to 17 November this year.
8. He highlighted the attributes of the World Food Summit which would adopt a Policy Statement and a Plan of Action for Universal Food Security and mentioned the related preparatory activities. He said that the Summit would be the first time in the 50 years since FAO was founded that a meeting on this issue was being held at the level of Heads of State and Government. He recounted special programmes already initiated by FAO to offer solutions to the food insecurity sit nation and referred to brighter prospects in the aftermath of the Summit. The full text of the Director-General's statement is contained in Appendix G.
9. On behalf of the OAU Secretary-General, Mr Nur expressed his gratitude to the FAO Director-General for the invitation to the Organization to participate at this Conference. He further thanked the Government and people of Burkina Faso for their hospitality and for the excellent conference facilities made available. He drew the attention of the Conference to two resolutions adopted by the policy-making bodies of the OAU concerning an African Common Position on food security and agricultural development, and noted that pursuant to these resolutions a draft document had been prepared by the General Secretariat and was submitted to the Conference for consideration. He further mentioned that the proposed Common Position would be submitted to the forthcoming OAU Summit in Yaounde, Cameroun, scheduled for 8 to 10 July 1996 for consideration and endorsement prior to its transmission to the World Food Summit in Rome.
10. In his statement, Mr Adama Ouedraogo expressed his appreciation for the opportunity to address the Conference and commended FAO for inviting a peasant farmer to address such an august assembly. He elucidated the wisdom of utilizing farmers knowledge to solve problems of hunger especially as this was a basic concern to them. He opined that interaction between farmers themselves, from both the developed and developing world as well as between them and other actors, including donors, would be particularly productive especially in areas of water management, livestock rearing, processing and food preservation. He extended a warm welcome to all present. His full statement is contained in Appendix H.
Election of chairman. Vice-chairmen and appointment of rapporteurs
11. The Conference at its first working session elected Mr Michel Koutaba, Minister of Agriculture and Animal Resources of Burkina Faso as its Chairman. In a short acceptance speech, the Minister expressed his gratitude for the confidence placed in him and said that he was certain that with the cooperation of all concerned he would guide the Conference efficiently and successfully.
12. The Conference then elected the rest of the members of the bureau:
First Vice-Chairman:
Mr Abraham Iyambo, Deputy Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources of Namibia
Second Vice-Chairman:
Mr Dennis Norman, Minister of Agriculture of Zimbabwe
Rapporteurs:
a. Mr Mospshatla Mabitle, Minister of Agriculture, Cooperative Marketing and Youth Affairs of Lesotho
b. Mr Robert Sagna, Minister of Agriculture of Senegal
Adoption of the agenda and timetable
13. The Conference then considered and adopted the agenda and timetable (Appendix A).
<section>3</section>
II. Statements
Statement by the director-general of FAO
Statement by the independent chairman of the FAO council
Country statements and general debate on the food and agriculture situation in the region
Report on FAO activities in the region 1994-95 (ARC/96/2)
Statement by the director-general of FAO
14. The Director-General made his statement during the inaugural ceremony, which is reproduced in Appendix G.
Statement by the independent chairman of the FAO council
15. In his statement to the Conference, Mr J.R. Lopez-Portillo recounted the intense preparatory activities undertaken at all levels for the organization of the World Food Summit and said that scrutiny of related reports and statements had led to the identification of interesting issues, problems and interactions which affected food security. He referred to some of these as problems associated with economic stress, extremely low incomes, inadequate economic development, low grain stocks, and qualitative changes in supply and demand which had pushed up prices. He mentioned that a fundamental interaction that had to be considered was the linkage between population growth, consumption patterns, inadequate technologies and resulting environmental degradation which was the basis for sustainable food production and food security. In its turn, this also affected social and political stability, triggered migration and resulted in security concerns at regional and sub-regional
levels.
16. He noted that the World Food Summit would provide the right solutions for such linkage problems which would include self-reliance and more focused international effort. The Summit would give indications for very effective solutions, at all levels on, inter alia, the possibilities for better use of scarce water resources, adaptive use of indigenous plants, appropriate land tenure solutions, appropriate considerations relating to women in development, better terms of trade, focused aid and debt relief which would result in increased resources to countries of the region, and so on. He hoped that tills Conference would provide the necessary inputs from the African perspective and wished the participants success in their deliberations.
Country statements and general debate on the food and agriculture situation in the region
17. The Conference heard the presentations of the various delegations under this agenda item as well as those from WFP, OECD, UNICEF, IGAD and the World Institute of Phosphate. The Conference congratulated the Director-General of FAO, Mr Jacques Diouf, for his wise leadership and expressed satisfaction for the efficient way he had handled crucial issues affecting FAO and its Member Nations especially those of the African region. They agreed with and thanked him for his initiative to convene the World Food Summit (WFS) and hoped that its outcome would provide much needed solutions to their food and agricultural problems. Most of the countries intimated that they had implemented the necessary mechanisms to prepare for the WFS and that not only would their delegations to the WFS be led by their heads of state but that these heads of state had shown solidarity by accepting to join the International Board of Patrons of the Summit. The Conference reiterated the usefulness of
collaboration and cooperation to achieve common goals and enumerated impediments affecting the development of their countries for which solutions were needed. Some of these impediments were specific to individual states and sub-regions. In particular the Conference:
a. reaffirmed that food security was particularly crucial to African countries as it was the key to political stability without which economic and social development would be difficult to attain;
b. recalled the experiences by African countries from the worst food crisis ever which had resulted in escalating famine, hunger, suffering and death and noted the range of causes, both natural and man-made, including recurrent droughts, civil wars, poverty, debt crisis, excessive population growth, environmental degradation and hostile external economic environment;
c. noted that the adverse environmental, climatic and other developmental constraints notwithstanding, there were significant success stories in which African countries and sub-regions had overcome such handicaps and recommended that these needed to be properly analyzed and brought to the attention of the Summit so that African countries could be considered equal partners rather than subordinates in the development process;
d. realized the importance of food security strategies, improvement in household access to food, including increased food production, post-harvest handling, liberal credit facilities and improved food habits as approaches for controlling and preventing nutritional disorders including protein, calorie and micro-nutrient deficiencies;
e. observed that development plans which favoured increased food security had been formulated and other special measures such as feeding in schools, establishment of definite food and nutrition enhancement policies had been instituted in countries and that these were showing positive results;
f. acknowledged that strategies which involved increased women's participation in policy and decision making contributed to increased food security and recommended that the related necessary education programmes and policies be implemented by countries;
g. realized that environmental protection policies such as afforestation, land reform and preservation, protection of water resources, adequate transportation, conservation and utilization of natural resources, soil revitalization, etc., contributed to food security and urged FAO to assist countries with their research and technology transfer/exchange in these areas, for example, in the use of draught power for irrigation (land preparation and water lifting); and
h. noted the varied conditions that led to internal upheavals, internal and external migration which had adverse implications for food security and recommended that neighbouring countries and the international communities cooperate in finding common solutions.
Report on FAO activities in the region 1994-95 (ARC/96/2)
18. The Conference acknowledged the kind sentiments expressed by the various delegations, commending the good work of the Organization in the region during the past biennium. It noted that the greatest challenge facing Africa continued to be the steady decline in per caput agricultural production, with most of the countries, particularly the Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries (LIFDCs), having very low and inadequate food production. The Conference further noted that food insecurity continued to be exacerbated by the high rate of population growth, rapid urbanization, environmental degradation (particularly desertification) and political instability, and in this regard, appreciated that FAO had redirected its efforts to promote food security in the region through increased food reliance. The Conference thus urged FAO to continue this good work in particular, and the other developmental assistance projects, in general. The Conference in particular:
a. commended the implementation of the Special Programme on Food Production in support of Food Security in LIFDCs in ten African countries and recommended that the Programme be expanded to cover more countries in the region;
b. supported the Emergency Prevention System (EMPRES) for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases and called for donor support for the implementation of the long-term programme for the control of Locust;
c. observed that FAO's activities to promote Technical and Economic Cooperation among the member states of the region were being actively pursued and strengthened in cooperation with OAU and other Inter-Governmental Organizations, and was informed of the many and varied Technical Cooperation Networks that had been initiated as a major vehicle for promoting Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC) in the region;
d. acknowledged that FAO, through its Investment Centre had continued to assist members in the preparation of investment projects;
e. appreciated that cooperation with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) had been strengthened and that in this regard, a database on NGOs had been established in RAF and noted the achievements of the FAO/NGO Regional Consultation on the World Food Summit (WFS) which was successfully organized prior to the Conference;
f. welcomed the recent changes introduced to make the programmes and policies of FAO more effective especially the decentralization of its technical assistance to the region; it noted with appreciation the facilities offered by the Governments of Ghana and Zimbabwe for the expanded Regional Office for Africa and the new Sub-Regional Office for Southern and Eastern Africa, respectively; and
g. endorsed the focus of the 1996/97 programme which included such innovative programmes as, conservation and rehabilitation of African lands; the expansion of irrigated agriculture; implementation of farmer participatory training in IPM; aquaculture and fisheries management; agro-forestry; improvement of access to economic and social services; supporting existing national and regional capacity building and promotion of technical and economic cooperation among African countries.
<section>4</section>
III. Discussion items
World food summit and report of the technical committee
World food summit and report of the technical committee
19. The following documents indicated on the agenda were considered by the Conference:
- ARC/TC/REP/1: Report of the Technical Committee
- ARC/TC/REP/2: Contribution of the 19th FAO Regional Conference for Africa to the Draft World Food Summit Documents
- ARC/96/3: World Food Summit: Policy Statement and Plan of Action
- ARC/96/4: World Food Summit: Food Security Situation and Issues in the Africa Region
- ARC/96/4.Sup.1: Food for All Campaign
Additional documents presented were:
- Draft OAU Common African Position on Food Security and Agricultural Development
- Report of the FAO/NGO Regional Consultation for Africa on the World Food Summit
20. The Conference examined the main document ARC/TC/REP/2 and its appendices which reported on the deliberations of the Technical Committee which had preceded the Conference. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the work done by the Committee in examining the related background documents and thereby providing the necessary additional inputs for enriching the contribution of the Conference to the draft World Food Summit documents. However, the Conference identified areas in the document which needed strengthening in order to improve its contents and focus for presentation as a true reflection of the concerns of the African region. In particular the Conference:
a. requested and obtained clarifications on procedural difficulties regarding preparation and presentation of a Common African Position by the Conference as an input to the World Food Summit;
b. recognized that indebtedness and the negative effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes, which were seriously affecting development efforts of African countries to improve food security (notwithstanding the fact that Africa had been left out of the benefits of the Marshall Plan and Green Revolution), were of primary concern to the countries and must be brought to the forefront of the document;
c. acknowledged that migration and the related problems of refugees, were important factors that contributed to food insecurity (for example, mass migration within and between borders of countries resulting from search for food), and were thus of fundamental concern to the countries. Consequently, they needed to be very strongly emphasized in the document;
d. recognized the harmful effects of trypanosomiasis and its contribution to food insecurity but was advised that the issue be considered within the ambit of animal disease prevention and control in general, since this would highlight more the basic concerns which embraced other livestock and crop diseases and pests;
e. stressed the valuable contribution of irrigation improvement and expansion, aquaculture and sustainable fisheries and forestry development and management to food security and agreed that these be included in the document;
f. stressed the need to give priority to measures aiming at associating food security with improved nutrition at household level, especially for women and children;
g. admitted that deterioration in terms of trade was a major cause of impoverishment in countries and should be given prominence in the document as well as the development and management of internal markets and trade;
h. considered that environmental issues, such as soil fertility, erosion, deforestation, etc., were of great concern to the countries in their efforts to overcome food insecurity and should be highlighted in the document;
i. agreed that human rights and democracy needed to be emphasized because of their importance for food security in the countries of the region and should be inserted appropriately in the report; and
j. recommended that the document be revised to include the above points, and made specific proposals on areas where some of them should be inserted.
21. On the basis of its extensive discussion, the Conference amended the report of the Technical Committee and adopted it for transmission to the Committee on World Food Security. This document is contained in Appendix D.
<section>5</section>
IV. Other matters
Future ministerial meetings in conjunction with sessions of COFI and COFO (ARC/96/8)
Proposal for shortening of regional conference reports (ARC/96/9)
Future ministerial meetings in conjunction with sessions of COFI and COFO (ARC/96/8)
22. The Conference commended the Director-General of FAO for his timely initiative in convening meetings of Ministers responsible for fisheries and forestry in March 1995. It provided them the forum to exchange ideas and share national experiences, as well as the opportunity to offer appropriate guidance to FAO in its work programme pertaining to these two sectors. Considering the many significant events which had taken place since the Ministerial Meetings of March 1995 and/or were planned for the immediate future, and recognizing that Ministerial guidance would still be necessary to enable FAO channel its technical assistance appropriately to member countries in future, the Conference:
a. endorsed the convening of meetings of Ministers by the Director-General in principle in conjunction with sessions of COFI and COFO;
b. agreed that the Director-General of FAO be given the flexibility for convening such meetings in future but opined that they should be held only when major issues pertaining to the sectors needed to be addressed;
c. agreed that the FAO Director-General hold consultations with member countries as appropriate before convening future Ministerial meetings;
d. advised that meetings of ministers would not be necessary in 1997; and
e. called for FAO's financial support to facilitate participation as required in such meetings.
Proposal for shortening of regional conference reports (ARC/96/9)
23. The Conference took note of the recommendations adopted in 1995 by the FAO Council and Conference respectively, requesting the Director-General to implement cost-saving measures on governance of FAO and examined the details of a proposal for shortening Regional Conference reports. The Conference was informed that the Technical Committee meeting which preceded it had endorsed the proposal and the new format of reporting. The Conference therefore:
a. agreed with the details contained in the proposal for shortening of Conference reports and approved the new format
<section>6</section>
V. Concluding items
Representation of the region on the consultative group on international agricultural research (CGIAR)
Any other business
Date and place of the twentieth FAO regional conference for Africa
Adoption of the report of the conference (including the technical committee report)
Closure of the conference
Representation of the region on the consultative group on international agricultural research (CGIAR)
24. The Chairman presented the recommendation of the Technical Committee to the Conference for confirmation of the nomination of a country to represent the region on the CGIAR.
25. The Conference accepted the election of Burkina Faso to succeed Ghana as the region's representative to the CGIAR for the four-year term, commencing 1997.
Any other business
26. The Conference recalled two areas on procedures in which FAO guidance was necessary, namely: (i) how to obtain assistance for locust control, (ii) ratification of the convention on desertification. The Conference:
a. was intimated of FAO's activities in connection with the EMPRES programme under which assistance for locust control was available;
b. acknowledged that the convention on desertification had been approved by ministers from member states in the region and appealed especially to FAO member states to ratify the convention so as to ensure the release of necessary funding for the programme.
Date and place of the twentieth FAO regional conference for Africa
27. The delegation of Ethiopia offered to host the Twentieth FAO Regional Conference for Africa. The Conference:
a. accepted by acclamation, this offer which would be conveyed to the Director-General of FAO who would decide on the date and place of the Conference in consultation with Member Governments.
Adoption of the report of the conference (including the technical committee report)
28. The Conference considered and approved the Technical Committee Report unanimously as given in Appendix E.
29. The Conference then considered and, after some amendments, adopted its report by acclamation.
Closure of the conference
30. The closing ceremony was performed by the Prime Minister of Burkina Faso, His Excellency, Mr. Kadré Désiré Ouedraogo, during which a closing statement was delivered on behalf of the Director-General of FAO by Mr. B. F. Dada, the FAO Assistant Director-General/Regional Representative for Africa, and a vote of thanks moved by Mr. Abraham Iyambo, Deputy Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources of the Republic of Namibia. In his closing statement, Mr. Dada recalled that the major part of the work of the Conference had been to review the various documents submitted by the Secretariat and other organizations in preparation for the World Food Summit. He pointed out that, in this regard, issues of particular relevance to Africa had been adequately addressed with a view to arriving at a common position and expressed his satisfaction that from the deliberations of the Conference, a report had emerged which would be forwarded to the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) as
the Common Position of the Africa Region for the World Food Summit.
31. Mr. Dada highlighted some of the key areas which the Conference had identified for specific action to enrich and sharpen the focus of the Policy Statement and Plan of Action for the World Food Summit and recalled that this resulted from the highly-spirited debates on issues of primary concern to the region. He underlined that this demonstrated the commitment of the participants to the implementation of policies that would ensure the availability of adequate food and access to it by all concerned. The Conference had closely examined the relationship between food security and nutrition and had recommended that it be more explicitly indicated in the report. The important role of women in contributing to household food security also needed to be given more recognition in the report.
32. In conclusion the Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative assured the Conference participants of the continued commitment of the FAO and its Regional and Sub-Regional Offices to assist countries of the region in their quest to achieve food security through increased self-reliance. He then expressed the sincere gratitude of FAO and all the distinguished delegates and observers to His Excellency the Prime Minister, Government and people of Burkina Faso for their kind invitation to host the Nineteenth Session of the FAO Regional Conference and for the excellent facilities provided as well as for the warm reception accorded the participants.
33. In moving the vote of thanks, Mr. Abraham Iyambo, Deputy Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources of the Republic of Namibia expressed, on behalf of all the delegates, deep appreciation and gratitude to the President of Burkina Faso for his kind words of wisdom at the opening of. the Conference and for the warm reception accorded participants during the period of their stay as well as for the excellent Conference facilities provided to ensure that the Nineteenth FAO Regional Conference was successfully organized in Ouagadougou.
34. He thanked the Prime Minister most sincerely for sparing the time to give audience to Heads of Delegations and for his kind words of wisdom and presence at the closing ceremony of the Conference. He also congratulated and thanked Mr. Michel Koutaba, Minister of Agriculture and Animal Resources of Burkina Faso, for his patience and understanding in guiding the proceedings of the Conference as its Chairman. Similarly he expressed thanks to the FAO Director-General for his wise leadership and initiative to convene the World Food Summit and to the FAO Assistant Director-General/Regional Representative for Africa and his staff for all the arrangements and guidance in organizing the Conference.
35. In his closing remarks, the Prime Minister of Burkina Faso, Mr. Ouedraogo, on behalf of the President of Burkina Faso, congratulated all the participants to the Conference for their achievements in bringing the Conference to a successful ending. He remarked that the fact that they had produced such a good report after three days of intense deliberations was a testimony of their determination to solve the seemingly intractable problem of food insecurity in the countries of the region and to their untiring efforts to achieve equity, justice and solidarity. Recalling the wise words of the President of Burkina Faso during the opening ceremony, he said:
"We remain firmly convinced that only the unswerving determination of the Africans to do more and better, relying overwhelmingly on themselves and their own ability to shape their destiny, will release this continent from hunger, malnutrition and under-development".
In this regard the Prime Minister expressed his appreciation for the good work being done by African countries to solve the problems of hunger and malnutrition.
36. Finally, he congratulated FAO, in general, and the Director-General, in particular, for the assistance in ensuring the successful outcome of the Conference and for the perseverance, determination and faith in assisting countries of the region to combat the problem of hunger. He thanked all those who had in various ways helped to make the Nineteenth FAO Regional Conference successful and wished delegates and others travelling, a safe journey back to their respective countries.
37. He then declared the Nineteenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa closed.
<section>7</section>
Appendix A - Agenda
Technical committee meeting: 16 - 17 April 1996
Plenary session: 18 - 20 April 1996
Technical committee meeting: 16 - 17 April 1996
I. INTRODUCTORY ITEMS
1. Opening of the Technical Committee
2. Election of the Technical Committee Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Appointment of the Rapporteur
3. Adoption of the Technical Committee Agenda and Timetable
II. TECHNICAL ITEMS
4. World Food Summit
5. Irrigation Improvement and Expansion: A Challenge to Food Security in Africa
6. African Agriculture and Natural Resources - Impacts of Recent Economic Reforms and Prospects to 