<title>Guidelines: Land evaluation for irrigated agriculture - FAO soils bulletin 55</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Some fifty million hectares of land could be developed for irrigated agriculture in the next twenty-five years. An even larger area needs rehabilitation or changes connected to intensified production. Irrigation developments are expensive and usually require investment and credit facilities, and mistakes are very costly. Therefore, almost all of this vast area will need to be evaluated to ascertain its suitability for the proposed irrigation systems.
The Land and Water Development Division of FAO has been concerned with land development for many years and has developed methods of assessing the suitability of land for specific uses so that reliable predictions and recommendations can be made (FAO 1976).
Irrigation is a major kind of land use with special requirements. So guidelines are needed to ensure that the methods adopted for evaluating and classifying land suitability are adequate. They are intended to provide guidance to land classification teams in the field and also to agencies responsible for investing in irrigation development so that they can make sure that the land resources evaluation provides a satisfactory basis for predicting the results of development.
This document is the result of collaboration among many specialists. An expert consultation recommended its production (FAO 1979) and a draft prepared by the USBR was discussed in 1983 by representatives of the World Bank, US Bureau of Reclamation (USBR), FAO and others. This provided the basis for a second draft prepared by consultants, Dr. B. Eavis (Land Resources Development Centre, U.K.) who wrote the main body of the report, and Dr. R. Struthers (formerly of the USBR), in consultation with Mr. M.F. Purnell and other staff members of FAO. The draft was circulated widely and numerous suggestions were incorporated in this version. FAO would like to thank all those who have contributed.
The procedures described are not intended as formal instructions but as optional guidelines to assist people to improve their own evaluations of their land and water resources. Likewise, the critical limits for land classes suggested in Part Two are guides which must be adapted to local circumstances. Comments and suggestions on their applicability, which will enable a future re-issue to be amended in the light of experience, should be sent to the Land and Water Development Division of FAO.
<section>2</section>
Summary
This bulletin is written for all concerned with land evaluation or irrigation planning, and is divided into two parts. Part One explains the recommended procedures of land evaluation and land suitability classification for irrigated agriculture and is based on the FAO Framework for Land Evaluation (1976). Part Two provides technical information on individual factors commonly of importance for the specification of critical limits in land suitability classification. The bulletin can be used as a general reference, for example, as a source of checklists, or more specifically, as a detailed guide to procedures and technical information.
The structure of the FAO Framework classification of land suitability is given in Table 1 of Part One and is described in detail in Appendix 1. Further details are given in FAO Soils Bulletin No. 32.
Chapter 1 of Part One outlines the role of land evaluation in the development of land and water resources for reconnaissance surveys through to the detailed design of irrigation projects. Chapter 2 explains the basic principles and terminology, and provides a summary of the procedures to evaluate and classify land for a specific use. The concepts of 'provisionally-irrigable' and 'irrigable' land at successive levels of detail, and the use of productivity and economic indices to evaluate land suitability classes are introduced in this chapter.
Chapter 3 provides a step-by-step guide to the procedures, accompanied by data record sheets (Formats) to assist land evaluators in the field. The individual steps are described in detail in subsequent chapters.
Chapter 4 explains how to select and describe relevant land utilization types (LUTs) or farming systems for evaluation. It then lists the factors that may affect a crop, its irrigation and management (i.e. land use requirements and limitations) and the land qualities or land characteristics, inputs and land improvements that should be evaluated.
Chapter 5 describes procedures for making a land resources inventory. The principal categories of data required are dealt with under eight headings: general characteristics of the project area, topography, soils, climate, water resources, drainage, vegetation and fauna, social and economic data.
Chapter 6 describes how land suitability for a specific use is classified by 'matching', and the assignment of land suitability classes to the land units.
Chapter 7 describes the economic evaluation of land suitability for irrigated agriculture. It explains economic criteria for separating land which is 'Suitable' from land which is 'Not Suitable' first In 'provisionally - irrigable' and later in 'irrigable' classifications. Procedures are set out for translating estimates of physical productivity into economic terms and for estimating ranges of permissible development costs. The chapter explains how to verify both the economic and financial viability of a project from the national and farmers' viewpoints.
Chapter 8 discusses the presentation of the results of land evaluation in land suitability maps and reports and Chapter 9 outlines the role of land suitability classification in the appraisal of irrigation development projects.
Chapter 10 gives a brief account of the USBR system of classifying land for irrigation with some comments on similarities and differences from that described in the foregoing chapters.
Part Two provides technical guidance on factors that are commonly used to determine land suitability class and on the setting of critical limits to help in the choice of land suitability classes. The discussion focuses on the individual factors and their interactions that may affect crop yields or production, management, land development costs, conservation and the environment, and socio-economic conditions.
The reader should use these Guidelines selectively, as not all the factors listed will be relevant in a given evaluation. The procedure provides for a sifting out of considerations deserving special emphasis in order to avoid needless investigations and unnecessary expense. The evaluation procedure is an essential preliminary to project planning and should be conducted in a manner that will minimize costs, but at a level that is consistent with achieving practicable recommendations.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 General
1.2 From project identification to project implementation
1.3 Levels of intensity of investigations
1.4 Planning a land evaluation investigation
1.1 General
A fuller use of land and water resources by the development of irrigation facilities could lead to substantial increases in food production in many parts of the world. The process whereby the suitability of land for specific uses such as irrigated agriculture is assessed is called land evaluation.
Land evaluation provides information and recommendations for deciding 'Which crops to grow where' and related questions. Land evaluation is the selection of suitable land, and suitable cropping, irrigation and management alternatives that are physically and financially practicable and economically viable. The main product of land evaluation investigations is a land classification that indicates the suitability of various kinds of land for specific land uses, usually depicted on maps with accompanying reports.
The evaluation and suitability classification system described in this bulletin is based on 'A Framework for Land Evaluation' (FAO 1976a). The structure of the FAO Framework classification is given in Table 1 with details in Appendix 1.
Table 1 STRUCTURE OF THE SUITABILITY CLASSIFICATION
ORDER
CATEGORIES CLASS
SUBCLASS
S Suitable
S1
S2
S2t
S2d
S2td
etc.
S3
N Not suitable
N1
N1y
N1z
etc
N2
Legend:
S1 Highly Suitable
S2 Moderately Suitable
S3 Marginally Suitable
N1 Marginally Not Suitable
N2 Permanently Not Suitable
Lower case letters in a Subclass indicate the nature of a requirement of limitation (e.g. t and d for topography and drainage). See list of Subclass symbols in Table 17. Land suitability units (subdivisions of Subclasses) may also be used to indicate minor differences in management.
1.2 From project identification to project implementation
In the early stages of land resources investigations, land evaluation studies indicate in a preliminary way, the suitability of land for alternative crops and irrigation methods and the land improvements that may be worthwhile. With further field studies, projects are identified and a plan of irrigation development is worked out. Individual projects are ranked in order of priority. The priority projects are planned in more detail and each project plan is progressively refined. The proposed crops, methods of irrigation, inputs and land improvements are progressively adjusted until a satisfactory project plan is produced.
Various criteria are used to decide whether a project plan is satisfactory. Apart from social and political objectives, which in practice are often paramount, a satisfactory plan is one that leaves the farmers, the community and the national economy better off. In other words, it results in the largest practicable increment in net benefits in an economic comparison of 'without project' and 'with project' situations. Such a plan will generally utilize limited resources of land, water or inputs for the most productive use. A satisfactory plan is one which is practicable and likely to work out under actual field conditions, not necessarily the most economically attractive on paper.
Land evaluation reports, maps and data continue to be useful after the planning stage during design and implementation, and for monitoring the project.' The detailed design of engineering works may depend on information collected earlier during the evaluation study. During the implementation and later management of the irrigation project, the land evaluation study provides a basis for monitoring changes in physical, social and economic conditions. In response to such changes, the recommendations may need modification and updating from time to time.
Currently, the rehabilitation of existing irrigation projects is an important aspect of land evaluation work. This highlights the need for thorough evaluation of land and water resources in the preparation of irrigation projects from the start; obviating the need for later rehabilitation.
1.3 Levels of intensity of investigations
The study of land and water resources and the production of irrigation development proposals may be conducted at national level, at the level of a river basin or hydrogeological basin, at project development level, or at village, farm or field level (Horning 1979). The types of studies undertaken at these different levels are indicated in Table 2.
Table 2 LEVELS OF INTENSITY OF INVESTIGATIONS
LEVELS
TYPES OF STUDY
TYPES OF SURVEY
National Basin
Project identification
Reconnaissance
Project
Pre-feasibility
Semi-detailed
Feasibility
Detailed
Village, farm or field
Detailed design
Very detailed
Project identification at a national and basin level leads to a need for prefeasibility and feasibility studies. These are followed by detailed design studies of water supply systems and field layouts. These various studies are served by different scales of survey.
At the national level, investigations are required to provide a Master Plan for land and water resources development including an assessment of the priorities accorded to respective regions and areas within the country. At the level of individual river basins or hydrogeological basins, investigations provide the basis for water development, water control for different uses and for land use planning (e.g. catchment projection, flood zoning, potential areas for irrigation, reclamation of delta and swamp and tidal zones, etc.). At the irrigation development project level, a plan is- formulated for investment in irrigation, drainage and flood protection. At the village, farm or field level, investigations provide information for farm water management and improvements or rehabilitation.
Reconnaissance surveys on a small scale i.e. 1:100 000 to 1:250 000 (Table 3) are useful for broad resource inventory (see Chapter 5), the identification of promising areas for development, and to provide a basis for more detailed study. Mapping units are usually compound and provide only estimates of the proportions of the conditions for the various land suitability categories. The 'land system' method of survey (Christian and Stewart 1968) is often used and it may suffice to broadly distinguish land which is promising for specific kinds of irrigated agriculture from land which is not. Economic studies at this, stage broadly indicate levels of production and income.
Semi-detailed surveys in pre-feasibility and feasibility studies are typically at scales from 1:25 000 to 1:50 000. Soil mapping units consist of a mixture of homogenous units (soil series) and compound units (e.g. soil associations). With sufficiently intense sampling, such surveys can be used for planning some developments up to the design stage.
Table 3 SURVEY INTENSITY, MAPPING SCALE AND KIND OF MAPS
KIND OF SURVEY
RANGE OF SCALES
Very High Intensity (very detailed)
Larger than 1:10 000
Soil maps showing special features or phases of soil series and occasionally soil complexes; detailed topographic maps with spot heights; cadastral maps; groundwater maps; present crops and vegetation etc.
High Intensity (detailed)
1:10 000 to 1:25 000
Soil maps showing phases of soil series and soil complexes; detailed topographic maps, groundwater maps, present land use, etc.
Medium Intensity (semi-detailed)
1:25 000 to 1:100 000
Soil maps showing series or associations of series; land system maps, physiographic units, topographic contour maps, present land use maps, etc.
Low Intensity (reconnaissance)
1:100 000 to 1:250 000
Soil maps with associations and phases of Great Groups or Subgroups; land system maps, physiographic or contour maps, present land use, climatic zones, etc.
Exploratory
1:250 000 to 1:1 000 000
Land units of various kinds.
Syntheses
Smaller than 1:1 000 000
Climatic maps, soil taxonomic maps, vegetation and land use, physiographic and geomorphological maps, agro-ecological zones, etc.
Detailed surveys may be required separately for soils and topography. Soil surveys, typically at scales of 1:10 000 to 1:25 000, with soils series and phases as the main soil mapping units, are used for project planning and implementation and for some surveys at village or catchment level, including layout of farms and irrigation systems. If topography is an important consideration in delineating land to be brought under command by gravity irrigation, a more intensive survey (e.g. at 1:5 000) may be required for land levelling and engineering applications.
Very detailed surveys, at scales of 1:5 000 or larger, are necessary where small contour intervals must be mapped in order to determine slope classes, or align irrigation and drainage channels.
1.4 Planning a land evaluation investigation
Land evaluation investigations may be carried out by a government department or private company with or without external help. Large irrigation projects often involve a client, a funding agency and a consultant organization. Prior to field work, initial discussions will take place to decide the objectives of the evaluation, and the data and assumptions on which it is to be based. The extent and boundaries of the area to be evaluated, and the kinds of land use or irrigation systems may either be prescribed in the terms of reference, or may be part of the evaluation. Appropriate physical or economic measures of suitability must be decided (see Section 2.4). The intensity and scales of the required surveys, and the phasing of activities should be agreed prior to the start of field work. The administrative, logistical and financial implications of the work being undertaken should also be agreed.
During initial discussions the requirements for reports and maps at various stages during the study should be decided. The regular production of progress reports and maps is a feature of all efficiently organized irrigation development investigations. These are essential as a basis for making major policy decisions at crucial stages of the study. It is also customary to produce interim reports in order to facilitate discussions and amendments before producing the final reports and maps.
This introductory chapter has indicated how the physical and economic aspects of land evaluation for irrigated agriculture become more detailed and refined as the land evaluation progresses from reconnaissance and project identification, to the detailed planning of irrigation projects. Chapter 2 describes the principles, terminology and outlines the FAO land evaluation procedures as applied to irrigated agriculture.
<section>4</section>
2. Evaluating and classifying land for irrigated agriculture
2.1 Basic principles
2.2 Terminology
2.3 Main procedures in land evaluation and classification
2.4 Land productivity index and economic measures of suitability
2.1 Basic principles
Certain concepts and principles are fundamental to successful land evaluation for irrigated agriculture. The basic principles advocated by the Framework for Land Evaluation (FAO 1976a), on which the methods described in this bulletin are based, are complementary to the principles of the US Bureau of Reclamation (see Chapter 10) which are specifically for irrigation.
i. The FAO Framework indicates that it is necessary to evaluate land and not just soils. The suitability of soils for irrigated crops is useful information but it is inadequate for making decisions about land use development. Therefore all relevant land characteristics including soils, climate, topography, water resources, vegetation etc. and also socio-economic conditions and infrastructure need to be considered.
ii. The main objective of land evaluation for irrigated agriculture is to predict future conditions after development has taken place. It is necessary to forecast the benefits to farmers and the national economy and whether these will be sustained without damage to the environment. Essentially a classification of potential suitability is required which takes account of future interactions between soils, water, crops and economic, social and political conditions.
iii. Some factors that affect land suitability are permanent and others are changeable at a cost. The costs of necessary improvements may be determined, so that economic and environmental consequences of development can be predicted. Typical examples of permanent features are temperature, soil texture, depth to bedrock and macro-topography. Changeable characteristics which may be altered deliberately or inadvertently, typically may include vegetation, salinity, depth to groundwater, microrelief, and some social and economic conditions (e.g. land tenure, accessibility).
iv. Land suitability must therefore be assessed and classified with respect to specified kinds of land use i.e. cropping, irrigation and management systems. It is obvious that the requirements of crops and irrigation and management methods differ, so the suitability of any land unit may be classed differently for various uses. It can be useless or misleading to indicate suitability for irrigated agriculture in general if the land developer needs to know about its potential for a specific irrigated crop or irrigation method.
v. Land evaluation requires a comparison of the outputs obtained with the inputs needed to generate these outputs, on different kinds of land. In other words, land suitability evaluation is essentially an economic concept, although formal economic analysis may not be necessary for simple surveys. Assessment of physical factors alone does not permit prediction of the results of irrigation; they must be translated into economic terms. It is most important to achieve a land classification that reflects differences in the long-term productivity and profitability of the land under irrigation rather than one that focuses only on physical differences without regard to their economic implications.
vi. The evaluation must take account of the local physical, political, economic and social conditions. The success of irrigation when it is introduced may depend as much on factors such as pricing policies for crops, labour supply, markets, accessibility, land tenure, etc. as on climate and soils. To avoid any misunderstanding all the factors which are relevant in the local situation should be explicitly stated rather than assumed. However, not all conditions need to be considered: only those that can usefully be taken into account in classifying land.
vii. The land suitability must be for sustained use, that is, permanently productive under the anticipated irrigation regime. Either there should be no land degradation anticipated or the cost of prevention or remedial action to control erosion, waterlogging, salinization etc. should be included in the comparison of inputs and outputs.
viii. The evaluation, where more than one apparently viable alternative exists, should compare more than one kind of use. Comparison may be, for example, between the present use and the proposed uses, or between different crops and irrigation methods. The reliability of the evaluation is enhanced by comparing inputs and outputs for several alternatives to ensure that the land use selected is not only suitable but the best of suitable alternatives.
ix. It is evident that an interdisciplinary approach is required, because no one discipline can cover all aspects of land suitability evaluation. Land evaluation can be carried out using general economic considerations to establish a context for selecting appropriate crops and management, and to establish the criteria for boundaries between suitable and unsuitable land. To make a quantitative evaluation at project or farm level, however, requires formal analysis in financial and economic terms.
x. Finally, as emphasized in Chapter 1, land evaluation is an iterative process leading to successive refinements and the need for surveys and investigations that are appropriate in scale and intensity during the different stages from reconnaissance to detailed project planning, and thereafter in successive phases of project implementation.
2.2 Terminology
Full definitions of the FAO Framework terminology are given in the Glossary at the end of this bulletin and in the appropriate Chapters. The most important terms are explained here prior to outlining the evaluation procedures.
i. LAND: An area of land within boundaries, with specified land qualities or land characteristics is known as a land unit. Land units can be mapped and serially numbered (e.g. land unit 1, land unit 2, land unit 3, etc.). The size of an individual land unit can be varied to suit the intensity of the investigation and should be the smallest area of land that it is necessary to evaluate and classify.
ii. LAND USE: A major kind of land use is a subdivision of rural land use. Examples are extensive agriculture, intensive agriculture, forestry, recreation, etc. A land utilization type (LUT), is a subdivision of a major kind of land use describing the cropping, irrigation and management (i.e. farming system), the social and economic context, and other relevant details given in Table 11.
Simplified examples of land utilization types (LUTs)
LUT A: Sprinkler irrigated maize on State farms;
LUT B: Double cropped rice on surface irrigated small farms;
LUT C: Spate irrigated sorghum on tenanted small farms.
Guidelines for the description of LUTs are given in Chapter 4.
iii. LAND SUITABILITY: The FAO Framework land suitability categories are Orders (Suitable or Not Suitable), Classes, and Subclasses, as shown in Table 1. The land suitability classes are Highly Suitable (S1), Moderately Suitable (S2), Marginally Suitable (S3), Marginally Not Suitable (N1) and Permanently Not Suitable (N2). A greater or smaller number of Classes can be used as required. A lower case letter is used to designate Subclass, indicating the reason for downgrading the land from S1 (no Subclasses) to a lower class (symbols given in Table 17).
Example: Land Unit 1 is Highly Suitable (S1) for single cropped rice (LUT D) but is Marginally Not Suitable (N1z) for double cropped rice (LUT B), in a classification for potential suitability.
The FAO Framework distinguishes between classifications for the present suitability of land for a specific use (under existing conditions) and the potential suitability after specified major land improvements (e.g. the rehabilitation of degraded land, irrigation, drainage, etc.).
Two further subdivisions of potential suitability are introduced in this bulletin. These are comparable, but not identical, to the US Bureau of Reclamation's 'arable' land and 'irrigable' land (see Chapter 10). They are defined as follows:
Provisionally-irrigable land: This is land that is classified provisionally, on the assumption that water can be supplied to it, but in the absence of full knowledge about the water supply or the project and land development costs. (Net farm income is a useful measure of the suitability of 'provisionally-irrigable' land, see Section 2.4).
Irrigable land: This is land that is Suitable for irrigation under a 'provisionally-irrigable' classification, that can receive water, and that has been classified according to an economic evaluation of its suitability for specified LUTs, taking into account the water supply, the incremental area-specific development costs, common project costs, and benefits. (Net irrigation incremental benefit or NIIB, may be used to measure the suitability of 'irrigable' land).
One of the merits of the 'provisionally-irrigable' classification is that it contributes to the formulation of the project plan early during the study by eliminating land that is permanently not suitable for reasons other than the water supply. This classification also provides a good basis for updating an evaluation in the event of large price shifts or other major changes at a future date. However, only an 'irrigable' classification meets the needs of a feasibility grade study.
iv. CLASS-DETERMINING FACTORS: These are variables that affect the performance of a land utilization type (LUT) on a land unit and which serve as a basis for classifying the suitability of land for a given use. Many factors affect the performance of a LUT on a given land unit; in suitability classification some are 'class-determining' and others are not. Some factors affect a crop, its irrigation and management, rather uniformily across all land units in the study area, or cause unimportant variations. In contrast, 'class-determining' factors lead to major differences in physical land productivity or benefits and costs on different land units for a given LUT. In land evaluation, only the most important factors (i.e. those that are prospective class-determining ones) need be assessed and these can usually be progressively short-listed or aggregated into estimates of yields, benefits or costs to evaluate the land suitability classes.
Individual factors, that may or may not be selected as 'class-determining' in any given evaluation, can be grouped according to how they affect:
a. Crop yields or production (i.e. agronomic factors)
b. Management
c. Land development or land improvement
d. Conservation and the environment
e. Social and economic conditions
These five broad groupings are subdivided to give a list of 32 factors that may be 'class-determining', in Table 12, Chapter 4. Each factor, and their interactions are discussed in detail in Part Two of this bulletin.
Many factors may be represented in terms of the requirements or limitations of the cropping, management and irrigation systems, and are influenced, for better or worse, by land characteristics. Some land use requirements and limitations, such as fertilizer requirements or drainage requirements are represented as inputs or land improvements, rather than as land characteristics. Thus, land characteristics and land qualities are attributes of the land. Land use requirements and limitations (more strictly, requirements and limitations of the LUT) are attributes of the land use. Many social and economic factors and some economic considerations (e.g. farmers' attitudes) are neither attributes of the land use nor the land, but none-the-less may be 'class-determining'.
v. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS: These are factors that may or may not be 'class-determining' and that are required for, or limit, the performance of a LUT on a land unit (Subsection 4.2.2, Table 12). Land characteristics, inputs and land improvements interact to satisfy or influence the requirement or limitation.
Examples: Water requirements of a crop, land levelling requirement of an irrigation method, erosion limitation (see list in Table 12).
vi. LAND CHARACTERISTICS: These are any measurable features of land that can be used to characterize a land unit.
Examples: Mean annual rainfall, slope class, soil texture, etc.
vii. LAND QUALITIES: These are descriptors of land in relation to land use. For example, water availability or water deficiency imply a relationship between water supply and water requirement but as an attribute of the land. Land qualities represent complex hierarchical interactions ranging from water availability, nutrient availability, to crop yielding ability, drainability, erodibility, etc. In general, land qualities are the interactions affecting the performance of a LUT.
Note that land qualities are land conditions that affect the LUT, whereas corresponding land use requirements and limitations are the conditions, inputs and land improvements required for, or limiting the cropping, irrigation or management system.
viii. SPECIFICATIONS OF THE LUT: The conditions required for the satisfactory performance of a cropping, irrigation and management system should be specified prior to land survey. These specifications comprise critical ranges, bounded by critical limits, and specify for individual class-determining factors, the land use requirements and limitations at different levels of suitability.
ix. CRITICAL LIMITS: The critical limits of a class-determining factor mark boundaries between s1, s2, s3, n1 and n2 levels of suitability for individual factors, or a single group of factors, in the evaluation of the suitability of a land unit for a LUT. They can be set using the guidelines given in Part Two of this bulletin.
x. FACTOR RATINGS: Factor ratings, namely, s1, s2, s3, n1 and n2, indicate, in terms of a single factor, or a single interaction of a group of factors, whether the land is highly suited, moderately suited, marginally suited, marginally not suited, or permanently not suited, respectively, for a given LUT. (Note that lower case letters are used to avoid confusion with land suitability classes mentioned in iii.)
xi. MATCHING: This term is used in two senses. In its broadest sense 'matching' is the adjustment of the land by inputs and improvements to match the requirements and limitations of the LUT. Conversely, it is the adjustment of the LUT to match more closely the conditions of the land.
In a more restricted sense, matching is the comparison between the land conditions (land qualities or land characteristics), and the requirements or limitations of the LUT, to give factor ratings. Thus, factor by factor, each class-determining factor is given a factor rating, s1, s2, s3, n1 and n2.
Example: Assume critical limits corresponding to s3 for the factor 'Rooting' are a soil depth range limited by 50-100 cm under LUT A. Land unit 1 has a soil depth of, say, 75 cm. This falls within these critical limits, therefore, the factor rating for land unit 1 with LUT A = s3 (see Chapter 6, Example 1).
xii. FACTOR SIGNIFICANCE: This indicates whether an individual factor, or interaction, is Very Important (VI), Moderately Important (MI), Less Important (LI), or Not Important (NI) in deciding the land suitability class from factor ratings (see Section 6.3).
xiii. MEASURES OF SUITABILITY: The land suitability classes can be defined in terms of various ph