<title>Forestry policies in the Asia-Pacific region: A review of country papers</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
It is extremely difficult to summarise the major themes and policy issues from the collection of comprehensive and thought-provoking papers presented to this Regional Expert Consultation. I will not attempt to make detailed comments on each Country Paper individually, but have attempted to find general themes that recur throughout all the Asia-Pacific papers (though to differing degrees). The intention is to facilitate discussion and the constructive exchange of views and experiences between participants at the workshop.
Given the great diversity between countries in their background situations and policy directions for the future, obviously not all comments apply to all countries. Even within regional groupings like ASEAN, South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the South Pacific Forum, member countries have different pasts, presents and future prospects. Thus, it would be absurd to expect to see uniform policies or problems, and it should be no surprise that policy directions seem to be going in opposite directions in some countries. We will attempt to understand why this is so, and what can be learnt from each other's experience.
As an outsider (but a very interested observer over the past 20 years) perhaps I can present a slightly different view of the processes and results, that might be useful to those directly and intimately involved in policy formulation and implementation.
Anyone writing on the subject of policy reveals something about himself - the questions one considers important, the priorities, whether we focus on Institutions, laws, processes or people. I have tried to focus on economic behaviour of people, industry and government, rather than on legal or technical/silvicultural issues. This is not to imply those are unimportant - I merely reflect my own interests.
Whether or not an agenda for policy reform or policy research emerges from this meeting, and if so, what it is, depends on those attending this Workshop and their national politicians. I would not dare comment on what is "wrong" with any country's existing policies or means of implementation, but do suggest we could all benefit from impartial critical evaluation, even if that means questioning some of our fundamental beliefs and presumptions about Forestry.
This paper is primarily based on the Country Papers presented to the Consultation. An edited collection of these papers is expected to be published by mid-1993 as an FAO Forestry Paper.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 What is a national forestry policy and what is it for?
1.2 Realism
1.3 Hitting a moving target
1.4 The process is important
1.5 Some common themes in the country papers
1.1 What is a national forestry policy and what is it for?
As the collection of Country Papers shows, most countries do have a National Forestry Policy statement, but there seem to be major differences in what the Policy means, in the force or authority that it bears, in the amount of guidance or direction given on how and when it is to be implemented and, last but not least, in how the policy was derived.
In some countries, such as Thailand and Indonesia, it is a statement prepared and issued on behalf of the government as a whole; in others (e.g. Malaysia and India) the primary preparation is by the Forestry Department, but it is then sanctioned and issued by the National government; in yet others (e.g. Bangladesh, Fiji and China) it is really only the policy of the Forestry Department or its Ministry.
If it is the policy of the entire government, we should expect it to have broad National support, and so be more effective in reconciling differences between government Ministries, particularly the thorny question of competing landuses. However, the paper from Thailand suggests this has not happened there. The policy statement may or may not be accompanied by a mechanism for resolving differences between Ministries or Departments.
We are all aware of instances where the pursuit of another sector's goals has had unintended negative effects on the forestry sector. Good intentions to protect and conserve forests have been swept aside in the face of imperatives to grow more food and provide more irrigation (as in India) or to generate more foreign exchange, from cassava exports in Thailand or from log exports in PNG and Solomon Islands. Even good intentions within the forestry sector may have had adverse effects, such as the Nationalisation of Nepal's forests in 1957; or trade restrictions to protect infant industries.
One fact is self-evident - as "statements of intent" all the national policies could not be challenged. It is obvious that much careful thought has gone into setting national ideals for the forestry sector -all the goals are worthy, even unassailable. As the Malaysian paper states succinctly, no government would ever knowingly choose policy objectives that were not socially ideal. However, as the Pakistan paper also points out, Policy is what is implemented on the ground. It is not what is preserved and decorated on the shelf. The taste of the pudding lies in eating it, and the test of policy lies in its implementation. There is no use in formulating a policy if it cannot be implemented.
So is a National Forestry Policy something that sits on the shelf? There may be a role as a reference but I believe its prime purpose is as a guide to making good decisions which can be effectively implemented, and as a standard by which results are assessed. As the Fiji paper stated, "Writing the policy is easy - but it is the implementation that counts."
This paper does not dwell on "what ought to be" - as professional foresters we believe we are all well aware of that, and have been so for many years. But is National Forest Policy the exclusive preserve of foresters?
The current international pre-occupation with the conservation values of tropical forests has been reflected in National Forest Policy statements of many countries represented here, for decades, even a century. What we need to be concerned about are:
whether the balance between production and conservation, between commercial, subsistence and social benefits, still accords with our societies' ever-changing priorities;
whether the implementation of our policy intentions has been effective; and
whether there have been any unexpected or undesirable consequences of the way we have attempted to implement them.
Thus much of the controversy, and perhaps need for reforms, is NOT about what the ultimate social-welfare goals are, but about the efficiency and equity of the more specific strategies and tactics (the policy instruments) applied to achieve those goals.
Thus I suggest we do not need research on what policy goals ought to be, but we might usefully conduct research:
to obtain a thorough information base for policy formulation;
to assess the impacts, effectiveness, equity and efficiency of alternative policy instruments; and
to analyse why apparently sound policies are sometimes implemented poorly, or not implemented at all.
It would be ironic to conclude that not only have we failed to achieve some of our policy objectives, but in some cases, the very measures we took have contributed to making matters even worse in some unexpected ways, or if the small gains made by good forestry policies have been overwhelmed by negative effects from agricultural, energy, international trade or transport policies, for example.
As the World Bank (1992) clearly shows, most of the major environmental problems in developing countries are not due to the pursuit of economic development, but rather are due to bad economic policies: poorly-defined property rights; under-pricing of resources; state allocations and subsidies; and neglect of non-marketed social benefits. Instead of trying to devise new policies to stop further resource and environmental deterioration while promoting real development, we should first try to eliminate those (legal, social, political and institutional) factors that cause or exacerbate the problems.
1.2 Realism
National Forest Policy should be based on a realistic assessment of the current situation as it exists on the ground.
Do the areas to be managed or protected as forests actually still exist as forests today? Do they have a resident population?
Should we declare a Class I watershed, in which no habitation or cultivation is allowed, if there are 500,000 people living there, with no other place to go and no other way to survive?
Should we assume that the State Forests and the Forest Department will be responsible for supplying the national requirement for timber and fuelwood, if in fact three-quarters is already coming from the household gardens and from farmers' plots, as in Bangladesh?
Should we assume that small farmers will grow trees, if their land tenure is still insecure, if the markets for the trees/products are uncertain, or if there are administrative impediments (like having to get a permit to harvest a crop of trees the farmer's family planted, especially of so-called "Royal" species)?
Some country papers contain unrealistic estimates of the remaining areas of natural forests. Not only can this be misleading when formulating effective programs, but can "backfire" against the forestry Profession and Departments. In some countries, including India, foresters officially denied the rate of deforestation for decades, insisting that everything was fine. When remote sensing revealed the facts, foresters were thought to be foolish, incompetent, malicious or negligent. As a result, governments and the public tend to lose faith in forest services as integrated resource managers, and forestry institutions are under serious challenge. Part of the backlash is an aversion to almost any form of commercial logging in natural forests, and often to exotic plantations as well. Defending unrealistic illusions can be fatal to our professional credibility!
1.3 Hitting a moving target
Policies tend to be long-lived, but the socio-economic context can change quite rapidly. Occasionally we devise policies for situations which no longer exist. For example, over the past ten years there has been a tremendous increase in recognition of the importance of trees and forests in meeting the basic needs of subsistence farmers. Some countries' policies have been revised, to varying degrees, away from pre-occupation with industrial timber, towards these needs. However, in many (but certainly not all) countries or districts, subsistence farmers are rapidly disappearing. Very few farmers are untouched by commercial cash-cropping, markets and off-farm income. The type of forest and forest produce that people need, continually evolves and it is possible, to the extent that the market economy spreads, that remaining viable farmers may even prefer commercial timber trees than fuelwood and fodder species. We need to constantly monitor the direction our policies are aimed in,
as well as their effectiveness and results.
Similarly, policies have been suggested to ease the transition from shifting to (more sustainable) sedentary agriculture, but the transition could be right out of agriculture! "Shifting Agriculture" has been used to cover a great range of different activities:
traditional/indigenous systems include: nomads; those who rotate their houses and gardens around defined territories; and those whose villages are fixed, but their gardens rotate.
Alternatively, temporary slash and burn agriculture is often practiced by newcomers-squatters-lowland migrants, often with support from influential persons, to produce cash crops.
It would be very naive to assume all these people will become settled farmers, especially with intensification and mechanisation of agriculture. We should actively seek views from agricultural colleagues about trends in input costs and output prices, which will largely determine how many people can and do remain as farmers in future. It is quite likely throughout Asia, especially in the economies with relatively high economic growth and slower population growth, that the future number and percentage of farmers (or even rural population in total) will be much less than today.
1.4 The process is important
I have already argued that getting effective results is more important than formulating a high-sounding policy which is a statement of good intent but could be either based on unrealistic data or mistaken directions. But now I want to argue that getting good results in practice, depends not only on having good policies (realistic, rational, consistent, efficient, etc) but also on the process by which the policy (and subsequent strategies) is formulated.
The Country papers generally refer only briefly to the process by which the National Forestry policy has been derived. For example, in Thailand, there is a large and very high-level committee representing almost every agency that could possibly be interested. In Indonesia, the Minister of Forests takes advice from his Directors-General, who are advised by Directors. In India, the Central Board of Forestry has the National Minister as chair, and all State Forestry ministers assisted by their Chief Conservators. In other countries such as Nepal and PNG, the national policy has recently been revised after lengthy consultations under the TFAP or "Forestry Master Plan" processes.
Despite all these differences, most National Forest Policy statements basically are pushed and driven by foresters - they generally arise through the national forestry agency (Department, Ministry, etc) and so tend to reflect the concerns, aspirations and professional views (perhaps even the social and political views) of the agency's staff. This can give a very narrow perspective, and a pre-occupation with the agency's functions, its concerns and the territory under its control.
Recognition of Stakeholders
In comparison, consider a broadly-based participatory process where ALL the interested Stakeholders have an opportunity to express their interest, concerns, ideas and energy.^1 Social conflicts have arisen world-wide, where government forest services have recognised few stakeholders other than wood-processing industries. For example, India's 1878 Forest Act really only recognised the Forest. Department and the timber industry as having legitimate interest in forests (for industrial, urban and military use). Traditional users and uses were prohibited or heavily restricted. By defining collection of leaves and deadwood, or "Minor Forest Produce" as privileges (not a right) local people were excluded from any say in forest management and denied any traditional powers to regulate who used forests when and for what. Customary management of forests was replaced by an open-access regime. This is also true for many other countries.
^1 Although Stakeholder theory was developed for the successful management of private corporations, it offers valuable insights into the management of any large complex structure, even Sectors or national governance. Survival and success depend not only on how well managers perform in furthering shareholders' or owners' interests, but rather on how well managers can balance the competing claims of all the stakeholders in the process.
Many of the unrecognised "stakeholders" in Asia's forests probably would support the National Forestry Policies as presented. However, receiving input and active participation across a wider range of stakeholders (not just Forestry Department and the timber industry) such as other agencies, companies, NGOs and environmental groups, could encourage:
a) better policies or better-informed, more realistic policies;
There should be much less chance of pursuing policies which are out of tune with people's real needs and aspirations, or which are based on faulty premises or data, if all the issues and options have been widely discussed before reaching a consensus. Stakeholders' different perceptions can bring new insights into what is possible, causes of problems etc.
b) continuous feedback on the effectiveness of policy measures;
c) greater commitment by all parties to seeing the policy successfully im«««Valoare a indentului diferita de cele prezente in lista actuala»»»«««Valoare a indentului diferita de cele prezente in lista actuala»»»plemented. Voluntary compliance of local communities in forestry programs may be higher when they have been involved in the formulation of those programs. One frequently cited obstacle to effective policy implementation is a lack of political will or support, but involvement of stakeholders in formulation is an effective means of getting widespread popular support, which could subsequently be reflected in politicians' attitudes to forestry and hence in budget allocations, legislation etc.^2
d) clarification of all the actors and their roles. Forestry agencies (and the timber industry) are not the only players involved in the forestry sector; the other stakeholders are now being heard - not only what they want, but what they could contribute (skills, knowledge, labour) and what support or assistance (if any) they would need, to do so.
^2 The success of urban forestry programs (although small and perhaps despised by conventional foresters) can contribute to establishing a strong political base and support for forestry in general.
What do China, the Philippines, Nepal and New Zealand all have in common? They are each exploring and implementing new perceptions on how forestry activities can be undertaken - Who should do what, and what reforms are needed to make it work? They have recognised that government forestry cannot (and need not) do everything needed in the sector, and so responsibility and authority is devolved to other players: farmers, community groups, NGOs or companies.
New institutions are emerging to redress the balance between all segments of society who claim an interest in the future use of forests.^3 The 1988 Indian policy is quite "green" reflecting the political and institutional changes to incorporate environmental and NGO stakeholders.
^3 For example, many traditional Forest Services are being subsumed into mega-Departments of Environment, Natural Resources, Conservation &/or Land Management - a political reflection of the loss of confidence in Foresters because we were seen to be too closely tied to the timber industry and ignoring the impacts on others. Forest Services in two Australian states no longer exist - their functions now subsumed within Departments of Conservation and Environment, and Conservation and Land Management (CALM). Responsibility for all natural forests in New Zealand now lies with the Ministry of Environment and the plantation forests have been privatised - NZ Forest Service has disappeared. The Philippines has DENR. The Indian Forest Service is now within the Ministry of Environment.
Nevertheless, there are potentially serious problems in arriving at a participatory consensus on forest policy:
Not all stakeholders have equal or similar information or power to negotiate - local communities may be disadvantaged; major stakeholders could be cabinet ministers or generals who also hold logging concessions;
Who is responsible for coordinating stakeholders' interests. Many Forest Services may no longer have the credibility to do so.
Perhaps if governments want to ensure real public participation in policy formulation and implementation, they may need to enable community groups and NGOs to participate, e.g. by providing grants to enable them to prepare submissions, to take time from daily work to participate.
1.5 Some common themes in the country papers
The country papers contain three major recurring, common concerns:
Population pressure-encroachment-shifting cultivation
Industrial Forestry, Forest Industries, Markets and Trade
Farm Forestry, Agroforestry and activities outside forestry reserves.
In the following Sections, I attempt to address each of these, with particular regard to the impacts, effectiveness and unintended consequences of the existing policies; and the possibility for evolution of new policies, new instruments and/or new institutional arrangements.
Although the status quo has imperfections, it is often strongly entrenched. Perhaps by examining those countries where changes are underway, we might learn more about the process, as well as the content, of policy reform. Frequently the issues that arise in implementation, have their roots in how the policies were formulated, and by whom.
<section>3</section>
2. Landuse pressures, people and trees
2.1 Population pressures
2.2 Structures of production
2.3 Why are so many of the "Reserved Forests" of Asia treeless?
2.4 Landuse planning
2.1 Population pressures
Table 1 presents information of areas of forests and woodlands, rural populations and forest areas per (rural) capita in Asian countries. Without wanting to imply some deterministic relationship between forest policies and forest per capita, it does seem that forest policies reflect socio-economic priorities that are fundamentally different, between those countries with larger forest resources/capita (Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar and Laos, for example) and those with very low ratios (e.g. Bangladesh, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan and the Philippines).
Table 1 Area of Forest & Woodlands, Rural Population and Forest area/capita, in Tropical Asia
Country
Forest Area (000 ha)
Rural Population (000)
Area/cap (ha/person)
South Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Southeast Asia
Indonesia
Kampuchea
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Thailand
Viet Nam
ASIA
Tropical LDCs
Source: World Resources Report (1991)
Westoby (1987) argued that ultimately, the purpose of all forestry is social. He differentiated between Industrial Forestry (well-suited for relatively resource rich countries to contribute to economic development, employment creation, foreign exchange earnings) and Social Forestry (to maintain rural welfare or "to stop it deteriorating further" through provision of basic needs). He might have added that Environmental or Protection Forestry (including watershed and wildlife management) is equally important to both groups.
National Forestry Policies nearly always have recognised all three elements, but the relative emphasis or balance keeps changing. Most societies would like more of all three classes of forest benefit, but governments have many other priorities and do not have unlimited budgets. Is it possible to get some more of each, through greater skills, technology or efficiency, rather than trade-off one against another?
A spectrum ranges from those countries struggling to provide basic needs from their forests, to those with ample resources for economic development and export industries. Fast growing fuelwood or industrial plantations may complement either strategy: to move from deficiency to self-sufficiency to exportable surplus; or to compensate for the progressive phasing out of logging in natural forests.
At the risk of over-generalisation, we might consider a spectrum where the relative emphasis changes as follows:
Philippines
Bangladesh, Nepal
Social Forestry, Extension, Devolution of management for remnant forests
China
Pakistan, India
Viet Nam
Thailand
Fast Growing Industrial Plantations
Fiji
Indonesia
Malaysia
PNG
Extraction from relatively abundant natural forests
Laos
I stress that this is not simply a question of population size or density relative to areas of forests, but too many people without decent alternative livelihoods. In many parts of Philippines, India, Bangladesh, Viet Nam, China and Thailand, the economy has not grown fast enough and in a way that creates enough employment opportunities. (Cruz, 1992) Being a forest encroacher, eking out a marginal and illegal existence is not an attractive occupation, but a strategy of last resort when no better options exist.
Perhaps the opposite illustrates the point better. In Malaysia, with rapid industrialisation, rural people are moving out of the villages to work in urban industry. In fact there are shortages of rural labour in particular times/places. Malaysia's forests are now relatively safe from encroachment for the same reason as in the USA or Australia - most people have better (more secure, more profitable, less dangerous) ways of making a living!
There is a myth about rapidly disappearing forests in Nepal's Middle Hills, but in reality, the forests are starting to expand, in both area and density. As alternative occupations in the market economy appear, basic agriculture in the Hills has become less attractive. Also, as people migrate to the Terai, population pressure on the Hill forests is in fact decreasing. A dramatic decline in livestock numbers has greatly reduced the demand for forest fodder. Terraced land that has been cultivated for many years is being allowed or encouraged to revert to forest.
It may be correct, but too simplistic, to observe that forests have disappeared because of population growth, increasing pressure for land for agriculture and settlement, for timber and fuel, and "inadequate protection and inadequate afforestation". Why could the pressures not be accommodated? Why were past efforts "inadequate"? The whole question of the behaviour of poor rural households, in their production, consumption, livelihood and migration decisions, requires further research. Some Forestry agencies assume that they understand such behaviour, but in many cases this is contradicted by their programs' ineffectiveness. Small and marginal farmers are sometimes thought of as a plague of locusts bent on destroying trees and forests, but in many cases, these people are actually major producers of trees and even supplying towns with their excess fuelwood from their own household trees.
2.2 Structures of production
Trees and forests can be managed in many ways, and numerous possible institutional arrangements exist in the Asian region (e.g. ownership of forests; responsibility for their management; responsibility for harvesting; and responsibility for processing and utilisation can all be by the State, private or, communal). The appropriate form of forestry, the appropriate structure of production, the question of who is responsible for what in the forestry sector, cannot be isolated from national macro-economic and historical factors. Again, it would be nonsense to argue for a single "correct" system, but we may learn from analysing the performance and implications of systems in use.
Outlined in Table 2 below are some of the attributes of two widely differing systems. Characteristics of a particular system depend on who is managing it - the attributes within each system, are intimately and intrinsically related to each other.
Table 2 Two Production Systems
State Forestry
Community Forestry, Tree Husbandry and Farm Forestry
Objectives
One dimensional, raw material for industry, protection
Multipurpose and socio-economic objectives. Related to the consumer & Producer. Self-reliance.
Technology
Imported, centralised, precedence over local technologies. Uniform and strictly adhered to
Varies. Indigenous, locally manageable. Imported technology must suit resources and needs.
Local Institutions.
Unimportant as long as no encroachment
Important. Used and supported as a resource.
Peoples Participation
Insignificant. People are target groups and consumers and to be motivated, uplifted and/or employed.
A requirement for relevant production. People are a resource, an asset to be supported. Involvement and responsibility
Role of People versus Experts
People are the problem experts the solution
People are the solution and a resource. Experts support them and their activities & the development process.
Local Solutions
Uniform
Diverse
Land
Government
Communal. Village, private.
Labour
Employed
Employed within the local system or self-employed.
Organisation
Centralised "work order" system
Local, village production unit (e.g. extended family).
Professional Sphere
Segmentation, "Forestry"
Integration with other farming activities.
Structure and Magnitude
Few large plantations with uniform management.
A large number of small areas with a variety of input requirements and production.
Legislation
Protective
Productive
Time Perspective
Long Term
Short term, or limited resources for delayed benefits.
Relation to other activities
Separate
Integrated in space and time in the small farmers' production system.
Source: Ohlsson & Byron, 1989
Many government agencies, even if established explicitly to manage many small areas of mixed forests for a wide array of public benefits, have tended, over time, towards:
concentrating on fewer, larger areas;
managing these according to uniform prescriptions, rules or guidelines;
managing for one or two dominant outputs rather than diversity (and the dominant output is likely to be wood because it is readily quantifiable and marketable).
All these attributes are entirely predictable, given the nature of the institutions and the way large organisations operate. The attributes of the second system are not just the opposite to the first, but reflect who makes decisions and why. Yet the production system of "State Forestry" ie what the Forest Services do, is now almost synonymous with "Forestry" - most of the other variants have been relegated to exceptions in many countries. A number of national Forest Policies state that all forest lands belong to the State, and/or that all forest plantations shall be under the control of the Forestry authority.
2.3 Why are so many of the "Reserved Forests" of Asia treeless?
This is not a riddle - much of the officially reserved forests in many countries of South and Southeast Asia are actually treeless. In some cases, the land is in fact productive agricultural land, the illegal farms of people who "squatted" there many years ago. In some countries, the Reserved Forest boundaries have been drawn around areas of forest which indigenous people had consciously managed for centuries, before being displaced by colonial authorities, or labelled as encroachers. However, in many more cases, the land is barren, eroding "wastelands".^4
^4 We should be careful about the word "wastelands" as this may represent only the official view - local people may find them useful for some grazing, collection of medicinal plants and fuels etc. Their production may be much below their potential, but not necessarily zero.
A series of reports about "The Uncultivated Half of India" showed almost half the country was virtual wasteland, far below its potential productivity in any sense, and much of this was government-owned Forests, but treeless. "Forest Land" (under the control of a Forestry Department) is not necessarily forested land (having trees on it). In many cases, Forest (Department) Land has no trees, while many trees are grown by farmers on land which is not Forest Land. Most of the country papers recognise this - we are no longer surprised by treeless Forests!
In Thailand, there are now, officially, 10 million ha of barren, treeless, degraded and degrading lands which are not occupied or regularly used by anyone - the classic wasteland. A further 12 million ha of land, also under the legal control of the Royal Forest Department, is actually occupied and used by farmers. This is said to be illegal and "temporary" but there are houses, shops, roads, with electricity services.^5 Some of these farmers grow trees, but not always of the type preferred by RFD e.g. Mango, Mulberry, Kapok (Bombax spp). Only 3.07 million ha of the 24.4 million ha being cultivated in Thailand has legal title - much of the remainder is actually "Forest Land" used to grow cassava and corn for export.^6
^5 They may pay taxes on these lands and receive extension services from other government departments, suggesting this use of the "Reserved Forest" is far from temporary. Their illegal land tenure could even be recognised by banks as collateral.
^6 Phantumvanit (1990) calculated that a 10 % increase in the world price of cassava led to a 16% increase in loss of forests (but presumably not the reverse - if prices fall, the deforested land may just be abandoned - not restored). Panayouto (1987) reported that construction of a major highway in Northeast Thailand was followed by logging and shifting agriculture, resulting in the loss of over 1 million ha (of what was continuous forests in 1973) in only 4 years.
Although there are officially 100,000 hectares of sal (Shorea robusta) forests in northern Bangladesh, which was the traditional home and source of livelihood 