<title>National Forestry Action Plan - St. Kitts and Nevis: Executive summary. National Forestry Action Programme - St Kitts and Nevis: Executive Summary</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This document comprises two parts:
Executive Summary
Project Profiles
The Executive Summary is based on that which was included in the main report of the Country Mission Team (CMT). It has been revised to include more factual background information so that this document can suffice as a working document for the Roundtable III meeting. Where necessary, reference should be made to the main report for further detail on specific points.
There are twenty seven Project Profiles proposed for implementation over a five year period at a total cost of US$ 7,238,660. Of this, the Government of St Kitts and Nevis will provide US$ 1,285,260 (EC$ 3,470,202) and donor funding of US$ 5,953,400 is being sought. It is recommended that a rolling format be used involving annual revision and updating of programmes and projects.
Great emphasis must be placed on institutional strengthening. In this respect, training has been identified as the most vital component of the NFAP. This will be pursued as a core project complementary to the list of priority projects.
Reference is made to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA, July 1993.
Forestry development initiatives at the regional/subregional level - regional project proposals 01-05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of the European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special report as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map l. General map of the East Caribbean showing the location of St Kitts and Nevis
Source: St. Kitts and Nevis Country Environmental Profile. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991.
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Background
1. St Kitts and Nevis are two of the Lesser Antilles. St Kitts has a land area of 176km^2 and a population of 37,000; Nevis has a land area of 93km^2 and a population of 9,600. Population levels are not growing so population pressures on land resources, forests and water resources have been modest.
Climate
2. For both islands, the climate is tropical marine, heavily influenced by steady northeast trade winds. There are only small variations in temperature throughout the year, the average at Basseterre being 27.8째C with maxima ranging from 29째C in January to 32째C in July. Relative humidity averages 76%, ranging from 70% in March to 78% in September, October and November.
Rainfall
3. Annual average is 1,625mm for St Kitts and 1,170mm for Nevis. However, the Southeast Peninsula (SEP) of St Kitts is much drier. Rainfall in Nevis is lowest along the eastern side. For St Kitts, most rain falls from August to November; the most rain falls in Nevis from July to January.
Topography
4. St Kitts has a rugged backbone dominated by the Northwest Range which includes three linked volcanoes, the youngest (Mt Liamuiga) rising to 1,156m. The steep mountainous interior is surrounded by an upland forest belt extending down to fertile coastal plains. The coastline is dominated by cliffs, with narrow beaches of coarse 'black' (volcanic) sand. Coastal erosion is a problem which is addressed (for Nevis) in project 1.14.
5. The 1,600ha SEP recently became accessible by a new road. It is a cluster of seven older small islets tied together by plains and marshlands. It has rather more steep slopes than the rest of the island. The highest peak is St Anthony's Peak at 319m.
6. Nevis is approximately circular and dominated by the central Nevis Peak at 985m.
Geology
7. St Kitts is seismically active with a core of older (Eocene) volcanic material comprised largely of andesite. The present steep central cone of Mt Liamuiga is made up of andesite and basaltic lava flows, agglomerates and pyroclastics.
8. Nevis is primarily volcanic but the oldest rocks are of marine origin. Away from the volcanic centres, Nevis is formed of sediments derived from these centres but the nature of the sediments is variable.
Map 2. General location nap for the islands of St Kitts and Nevis
Source: St. Kitts and Nevis Country Environmental Profile. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991.
Soils
9. The agricultural soils of St Kitts and Nevis have been used extensively and intensively for over 300 years. Although the lowland soils of Nevis in particular show the ill-effects of this and other uses, the soils of both islands have stood up well to this long use. This is probably because of the rapid rate of fertile soil formation from fresh volcanic ash soils.
Vegetation
10. There is evidence of much disturbance caused by human activity. Agricultural crops dominate the lowland areas. The mountain peaks are forested but mostly this is secondary growth. Undisturbed rain forest is relatively rare. Five vegetation zones are recognised for St Kitts and described in the main report. On the SEP, the forest has been replaced by dry scrub woodland vegetation.
11. The St Kitts forest/woodland cover is classified:
rain and cloud forest
2,300ha
moist forest
2,100ha
dry forest
2,100ha
6,500ha
This represents approximately 37% of the land area.
12. Up to nine vegetation zones have been recognised for Nevis and these are described in the main report. Trees tend to be small due to the steepness of mountain slopes and exposure to high winds. Species diversity of the humid and rain forest zones is low.
13. The forest/woodland area of Nevis is classified:
rain forest
450ha
moist forest
450ha
dry forest/bush
4,141ha
5,040ha
This represents 56% of the land area.
Agriculture
14. Sugar has dominated agriculture in St Kitts for over 300 years and is likely to remain as a significant part of the economy. However, there is a new policy of agricultural diversification. Sugar production in Nevis ceased in 1969 and generally agriculture is in decline, hindered by social, economic and environmental factors. The soil is very difficult to work.
Administration
15. Forestry activities fall within the departments of agriculture of each island. The Department of Agriculture for St Kitts contains a Forestry Division; that for Nevis does not have an operational Forestry Division. The Country Capacity Project (CCP - project 5.01) includes provision for institutional strengthening of the Forestry Division in order to achieve the NFAP objectives. Great emphasis on institutional strengthening is essential. The main report contains details of the subprofessional and professional staff, support staff and facilities that will be required for the implementation and continuity of TFAP projects.
The Economy
16. St Kitts and Nevis seems to have done better than most OECS countries over the last decade. From 1966-1986, average growth rate was 8.3% per year in real output per capita (GNP after deducting inflation). GNP grew by 6.3% 1980-1990, despite the volatility of the sugar market, the impact of Hurricane Hugo in September 1989 and the drought of 1990-91. Growth of GDP is very dependent on agriculture (especially sugar) but also on manufacturing and tourism sectors. Inflation has been modest in recent years. The long-term prospects for St Kitts and Nevis, with some provisos, are favourable. Heavy foreign indebtedness has been avoided and at the end of 1991, external debt stood at US$44 million, 26.4% of GDP.
The Contribution of Forestry to the National Economy
17. Forestry's contribution to measured GDP is very low, about 0.1% (1991). However, many forest outputs are not included in GDP and are not marketable. The forestry contribution to watershed protection, erosion control and amenity services is significant.
Economic Development Strategy
18. The main thrusts are: to maintain the sugar industry in St Kitts, to diversify agriculture, to encourage tourism and to encourage export manufacturing such as electronic assembly and garments.
19. The NFAP can contribute to all the main thrusts of the economic development strategy. Forestry can contribute to agricultural diversification through tree crop and agroforestry programmes (see proposed projects 1.03, 1.04). Tourism expansion is catered for in project 4.03. Contribution to watershed management (project 1.10) impacts on all objectives. Maintenance of the sugar industry by diversification is addressed in projects 1.08 and 1.15.
Imports and Exports
20. St Kitts and Nevis imports nearly all wood and wood product needs and a substantial proportion of agricultural and agroforestry needs. Exports of wood and wood products are minuscule; those for agricultural and agroforestry products are greater. Proposed expansion of domestic production is addressed in projects 1.7 and 1.12 for industrial plantations, project 3.01 for fuelwood fencepost and fodder plantations, and project 3.02 for split fencing materials.
Tourism
21. This is a growing sector, with numbers increasing threefold between 1982 and 1991. Hotels provide a lot of local employment and purchase local agricultural produce, though there is the potential for increased sales (see project 1.03). Various suggestions are made to ensure that the projected tourism expansion is beneficial.
Forest Resources Policy
22. No forest policy has ever been approved for St Kitts and Nevis. Revised forestry, wildlife and national park policies have been prepared with FAO assistance (Gane, 1988). A policy based on these is recommended for early acceptance. 'Imperatives' on which this policy depends and a strategic programme are presented in the main report. If accepted, the policy will require appropriate legislative support.
Legislation
23. The legislation operates in the context of the federal division of power between the Government of St Kitts and Nevis, and the Administration of Nevis, which is the political administration. Considerable problems of uncertainty in the law flow from the federal division of power.
24. The National Conservation and Environmental Protection Act (NCEPA) 1987 is the centrepiece of the federal legislative regulation of forestry matters in St Kitts and Nevis. However, it has almost no application to Nevis. An existing Nevis ordinance, the Housing and Land Development Ordinance (HLDO) contains provisions which overlap with those of the NCEPA.
25. There are deficiencies in these and other enactments, and twelve recommendations to address these are made in the main report.
Forestry Staffing
26. In St Kitts, several subprofessional positions remain vacant. The technical staff have no formal training so the proposed regional projects 01, 02, 03 which all include some aspects of training are very appropriate for a small country such as St Kitts and Nevis. In addition, training has been identified as the most vital component of the NFAP. It is intended that 'training' will be pursued as a core project complementary to the priority projects.
27. The work programme prepared for the first five years of the NFAP is modest in recognition of the financial and staffing limitations. No forestry officer, either professional or subprofessional, has ever been appointed to Nevis. It is imperative that a Forestry Division be created and properly staffed in order to implement the proposed NFAP activities. Additional office accommodation will be required in both St Kitts and Nevis (see CCP, project 5.01).
Factors Affecting Land Use
28. The main part of St Kitts is well suited to mechanized agriculture because there are few boulder-rich soils. The SEP is better suited as a wildlife area or tourist attraction. Landslips are less likely than in most of the OECS as there are few naturally unstable slopes but injudicious road and house cutting present risks.
29. Nevis has a large proportion of badly eroded or otherwise degraded soils. Many have considerable physical limitations, being either heavy clay over a hard layer or sandy.
Present Land Use in St Kitts
30. Recent aerial photography (CIDA) should permit better estimates and proposed project 1.02 'forest Inventory' includes provision for aerial photographs, but it is reported that 25% is for forest (probably underestimated) and 28% is for sugar cane. For the past 60 years, forest has been moving back into abandoned or less economic lands mainly at higher altitudes. Land use estimated in 1992 is summarised:
Type
Area (ha)
Area (%)
Forest
Woodland & shrub
National Park
Sugar cane
Other crop pasture
Unused agricultural land
Built-up area
Other uses
New agricultural land
31. The area of sugar cane shows a gradual reduction since the 1960s. A further reduction in area coupled with an increase in efficiency is being investigated. An IBRO/FAO diversification project is planning to establish over 400ha of new model farms.
32. There are a few (perhaps 30) commercial small holdings working with the extension service and producing some crops for export. The rest are for subsistence and number about 3,000 covering about 900ha. They provide for the local market and home consumption. Livestock may be kept and fed from surplus vegetables.
33. Erosion levels from bare fields is high. Good husbandry needs to be emphasized as in proposed agroforestry/livestock project 1.09. The use of contour barriers and tree barriers along ghaut edges should be employed. It is important to conserve natural tree vegetation in the ghauts and project 1.10 'Ghaut protection and stabilization' aims to prevent further gully erosion. For upper slopes in particular, a change to agroforestry systems, especially alley cropping, will be beneficial.
34. Mining of sand from beaches, dunes and ghauts is not controlled adequately to avoid environmental damage. Recommendations have been made but not yet fully approved by the government.
Land Use Capability in St Kitts
35. It is suggested that most land is Class II land where it occurs on gentle slopes, and Class III or worse southeast of a line through Conaree Hill. The range of crops which can be grown is wide. With the now declining influence of the sugar monoculture and the withdrawal of the SSMC from some lands, the most promising means of developing a successful farmer group is by establishing farms of 3-5ha on long lease or freehold with covenants governing change of use.
36. A State Corporation has been set up to administer the development of tourist based facilities on the SEP which is mostly privately owned. Project 4.01 'SEP Environmental Project' proposes to protect the existing vegetation from fire and grazing and encourage landscaping when development plans for the area are processed. It is recommended that the costs of water supply, effective sewage and solid waste disposal and conservation of the environment be determined to ensure that development does not prove to be an expensive mistake.
Present Land Use in Nevis
37. Nevis is rapidly changing from an island of abandoned agriculture to one of growing tourism, retirement living and new enterprises including agriculture. 1986 interpretation of 1982 aerial photography is probably still appropriate:
Land use/vegetation type
Area (ha)
Area (%)
bushland (forest, woodland acacia bush)
bushed grassland (acacia savanna)
grassland (mainly grazed abandoned cultivation)
coconuts (50%) and other tree crops
arable cultivation
urban
38. There is no systematic forestry. Uncontrolled goats and donkeys have reduced some areas of the south to a desert-like appearance, while green monkeys are a problem in the upper forest land. Relevant proposed projects are 1.14 (for control of donkeys) and 4.02 (for control of the green monkey).
39. Few landholders are engaged in truly commercial agriculture. They produce vegetables, fruit and honey for the new tourist hotels using a marketing information scheme developed by the Department of Agriculture. The OECS Agricultural Diversification Coordination Unit (ADCU) may assist other such farmers to respond to market opportunities.
40. There is a noticeable dichotomy between the (few) young commercial farmers and the majority of farmers who are over 60 years old and who produce to eat, taking small quantities of surplus to market and owning livestock that wanders freely.
41. Husbandry is generally poor and the practice of letting sheep and goats roam, which has contributed greatly to the degradation of Nevis, must be controlled. A project is proposed (1.11 'South Nevis coastland rehabilitation^/) as a pilot for redeveloping at least some of the degraded land. It proposes to introduce agroforestry with a timber, fodder mixed crop system, for small farmers.
Land Use Capability in Nevis
42. The predominant soils have been rated (Lang and Carroll, 1966) as Class III, gentle to moderate slope with many physical problems in use in spite of good chemical characteristics. Crop development suggestions are more limited than for St Kitts, but the range is still wide.
43. The 1987 land zoning plan has the force of law but there seems to be no effective method of ensuring that it is adhered to. However, it is not necessarily the most suitable plan. There are ample possibilities for restoring relatively intensive mixed agriculture.
52. The natural forests perform both protective and productive functions. However, it is essential that Forest Reserves be identified, surveyed and mapped. This is addressed in proposed project 1.01 'Forest reserve boundary line survey, demarcation and mapping'. The absence of clearly defined forest reserves has resulted in uncontrolled forest exploitation for timber, poles, fuelwood and other produce. The licensing system must be re-introduced to control this exploitation. A royalty system is recommended to obtain revenue from forest products.
53. A forest inventory must be undertaken for both St Kitts and for Nevis (see project 1.02 'Forest inventory'). Then, detailed ten year management plans must be prepared for each forest reserve. There are suggested inclusions for these plans in the main report. It is imperative that reliable data on the actual quantities of wood used for activities such as firewood, charcoal, fencing, poles, furniture, fishpots and non-wood products is obtained for proper planning purposes. The need for technical assistance in the areas of forest reservation, inventory and management is addressed in the CCP.
54. There needs to be a programme of plantation and/or agroforestry on the estimated 1-2,000ha of abandoned cane lands. An incentive scheme directed towards private land owners should encourage them to establish forestry/agroforestry plantations. However, any programme of plantation must address the pressing problem of grazing animals which cause much damage. Protective fencing is essential in the establishment of industrial plantations (projects 1.07, 1.12).
Agroforestry
55. There is tremendous scope for agroforestry development. However, the land tenure system does not give farmers land rights, consequently they show little interest in soil conservation practices and tree planting. With the exception of sugar, there are no secure markets for agricultural produce. Long-term planning, market research and market intelligence (as proposed in project 1.03) will be essential to the development of a successful agroforestry sector.
56. The problem of the almost total absence of plant propagation facilities is addressed by nursery development projects at La Guerite, St Kitts (project 1.06) and at Prospect, Nevis (project 1.13). When these are on-stream, they could produce about 20,000 fruit trees per year and support project 1.03 for fruit tree based agroforestry. Fruit fly infestation remains a serious constraint to regional and international marketing of fruits.
57. Diversification of the agricultural sector has so far shown limited results. Agroforestry can contribute towards increased production levels for fruits and vegetables especially on marginal lands using spatial or temporal intercropping.
58. The ecozone agroforestry approach is considered to be the most appropriate for St Kitts and Nevis and this is described in detail in the main report.
59. Legume/tree based agroforestry should be encouraged amongst small farmers as a way of increasing productivity. This is proposed as project 1.04 and should lead to an increase in soil fertility and a reduction in erosion rates. Fruit tree based agroforestry (project 1.03) should be adopted as the preferred land use system for hillside land with slopes of 20-25째 and minimum soil depths of 20cm. This project includes a training component and calls for the establishment of ten 4ha fruit tree based agroforestry orchards.
60. Honey production has potential on both islands though it seems to be more developed on Nevis.
61. Land is in short supply so livestock integrated with the recommended tree crop agroforestry system may provide the best land use. Historically, livestock production has been the neglected subsector of agriculture. There has been a steep decline in livestock numbers over the past decade. However, the current systems of livestock production may be inappropriate for the future development of this sector. Project 1.09 'Livestock production in agroforestry' will establish test and demonstration plots. Demonstration of fodder production and improved livestock rearing in tree crop production will be project outputs. Project 1.14 for Nevis, integrated agroforestry/livestock' allows for the vegetation to re-establish itself at one or more locations by the use of fencing to exclude animals.
62. Forage legumes, particularly Gliricidia, Leucaena and Erythrina should be exploited more widely to improve livestock production in an agroforestry set-up. Some fodder may also be produced from project 1.05 in return for care of the proposed coastal area plantations. There is scope for utilization of some byproducts of sugar manufacture as feed for ruminants. Project 1.08 'Sugar cane as livestock feed' envisages manufacture and demonstration feeding of molasses urea salt blocks in St Kitts, with a similar project (1.15) for Nevis. These projects offer the SSMC protection of its basis for existence i.e. sugar manufacturing but also diversification.
63. Uncontrolled grazing is a problem which reduces the productivity of land and animals. Fencing is essential and project 3.02 proposes to provide split fencing and fence posts at a reasonable cost for enclosing livestock. In Nevis, there is a serious problem of 'wild donkeys' estimated to number over 1000. These are destroying the environment and control is addressed in project 1.14.
64. Praedial larceny will only be addressed when more farmers actually reside and spend more time on the farm. A leasing and settlement programme for farmers is stipulated for the success of agroforestry projects such as 1.03.
Forest Based Industrial Development
65. Import of wood based products is high, valued at EC$30 million in 1990. Logging in St Kitts is minimal and inconsequential. No sawmills have been established on either island.
66. Unfortunately, in Nevis timber felling for charcoal production is unregulated and uncontrolled. Re-introduction of regulations and enforcement of control measures is of the utmost importance. Hotels and restaurants obtain their supplies for barbecues from Nevis and large areas have been over-exploited resulting in serious degradation. Project 3.01 aims to establish 12ha of fuelwood, forage and fencepost plantations.
67. There are approximately 12 secondary processing manufacturers mostly producing for the local market. Poor management leads to under-utilization and idle machines. The use of unseasoned untreated lumber has limited product design and generally the quality of products is low. Project 2.01 is for the development of solar drying kilns and will satisfy the need for seasoned lumber at a low cost.
68. The handicraft industry is in a state of malaise, although there is a National Handicraft and Cottage Industries Development Board. Project 2.02 is for the propagation evaluation of three relevant species to encourage their sustained propagation for the handicraft industry. A training component is included.
69. The proper completion of a forest resource inventory is a fundamental pre-requisite for determining the size and nature of existing forest resources, and for assessing potential production capabilities on a sustainable yield basis. Project 2.03 is for 'Documentation of commercial species'. Forest based industries cannot be developed until the resource base is established to supply the raw materials. This is proposed for St Kitts (1.07) and Nevis (1.12). 'Establishment of industrial plantations' is seen as a contribution towards making the country self-sufficient in timber as well as reducing soil erosion and environmental degradation.
70. A logical follow-up to this is project 3.02 for the production of split fencing from poles and thinnings obtained from these plantations established at 10ha per year. The fencing will help alleviate the problem of uncontrolled livestock grazing.
71. The importance of establishing small commercial plantations is stressed. Project 1.05 envisages such plantations as a way of utilizing unproductive land close to the circum-island road.
Forestry Research
72. The separate report (Buford Briscoe, 1991) details constraints and recommendations. There is a need for a continuous forestry inventory which is addressed in regional project 02. Rigorous selection of seed trees and establishment of windbreaks are recommended. Regional project 04 'Meeting research needs in forestry and related areas' is an ideal way for St Kitts and Nevis to benefit from the assistance of a Forest Research Officer.
Wildlife
73. The fragmented approach to environmental administration, which splits responsibility for the management of forests, wetlands, beaches and coral reefs among various state agencies or corporations is, unfortunately, a key factor in the mismanagement of the environment.
74. There is a need for a database for site specific wildlife resource information and initiatives by the SEP Board will address this. All natural ecosystems in St Kitts and Nevis are endangered especially the forested upper elevations. In the Northwestern Range of St Kitts, all zones are highly disturbed. Activities include tree felling, harvesting of non-wood forest products and deliberate burning of gommier bark. In Nevis, construction of large residences in secondary forests above 300m is becoming a cause for concern. The NIA is taking steps to safeguard the forest resources.
75. There are few major wetlands but they are coming under increasing pressure. Comprehensive land use maps would be of benefit in regulating activities in these wetlands. In Nevis, cutting of mangroves and solid waste disposal are the most severe forms of observed abuse.
76. The African Green Monkey, reportedly introduced as a pet in the 17th century, has reached such numbers that farmers complain about damage to crops. Quantitative data on population numbers is urgently required and project 4.02 addresses this.
77. In general, the public does not appear to be fully aware of the benefits of conservation and the role that careful management of the environment plays in national development. However, there are around six very active NGOs doing valuable work which is summarised in the main report. The previously mentioned NCEPA is a magnificent framework for reducing the existing muddled approaches to environmental management.
National Parks and Protected Areas
78. The Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park (BHFNP) in St Kitts is one of the region's most successful restoration efforts of a major historical site. Proposals have been made for nature trails through the wooded areas of the park and it is recommended that proposals for developing the natural attributes of BHFNP be given top priority.
79. The mix of wetland habitats in the SEP can be an important component of the ecotourism and recreation plan for this area. It is recommended that all remaining wetlands of the SEP be declared wildlife sanctuaries. Other general and site specific recommendations are made in the main report for forested lands, wetlands, forest ghauts and monuments.
80. Embracing these recommendations is a proposed project 'Development of a system of national parks and other protected areas' (project 4.03). This project is of the highest priority. In Nevis, the proposed areas are Coconut Walk Estate and New River, and supporting reasons are given in the main report. In St Kitts, development of Wingfield National Park is proposed.
81. Development of the regulations of the NCEPA will be required. Top priority should also be given to the establishment of a secretariat to support the work of the National Conservation Commission as this is the principal agent for the execution of the NCEPA.
82. Species diversity and ecosystem diversity are significant in both St Kitts and Nevis. Priority should be given to the collection of data on the status of rare and endangered plants. Thus project profile 5.01 includes provision for a plant ecologist. An associated key strategy is the provision of herbarium facilities; project profile 5.04 has been prepared to develop this facility.
Ecotourism
83. There is considerable potential for ecotourism and government policy is to support ecotourism. However, this support needs to be expanded into a management plan for all the elements of an ecotourism thrust. A study of park objectives and management activities is recommended in project 4.03 for each element of the national parks plan. In the interim, management of selected sites could be carried out by NGOs, and communities around ecotourism sites could be paid as wardens.
84. Wildlife surveys are essential with regular collection of data being the principal goal. Training of young volunteers is recommended.
85. The recommendation for St Kitts and Nevis to become a signatory of CITES (CEP, 1991) is endorsed. The country has been cited as an exporter of illegal turtle shell. St Kitts and Nevis should also make every effort to become a signatory to SPAW and RAMSAR.
Social Forestry
86. There is both a population and labour decline with a shift of workers from agriculture to tourism. Unemployment is not a problem in either urban or rural areas.
87. The development of ecotourism brings opportunities for more people to be nature trail guides. More forest products could be utilised, for instance for handicrafts or construction, which suggests there is the opportunity for investment in forest resources production.
88. Important nontangible products of the forest economy are watershed management, and wildlife and forest protection. Several organisations involved in rural development activities are listed in the main report.
89. However, a significant core of skilled forest workers or harvesters is lacking. There is a dearth of skilled operators involved in timber processing. There would be the opportunity for farmers and other rural peoples to be more involved in forest based activities especially during the low employment periods in agriculture.
90. More Forestry Division staff are needed in both islands to deal with social forestry activities (see project 5.01). Social forestry activities should be integrated with agroforestry projects and with activities under the UNDP/FAO St Kitts and Nevis Agricultural Diversification Project. Training will be essential.
Public Education
91. This has been well handled and the major actors are listed in the main report. There are some constraints such as a shortage of trained staff, equipment and vehicles as well as special places where environmental education can be taught. Proposed projects 5.02 and 5.03 have been put forward to address the need for trained staff, and to upgrade the facilities for public education in both islands. The expertise of forestry public affairs officers is lacking but is provided for in regional project 05 which is concerned with public education and awareness programmes.
<section>3</section>
List of projects selected and prioritized for NFAP
Forestry in Land Use
Priority
St. Kitts and Nevis
Forest Reserve Boundary Line Survey, Demarcation and Mapping
Highest
Forest Inventory
Highest
Fruit-Tree-Based Agroforestry Project
High
Legume Tree-Based Agroforestry for small Hillside Farmers
High
Coastal Land Rehabilitation
Very High
Expansion and Upgrading of Central Nursery
Highest
Establishment of Industrial Plantations
Highest
Sugarcane as Livestock Feed
High
Livestock Protection in Agroforestry
High
Ghaut Protection and Stabilization
Very High
Nevis
South Nevis Coastal Rehabilitation
Very High
Establishment of Industrial Pla