<title>Inter-Regional project for participatory upland conservation and development (Field Document 3) - Bolivia, Burundi, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia. A Review of project practice in planning, monitoring and evaluation - Learning from experience</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The study described in this document focuses on one of the most challenging and delicate aspects of the overall experience developed by this inter-regional project over the last five years: the design and implementation of a system for planning, monitoring, and evaluating (PME) systems at both the project and community-levels.
Obviously, project-level and community-level PME must be as closely interconnected as possible. In fact, the rationale of the participatory approach adopted by the project implies a direct exchange and a mutual control between: i) plans and activities developed by concerned user groups/interest groups and communities, and ii) the assistance and services provided by the project.
Project design has entailed performing this task with the fewest human and financial resources as possible, so that achievements of pilot experiences developed in the framework of the project can be expected to be more easily replicable by local actors without international assistance. Though this approach has helped preventing the creation of artificial, project-led mechanisms, it has also entailed some limitations inherent to any real-life, low-budget condition.
In this framework, some weaknesses have been identified in the overall PME experience developed by the project to date. However, the study also clearly shows how an innovative PME practice is being progressively adopted by project field teams, collaborating institutions and grassroots organizations.
This process will be further strengthened and developed during the remaining life of the project, to support local partners in an area whose importance has been universally recognised, but where concrete, positive experiences are still strongly needed.
Luca Fé d'Ostiani - Project Manager, GCP/INT/542/ITA
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This document is the outcome of collective efforts made towards re-thinking the PUCD Project's experience in project- and community-level planning, monitoring and evaluation, started during the Internal Technical Review Meeting, held in Hammamet, Tunisia, in December 1996. Special thanks go to the colleagues who participated in that initial discussion: Luca Fé d'Ostiani, Antonella Tomassin, Simone Borelli, Frits Ohler, Helle Qwist-Hoffman, Javier Escobedo, Paolo Mori, Shah Rehman, Marylee Kane, Lamine Toumia, Andrea Ambroso, Ali Ben Mabrouk, and Asma M'hamdi.
Together with field-staff and selected members of local communities, most of the above individuals took part in the self-assessment exercise in June and July 1997, on which most of the facts and opinions presented in this document are based. A preliminary draft was reviewed in-depth by Luca Fé' d'Ostiani, Victor Mol, and Frits Ohler, whose comments helped to improve both the content and form of the document. Mark Kanieff provided steady and accurate editorial assistance.
ACRONYMS
APO
Associated Programme Officer
CAP
Community Action Plan (in Nepal)
CTA
Chief Technical Advisor
FAO
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
FRAMES
Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
ITRM
Internal Technical Review Meeting
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
NFT
National Field Team
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NPD
National Project Director
OTB
Organización Territorial de Base (local grassroots organization, in Bolivia)
PME
Planning, Monitoring, and Evaluation
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
ProDoc
Project Document
PUCD
Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (Project)
SWOL
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Limitations Analysis
<section>3</section>
Executive summary
Since its inception, the FAO/Italy Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD Project) has been a pilot, process-oriented, learning initiative, based on an iterative process of assessment, planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and re-planning Based on the preliminary experiences of the project's National Field Teams (NET), a specialist consultant developed, in 1994, a framework for designing and operating a comprehensive planning, monitoring, and evaluation (PME) system. NFTs in four participating countries (Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan, and Tunisia) have used this framework to develop a PME system fitting local needs, assets, and constraints.
Discussions held at the 1996 PUCD Project's Internal Technical Review Meeting revealed some strengths and weaknesses of this ongoing experience, as well as significant differences in the NFTs' experience with the system and in opinions about its actual performance, usefulness, and adaptability to the local environment It was thus deemed necessary to conduct a more in-depth review of the PME practice in each country, so that areas for improvement could be identified.
The present study is meant to contribute to fulfilling this need by pursuing the following objectives:
1 To describe the initial design of the project- and community-level PME systems and the variants actually implemented by each NET.
2 To assess the implementation of the PME systems in terms of their overall performance, usefulness, and adaptation to the local institutional and social environment, according to the opinions of project management, staff and participants (i.e. self-assessment);
3. To discuss common problems in PME practice elicited from the above mentioned self-assessment exercise; and
4. To develop technical recommendations for improving the design and operation of the PME systems.
The methodology of the study is based on an adapted version of the Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES), developed in the early 1990s by the Evaluation and Research Department of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). A twofold method strategy has been adopted, including:
a) a review of all relevant documents produced by the project's NFTs and the Coordination Unit (mainly for achieving objectives 1 and 3); and
b) interviews with project management, field-staff, and local participants (for achieving objective 2).
In this report, research findings have been organized into three chapters.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the PUCD Project's PME systems, covering:
· the identification of the managerial needs the PME systems are meant to address;
· a "normative" description of the framework of the PME systems, including the different components (i.e. project- and community-level PME) and modules (i.e. planning, monitoring, process evaluation, and result evaluation);
· a review of the variations in the design and operation of the PME systems developed by each national component, according to local needs, assets, and constraints.
Chapter 2 summarises the results of the self-assessment exercises in the form of four detailed self-assessment profiles, one for each national component. These profiles are meant to provide detailed diagnostic indications for future improvement of critical aspects of each local PME system.
Chapter 3 provides a comparative discussion of major self-assessment findings, whose main conclusions can be summarised as follows:
1) During the second phase of the project, the four NFTs made major efforts towards developing sound project- and community-level PME systems.
2) All NFTs positively evaluated the usefulness of outputs of both project- and community-level PME practice, as well as the adaptation of the overall system to the local environment.
3) There are some general problems regarding the functioning of the different components and modules of the PME systems, specifically:
· Priority-setting mechanisms built into project-level planning have not always succeeded in preventing over-planning (i.e. planning commitments could not be fulfilled with the available resources and time).
· Most NFTs have encountered difficulties in using time allocation indicators, as suggested by the consultant, for project-level process evaluation, and some NFTs have questioned the relevance and validity of these indicators.
· To date, project-level PME systems have paid insufficient attention to assessing the project's environmental, social and economic impact.
· According to project management, the field workers' insufficient skills in data collection have been a major constraint in implementing project-level monitoring and evaluation (M&E) practice. This has often been complicated by the field-staffs misunderstandings about the function and meaning of M&E.
· Project managers have also reported difficulties in terms of the field staff's ability to act as facilitators of community-level PME exercises
· All NFTs have found that the analysis and application of project-level M&E information were inadequate.
· The field-staff in Bolivia and Nepal have reported that time requirements are a major constraint in community-level PME practice.
· According to all NFTs, local participants and communities are not skilled or motivated enough to begin organizing and implementing autonomously their community-level PME practice This opinion, however, contradicts the participants' perception of their own performance in this area.
· Based on these conclusions, the following operational recommendations have been developed with the aim of improving the PME practice of the PUCD Project:
Stricter priority-setting mechanisms should he built into the project-level planning module. To this end, information on cost-effectiveness and time required for different activities should he elicited from evaluation exercises and considered, together with technical, social and institutional factors, in assessing the actual feasibility of each activity to he included in local workplans.
Project-level process-evaluation techniques should he simplified. When needed, time-allocation analysis should be replaced by simpler qualitative exercises, such as the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Limitations analysis.
The Coordination Unit and the NFTs expected to participate in the third phase of the project should reconsider the possibility of including an impact evaluation module in the project-level PME system.
The supervision of data collection by field workers should be strengthened. This supervision should have a "formative" orientation (i.e. offering field workers the opportunity to consolidate and upgrade their knowledge, skills, and attitudes).
Higher priority should be given to the processing of M&E data. Whenever possible, this responsibility should he assigned on a full-time basis to one member of the NFT, who should possess the necessary skills or receive appropriate training. If this is not feasible, well defined M&E data processing tasks should be included in the terms of reference of the CTA or other senior staff, and the time needed to perform these tasks should he properly considered in project workplans and individual agendas.
All M&E reports, whether formal or informal, should include a number of operational recommendations for re-planning relevant activities. After thorough discussion with the concerned staff, these recommendations should he fully taken into consideration in designing, programming, and implementing subsequent activities.
Staff members contributing to data collection should receive timely feedback of the findings of evaluation in special sessions or workshops. Appropriate facilitation techniques should he used to stimulate field workers to interpret this information and to improve its implementation
The Coordination Unit, in collaboration with centres of excellence in this area, should facilitate the preparation of a comprehensive training package on community-level PME. This training package should address the learning needs of both field-staff and leaders of selected grassroots organizations.
· During the third phase of the project, the role of project staff in the operation of community-level PME exercises should he progressively re-oriented. Less work and time should he invested in organizing and implementing community-level PME events, while more emphasis should be placed on providing training and formative supervision on participatory PME to local interest groups and grassroots organizations.
The responsibility for organizing and implementing community-level PME events should he progressively handed over to trained community members. However, methodological backstopping should continue to he provided to interest groups and grassroots organizations. Arrangements should also he made with national centres with relevant expertise, to ensure that they will continue to provide their assistance after the project's termination.
<section>4</section>
Introduction
Background and rationale of the study
Objectives of the study
Methodology
This report
Background and rationale of the study
The FAO/Italy Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD Project) aims at identifying and field-testing strategies, methods and techniques for promoting and consolidating people's participation in the integrated management of upland watersheds The project was begun in 1992 and, until 1997, was implemented in two phases in selected watersheds of Bolivia, Burundi, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia A two-year third phase is currently being conducted in the three countries that the Tripartite Review Mission indicated as the most promising for institutionalising the project experience at the national level (Bolivia, Nepal and Tunisia)
Since its inception, the PUCD Project has been a pilot, process-oriented, learning initiative It was designed to be flexible in terms of the nature and type of activities and outputs An iterative process of assessment, planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and re-planning has been developed to ensure that field activities and specific outputs are consistent with the needs of participating communities and the capabilities of local counterparts and partner institutions^1.
^1 See COO/94/1. For the sake of brevity, all references to project materials included in this paper are denoted using the following code: the PUCD field component (COO = Coordination Unit; PUB = publications; BOL = Bolivia; NEP = Nepal; PAK = Pakistan; and TUN = Tunisia); the year of preparation (94, 95, 96, etc.); and the month of delivery (1 = January; 2 = February; 3 = March; etc.). The list of documents consulted is presented in Annex II.
During the second phase of the project (1994-97), a specialist consultant (the author of the present report) provided technical support to National Field Teams (NFTs) and the Coordination Unit in developing systems for internal planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME). Based on a needs-assessment, and following a preliminary reconnaissance to Bolivia, the specialist consultant prepared a framework for these systems in 1994 ^2. This framework was meant to be structured enough for establishing a common PME practice among the different field components of the project, yet flexible enough to be adaptable to the variety of institutional and social environments
^2 See COO/94/8.
From 1994 to 1996, a number of field missions to Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia allowed this framework to be adapted to each specific national component ^3 During these missions, interaction with the NFTs facilitated the development of several amendments to the consultant's initial proposal. Further suggestions for improvement were provided by discussions held during yearly Internal Technical Review Meetings (ITRM) and informal exchanges among NFTs. The PME systems implemented in each country can thus be considered as the outcome of a joint elaboration process.
^3 Unfortunately, it was not possible to directly involve the NFT in Burundi in this process. In fact, two missions of the consultant to this country were canceled due to prevailing security conditions. Consequently, the NFT in Burundi autonomously developed its own project-level PME practice. However, the unique conditions in which the Burundi NFT's PME experience developed and the lack of substantial documentation of this experience led to the decision to not include Burundi in this review.
Discussions held at the 1996 PUCD project's ITRM allowed common strengths and weaknesses of this experience to be identified ^4. The following strengths were identified; high flexibility and adaptability to local conditions; progressive improvement through experience; contribution to better planning; involvement of field-staff; improved availability of information on the functioning of the project and its achievements; contribution to local capacity-building; and support to the dissemination of the project's approach. The main weaknesses included: technical problems in the operation of the system; controversial value of certain key indicators; limited reliability and validity of data from monitoring and evaluation (M&E); uncertain sustainability at the institutional level; insufficient investment in the operation of the system, unsatisfactory performance in processing and applying M&E data, and inconsistent community involvement.
^4 Se COO/97/7.
Discussions also revealed significant differences in the NFTs' experience with the system and in opinions about its actual performance, usefulness and adaptability to the local environment It was thus deemed necessary to conduct a more in-depth review of the PME experience carried out to date in each country in order to identify areas for improvement. This review was found to be especially urgent in view of the termination of Phase 2 of the project and the start-up of Phase 3, aimed at replicating the project's approach on a wider scale and at it institutionalising it. Establishing a PME system adapted to the institutional culture and operational capability of national counterparts was, in fact, identified as a basic task to be carried out by the project after August 1997 (the termination date of Phase 2).
The present study is meant to contribute to this endeavour by reviewing the NFTs' experience to date with PME in Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia, based on the opinions of actors in the field-projects (managers, staff and members of participating grassroots organizations). Its main purpose is to develop technical recommendations (covering both amendments in the system's design and operational requirements) for improving the NFTs' PME practice during the forthcoming third phase
Objectives of the study
This study focuses on the PME experience gained by four NFTs (i.e. Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia) from 1994 to 1997.
The specific objectives of the study are as follows:
1. To describe the initial design of the project- and community-level PME systems and the variants actually implemented by each NFT involved.
2. To assess the implementation of the above PME systems in terms of their overall performance, usefulness, and adaptation to the local institutional and social environment, according to the opinions of project management, staff, and participants (i.e. self-assessment).
3. To discuss common problems in PME practice elicited from the above mentioned self-assessment exercise.
4 To propose technical recommendations for improving the design and operation of the PME systems
Methodology
The methodology of the study is based on an adapted version of the Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES), developed in the early 1990s by the Evaluation and Research Department of the International Fund for Agricultural Development ^5 A twofold research method has been adopted, including:
^5 See O. N. Feinstein. 1993. Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES). IFAD M&E Division Special Studies. Report N° 0449. IFAD: Rome.
a) a review of all relevant PME documents (mainly for achieving objectives 1 and 3); and
b) interviews with NET management, field-staff, and local participants (for achieving objective 2).
a) Review of PME documents
The documents reviewed included the following PME materials produced from 1993 to 1997 by the four NFTs and the Coordination Unit:
* PME design documents;
* mission reports by consultants;
* relevant materials submitted or produced during the 1995 and 1996 ITRMs;
* PME manuals and guidelines prepared for/by NFTs; and
* internal monitoring and evaluation reports prepared by NFTs.
Based on these materials, the overall framework of the PUCD Project's PME was outlined, and profiles of the systems actually implemented in each field-project were prepared. This review also contributed to identifying elements to be considered in the discussion of self-assessment findings.
b) Interviews with PME actors
These interviews were conducted to obtain the opinions of project management [Chief Technical Advisers (CTAs), National Project Directors (NPD), and the staff in-charge of M&E activities (M&E Officers)], and of a sample of field-staff and participants, on the following aspects of the PME system:
· functioning (i.e performance related to the collection, storage, analysis, feedback, and use of PME information).
· usefulness (i.e. relevance of PME information to project- or community-level decision-making); and
· adaptation to the local environment (including participation of different PME actors and replicability of certain elements of the system without assistance from the project).
Different means of data collection were used with each of the above categories of respondents. A questionnaire, including both scoring-scale questions and open-ended questions, was submitted individually to CTAs, NPDs, and M&E Officers. The perceptions of field-staff were collected through group exercises in strengths and weaknesses analysis. The participants' opinions were obtained through focus-group interviews (involving at least two different groups of project participants for each national component).
Processing of interview data included;
· a quantitative analysis of scoring-scale questions included in the questionnaire for project management. Average scores were calculated for each item of the questionnaire and for the overall performance and usefulness of project-level and community-level PME ^6; and
^6 Quantitative data generated by scoring-scale questions are presented in table format in Annex I.
· a qualitative analysis of answers to open-ended question and statements from strengths and weaknesses analysis group exercises and focus-group interviews. To this end, several techniques were used, including cross-referencing of statements, identification and classification of key themes, and validation by triangulation.
Based on this information, self-assessment profiles of the PME practice developed by each NFT were created. Subsequently, these profiles were compared with the aim of identifying and resolving technical problems affecting PME practice
This report
In this report, research findings have been organized into three chapters.
Chapter I provides an overview of the PUCD Project's PME system design, covering:
· the managerial needs the system was meant to address;
· a "normative" description of the different components and elements of the system;
· a review of the variations in the design, subsequently developed for adjusting the system to the specific needs, assets and constraints of each national component.
Chapter 2 summarises the results of the evaluation exercise in the form of four self-assessment profiles, one for each national component. These profiles are meant to provide detailed diagnostic indications for future improvement of critical aspects of each local PME system, This detailed presentation addresses the specific needs of the concerned NFTs. Certain readers of this document may not be interested in such an in-depth analysis and are advised to move on to Chapter 3.
Chapter 3 describes the main comparative findings of the study and provides general recommendations.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1 - Design and implementation of the PUCD project's PME systems
1.1. General framework of the PME systems
1.2. Bolivia
1.3. Nepal
1.4. Pakistan
1.5 Tunisia
1.1. General framework of the PME systems
To comply with the open-ended and flexible design of the Project Document (ProDoc), the PUCD Project's PME systems should be able to:
· enable local staff to prepare sound and detailed workplans, focusing on specific micro-outputs to be pursued in a given period of time, relevant actions and organizational aspects;
· ensure timely monitoring of the progress made towards achieving the micro-outputs specified by the workplans;
· extract lessons learned from implementation, through simple "formative" evaluation exercises;
· promote application of lessons learned to further planning.
Further requisites are posed by the participatory approach. These include:
· enabling the participating communities and interest groups to identify relevant and feasible activities to be carried out with assistance provided by the project (or other partners);
· supporting local participants in ensuring the appropriate follow-up of the implementation process;
· contributing to participants' "learning-by-doing process" by facilitating self-evaluation and re-planning practices.
To meet both sets of requisites, the general framework of the PME system prepared by the consultant in 1994 included both a project-level and a community-level component.
a) Project-level PME
This component aims to support NFTs in planning, following-up, and assessing the project's performance and the achievement of micro-outputs. Project-level PME is based on simple conventional PME techniques and tools and is organized into the following four modules:
· The planning module facilitates the identification of micro-outputs to be achieved, major steps in implementation, and tentative deadlines for achievement. It includes exercises for priority-setting, feasibility analysis, logical-framework (means/end) analysis, and programming.
· The monitoring module facilitates the continuous adjustment of the project's workplans to the constraints encountered in implementation. It also allows for the assessment of timeliness in implementation. It is based on regular monitoring meetings during which the project staff analyses the progress made and the causes for delay.
· The process-evaluation module facilitates the periodical assessment of implementation. It allows the project's and the partners' inputs to be reviewed in terms of both quantity (based on lime-allocation indicators, see Box 1) and quality (as perceived by staff and participants). Its main output is the identification of strengths and weaknesses in implementation.
BOX 1 - Time-allocation indicators for quantitative process evaluation
INDICATORS
PROXIES FOR
Average no. of staff involved
Project's commitment to implementation
Total hours contributed by staff
Project's work input
Average no, of participants involved
Participation in implementation
Total hours contributed by participants
Participants' work input
Ratio of staff to participants in terms of total hours (total hours staff/total hours participants)
Efficiency of the participatory process
· The result-evaluation module facilitates the assessment of the preliminary achievements of project implementation. Based on the specific needs of each NFT, which may vary by location and time, this module may include exercises for evaluating the following results, based on relevant indicators:
- environmental changes (e.g., re-vegetation of rangelands; see example from Pakistan in Box 2);
- social changes (e.g., capacity-building of grassroots organizations, women's participation);
- changes in people's competence or behaviour (e.g., adoption of "conservation-by-use" practices, management of community nurseries).
- financial results of income-generating activities and technical results of field trials (e.g., introduction of new species or varieties, innovative measures for natural resource management).
These exercises may be carried out just once or repeated several times during the project. Their main output lies in distinguishing those aspects of the project's technical contributions that work best
BOX 2
Indicators for assessing environmental changes related to project activities identified by the NFT in Pakistan (February 1995)
Agricultural land protected by bunds (surface)
Agricultural land serviced by cemented channels
Depth of the water table in selected wells
Surface of plots afforested with Tamarix
Survival rate of Tamarix plantations
Surface of plots afforested with saltbush
Survival rate of saltbush plantations
No. of trees planted (by species) in special locations (roads, irrigation channels, compounds)
Survival rate of trees planted (by species)
% cover by species under different treatments
% composition of vegetation under different treatments
% overall cover under different treatments
Biomass (kg) per acre under different treatments
b) Community-level PME
Community-level PME aims to support interest groups and communities in learning how to better orient and implement their initiatives. It is based on participatory action-research methods similar to Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA).
Community level PME is organized into the following three modules
· The planning module, is based on the initial participatory appraisal or the subsequent participatory-evaluation exercises It is meant to facilitate the identification of priority needs, the design of relevant activities, the assessment of their feasibility, and the preparation of a simple workplan answering the basic planning questions of "What?", "What for?", "How?", "By whom?", and "By when?". The participatory techniques and tools for this module include: problem-tree analysis, priority-ranking participatory feasibility analysis matrixes, and participatory planning matrixes
· The participatory monitoring module includes exercises conducted during implementation for facilitating participants awareness of the progress made and of the difficulties met in putting into practice initial planning decisions, and for adjusting the process accordingly The main technique used is participatory monitoring meetings
· The participatory evaluation module allows participants to review the work process and results, to extract lessons learned from implementation, and to plan the continuation of activities accordingly. Relevant techniques and tools include: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Limitations (SWOL) analysis; Problems, Causes and Solutions analysis; observational walks; slide; language; community-based experiments; participatory mapping of changes; scoring of key indicators; and ex-post participatory cost-benefit analysis
Since 1994, the above general framework of the PUCD Project's PME systems has been progressively adjusted according to the specific needs, assets, and constraints of each project field component. ^7 As a result of this process, the individual PME systems that have been actually implemented significantly differ among the four field components. The key features of each of these systems are summarised in the following sections. Some examples of the techniques, tools, and procedures adopted are provided in boxes.
^7 Adjustment of the system's framework to local conditions was facilitated through start-up and follow-up consultancies. During start-up consultancies, the system's framework was discussed in detail with project management and staff, and upgraded on the basis of their suggestions. Paper and computerized tools were developed for data collection and storage, as were procedures for data analysis, and for the feedback and subsequent use of information, taking into account users' preferences. The outcomes of these activities were presented to the NTT in training workshops, aimed at clarifying the rationale and objectives of each exercise included in the system, and at transferring the relevant skills for data collection and processing. In subsequent follow-up missions, the experience undergone in the six to twelve months following the start-up mission was reviewed with project management (including, when appropriate, staff members in-charge of coordinating PME operations) and
staff. The system's shortcomings were identified, and amendments were made, according to users' demands and suggestions. When appropriate, original ideas developed by NFTs were integrated into the system. Furthermore, the staff in-charge was provided with additional training on ho