<title>National Forestry Action Programme - St Lucia: Executive summary</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This document comprises two parts:
Executive Summary
Project Profiles
The Executive Summary is based on that which is included in the main report of the National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP) for St Lucia. The main report was produced as a result of the visit of the FAO/TFAP Country Mission Team (CMT - Appendix I).
There are twenty three proposed projects under all five FAO TFAP priority areas. For four of these areas, charts are included which clearly summarise the associated problems and objectives.
In addition to these twenty three project profiles, three core projects have been formulated. These cover the areas of: management of critical watersheds, agroforestry development and natural resources conservation and development, and are available as a separate document. The five proposed regional projects which were formulated after this document had been prepared, are also of relevance and interest to St. Lucia.
Attention is also drawn to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA. July 1993.
Forestry developments at the regional/subregional level-regional project proposals 01-05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region.
Report on Forest Research - special study as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe.
Map 1. Map of St. Lucia and location in the Caribbean region
Source: Country Environmental Profile for St. Lucia, CCA/IRF/USAID 1991
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
1. Introduction
2. Overview of the forestry subsector
3. National forestry action plan
4. National development policy framework
5. Plan objectives
6. Development programmes
1. Introduction
1. The full contribution of the forestry sector to the national economy is significant and broad. It touches many sectors of the economy and most St. Lucians. In measured value terms, however, it is very modest. Contributions such as erosion control, watershed value, tourist amenity and ecological diversity are not easily measured but are substantial in terms of benefits accruing to the users.
2. St. Lucia has numerous areas of outstanding natural value. However, its ecosystem is undergoing rapid changes and while there is no apparent danger of ecological catastrophe at the present time, the fragile nature of its environment means that the ecosystem must be protected. The growth of population and of the economy in recent decades has meant that the natural environment is coming under increasing pressure from human activities. The impact of these activities is accelerating, and their deleterious effects are to be found in the loss of forests and woodlands to agricultural and other uses, the reduction in stream flows, increasing soil erosion and landslides, the destruction of coastal features, the pollution of rivers and the sea and the loss of wildlife.
3. These important contributions of the forestry subsector are being reduced by degradation. The forests are disappearing at a rate of approximately 1-2% per annum.
4. The future of St. Lucia's economy will largely depend on putting a stop to deforestation and other forms of forest degradation. The forest resources must be put under proper conservation practices. Consequently, the Government of St. Lucia has prepared a National Forestry Action Plan which covers a five year period and focuses on the five priority areas of FAO's Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) methodology (see overview document).
5. The total cost of the five-year National Forestry Action Plan is estimated at US$12,090 million. Implementation of this Plan will be the responsibility of mainly the Ministry of Agriculture through the Planning Unit and the Forest and Lands Department (Appendix II).
2. Overview of the forestry subsector
6. The total forest area of St. Lucia, approximately 8,000ha (13% of the land area) constitutes one of the main environmental benefits to the island. These forests and other areas of trees are slowly being eroded by encroachment and misuse.
7. Analysis of the status of Forestry in Land Use indicates inadequate land use planning and coordination of watershed protection. Insufficient soil and water conservation measures have led to stream pollution, soil erosion and reduction of water retention capacity in the watershed. Much of this is a result of cultivation on marginal lands, poor farming practices and lack of land use policy.
8. In the area of Conservation. St. Lucia is attempting to bring under protection sensitive areas of biodiversity and to establish national park land. There is, however, no set policy as yet to guide conservation of the forest ecosystems outside of the Forest Reserve. There is also insufficient institutional capacity for regulation. Public awareness needs to be strengthened with regard to the benefits of environmental conservation and its impact on economic development, particularly in the public sector.
9. The Fuelwood and Energy priority area is a major contributor to wood use in St. Lucia. Fuelwood and charcoal are used by approximately 83% of households. While the extent of this usage appears to be decreasing, it still accounts for pressure on the existing forest and needs to be controlled and augmented by the establishment of community-based fast-growing fuelwood sources, particularly in areas where pressure on the forest is greatest.
10. Forest based industries are limited to woodcutters producing wood for use by the local furniture and building industry. The sustainable capacity of the present resource is not sufficient to support medium-sized wood utilization plants.
11. In the priority area Institutions there is conflicting legislation and areas where inadequate or no legislation exists, which needs to be remedied. Institutional assistance is also needed in land use planning and upgrading of institutional capacity in the lead institutions. This is most needed specifically in the area of natural and environmental resources regulation (Appendix III).
12. The National Forestry Action Plan is designed to strengthen the subsector's contribution to St. Lucia's economy based on improvements ranging from legal reform and improvement of regulatory capacity to institutional support in land use planning, improvements in forest management, afforestation and ecological protection.
13. Investments in these should assist in improving the sustained economic growth in the subsector and improve the ability to maintain a stable resource base for the land-using sectors of the economy.
3. National forestry action plan
14. The St. Lucia National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP) was prepared through the combined efforts of the Government of St. Lucia, the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), acting as the lead cooperating agency, and the Overseas Development Administration of the United Kingdom (ODA/UK) which provided most of the funding.
15. During the preparation of the plan, policies and conditions in the forestry and related subsectors beginning at the community level were studied and analyzed for use as guides to the preparation. Based on priorities and objectives, strategies and programmes were formulated or presented leading to the presentation of 23 project proposals in the NFAP.
16. Planning capability in land use and watershed protection as well as legal and regulatory frameworks need to be strengthened in order to support the continuation of the plan process and implementation of programmes along recommended lines.
4. National development policy framework
17. While the National Development Plan is stilt in preparation, the following statements expressed in the objectives of the National Physical Development Strategy (proposed 1990) are relevant to the protection, enhancement and development of the forestry subsector, and to its increased contribution to the nation's environmental well-being.
1) To conserve and protect all essential elements and processes in the natural environment.
2) To conserve and protect all areas of outstanding natural beauty.
3) To limit to a minimum the adverse effects of all forms of development on the environment.
4) To improve the functioning of the urban environment through zoning, land use conformity and other measures.
5) To develop to their full potential agriculture, fishing and other rural industries.
18. The NFAP has been prepared and should be implemented within this broad policy framework as part of the Government's official development policy.
5. Plan objectives
19. Study and analysis in the preparation of the NFAP indicated that substantial progress was being made in the areas of resource conservation and environmental preservation but that there were a number of constraints impeding progress to meet the economic and social needs. Removal of the constraints and improvement of the institutional and legislative requirements will allow for a stronger participation in the management and development of the natural and environmental resources of St. Lucia and provide for a more interactive role between the lead institutions and the rural population and other resource-related private and public agencies. This will also provide the required flexibility for the successful implementation of the plan.
20. To implement the NFAP the following objectives have been set:
Overall Subsector Objective
21. To conserve and manage the natural resources for the protection of the environment and to obtain maximum utilization consistent with sustainable development and with regard to the welfare of rural communities.
Priority Area Objectives
22. Forestry in Land Use: To allocate appropriate land to secure a resource base for sustainable forestry and allied activities to ensure the protection of the environment, particularly watersheds, and to provide diversity for opportunities to generate income for the rural population.
23. Conservation of Forest Ecosystems: To conserve biological diversity and natural forest ecosystems through the establishment of protected areas, and to maximize their contribution to national development.
24. Fuelwood and Energy: To sustain fuelwood resources and alternative energy sources within the constraints attendant on the preservation of the environment.
25. Forest Based Industrial Development: As far as possible develop the management of the limited forest resources for maximum social and economic benefit.
26. Institutions: To bring policies and laws in line with national natural resource policies, develop an institutional framework capable of carrying out development requirements and to ensure maximum participation of the public and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).
6. Development programmes
27. Programmes are presented in each of the five priority areas within the framework of the objectives presented above. The programmes respond to problems identified in each of the priority areas and are composed of specific projects formulated as "project profiles".
28. In the field of Forestry in Land Use, there are four programmes with a total of eight projects.
Programme 1: Watershed Management Programme
29. This addresses problems of deterioration in upper watershed areas with a view to remedial action and preparation of a plan for watershed improvement on a sustainable basis.
Project 1.01 Sustained Redevelopment of Watersheds
Project 1.02 Fond St. Jacques Watershed Management Project
Project 1.03 Choiseul Watershed Management Project
Programme 2: Agroforestry Programme
30. This is intended to address the need for diversification in marginal agricultural areas, particularly on steep slopes and in areas where pressure is being placed on the forest by landless farmers. This programme comprises three projects.
Project 1.04 Agroforestry Development
Project 1.05 Beausejour Communal Pasture
Project 1.06 Honey Production
Programme 3: Intensive Forest Management
31. There is one project in this area which plans to address natural forest improvement for future production and to bring management information and plantation maintenance up to date.
Project 1.07 Forest Improvement and Plantation Maintenance
Programme 4: Land Use Programme
32. This comprises a single project to deal with the problem of the acquisition, consolidation and redistribution of Crown lands and unused lands.
Project 1.08 Development of a Land Bank
33. The priority area Conservation of Ecosystems contains seven projects which aim at improving the ecological data base and protection and ecological conservation with a view to the economic feasibility of nature tourism. These projects are:
Project 2.01 Coastal Resources Development
Project 2.02 Proposal for National Park Land Development
Project 2.03 Nature Trail Development
Project 2.04 Herbarium Expansion and Development
Project 2.05 Bois D'orange Wetland Bird Sanctuary
Project 2.06 Wetland and Waterfowl Conservation
Project 2.07 Study of Wildlife in St. Lucia
34. As there is a sufficient but declining demand for fuelwood/ charcoal, only two projects have been developed under the priority area Fuelwood and Energy. Project 3.01 (Pilot Establishment of Community Woodlots) is presented to relieve the pressure on the forest resource in those areas of greatest need, and Project 3.02 (Biogas Plant Development) looks at an alternative natural source of energy for the small landholder.
35. The Forest Based Industrial Development priority area is restricted to only one project owing to the fact that the sustainable productive quantity of timber from the existing forests will only support limited local part-time industry. Project 4.01 (Cooperative Forest Industry) proposes the organizing of woodcutters for sustainable annual production of sawn material from the forest under management.
36. Finally, the priority area of Institutions includes 5 projects under three programmes.
Programme 1: Public Education Programme is made up of Project 5.01 (Establishing/Strengthening Environmental Clubs in Schools), a natural resource education project.
Programme 2: Institution Building Programme
Project 5.02 Land Use Planning Model (an immediate priority which is already initiated by the Ministry of Planning).
Project 5.03 Training in Conservation, Training in Agroforestry-Techniques for the SLBGA
Project 5.04 Strengthening of the Information Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture
Programme 3: Legislation Programme Project 5.05 Natural Resource Legislation
This project is an immediate priority, an "imperative" before the land use and watershed projects can be initiated. This project financing has been agreed by CIDA and the Government of St. Lucia; all that remains is for this to be passed by Cabinet.
<section>3</section>
Summary list of proposed project profiles
Priority area: forestry in land use
1.01 Sustainable redevelopment of watersheds
1.02 Fond St Jacques watershed management project
1.03 Choiseul watershed management project
1.04 Agroforestry development
1.05 Beausejour communal pasture
1.06 Honey production
1.07 Forest improvement and plantation maintenance
1.08 Development of a land bank
Priority area: conservation of ecosystems
2.01 Coastal resources development
2.02 Proposal for national park land development
2.03 Nature trail development
2.04 Herbarium expansion and development
2.05 Bois D'orange wetland bird sanctuary
2.06 Wetland and waterfowl conservation
2.07 Study of wildlife in St Lucia
Priority area: fuelwood and energy
3.01 Pilot establishment of community woodlots
3.02 Biogas plant development
Priority area: forest based industrial development
4.01 Cooperative forest industry
Priority area: institutions
5.01 Establishing/strengthening environmental clubs in schools
5.02 Land use planning model
5.03 Techniques for the SLBGA: training in conservation, training in agroforestry
5.04 Strengthening of the Information Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture
5.05 Natural resource legislation
<section>4</section>
Summary of project priorities
FROM HIGHEST PRIORITY IN DESCENDING ORDER
1.01 Sustainable Redevelopment of Watersheds
1.02 Fond St. Jacques Watershed Management Project
1.03 Choiseul Watershed Management Project
1.04 Agroforestry Redevelopment
2.01 Coastal Resources Development
2.02 National Parks
2.05 Bois D'Orange Wetland Bird Sanctuary
2.06 Wetland and Waterfowl Conservation
5.03 Conservation Expertise of SLBGA
5.01 Environmental School Club
1.06 Honey Production
2.03 Nature Trail Development
2.04 Herbarium Expansion and Development
3.01 Pilot establishment of Community Woodlot Other Projects (not prioritised)
<section>5</section>
Budget summary EC$'000
PROJECT NO.
PROJECT TITLE
PRIORITY AREA
TOTAL ESTIMATED COST
LOCAL CONTRIBUTION
FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION
Sustainable Redevelopment of Watersheds
Forestry in Land Use
Fond St. Jacques Watershed Management Project
Forestry in Land Use
Choiseul Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Agro-Forestry Development
Beause jour Communal Pasture
Honey Production
Forest Improvement and Plantation Maintenance
Development of Land Bank
Coastal Resources Development
Conservation of Forest Eco-Systems
National Parks
Nature Trail Development
Herbarium Expansion and Development
Bo is D'Orange Wetland Bird Sanctuary
Wetland and Waterfowl Conservation
Study of Wildlife of Saint Lucia
Pilot Establishment of Community Woodlot (s)
Fuel wood & Energy
Biogas Plant Development
Co-operative Forest Industry
Forest-based industries development
Environmental School Club
Institutions
Land Use Planning Model
Conservation Expertise for SLBGA
Strengthening of Information Unit
Natural Resources Legislation
TOTAL
<section>6</section>
Project profiles
PRIORITY AREA 1: FORESTRY IN LAND USE
Problem analysis
Objectives analysis
<section>7</section>
Summary of project proposals towards realisation of objectives
1. Watershed management programme
2. Agroforestry programme
3. Incentive forest management programme
4. Land use programme
Within the "Forestry in Land Use" priority area there are four (4) programmes:
Watershed Management Programme
Agroforestry Programme
Intensive Forest Management Programme
Land Use Programme
A total of eight (8) projects, have been developed to assist in the fulfillment of the objectives outlined above. These are summarised in the following:-
1. Watershed management programme
ST. LUCIA - NATIONAL FORESTRY ACTION PLAN PROJECT PROFILE
PROJECT NUMBER:
PROJECT TITLE:
Sustainable Redevelopment of Watersheds
PROJECT DURATION:
Five (5) Years
ESTIMATED COST:
EC$5, 401, 000
PROJECT LOCATION:
Woodlands, Marquis, Ravine Poisson/Cendifeur, Desruisseaux/Blanchard, Viancelle & Errand Woodlands
BENEFICIARIES:
St. Lucia farmers and future populations
EXECUTING AGENCY:
Ministry of Agriculture/Forestry Engineering Division, SLBGA: National Farmers Association
BACKGROUND
The six (6) locations identified represent important watersheds in differing ecological zones within St. Lucia (Map 2). They are characterised by steep slopes, unstable soils, high population densities, heavy rainfall during the wet season, and their close proximity to water sources utilised by the Water and Sewage Authority. During the last decade these lands have been placed under heavy pressure by landless farmers hungry for land to cultivate high value cash crops, in particular bananas. The 'banana boom' of the 1980s has resulted in the cultivation by farmers of steep slopes categorised as unsuitable for agricultural purposes. The simultaneous depletion of the forest cover and minimal application of conservation measures by the users have led to heavy top soil erosion and noticeable siltation of the important water sources. It is therefore imperative that conservation measures be applied in these areas to reverse the destructive trend of the past decade (s).
Map 2. St Lucia drainage basins and priority water management areas
Figure 2.2(1): St. Lucia basin numbering system and priority management areas
This project must be linked to follow the development of project No. 5.02 (Land Use Planning Model) since approved policy directives will form the basis for strategies adopted during its implementation.
OBJECTIVES
Immediate
To demonstrate to farmers in the identified locations the use and benefits of agroforestry techniques.
Long-term
(1) To phase out cash crop cultivation on highly degraded areas.
(2) Universal application of approved watershed management practices by both farmers and central authorities.
ACTIVITIES
1. Select 5-10 acres in moderately to steeply sloping lands within the targeted watersheds, probably occupied by bananas, and obtain agreement to use for a period of five (5) years.
2. Analyse agroecological environments within which the banana can be grown satisfactorily.
3. Produce plans for each banana site which include full conservation and the introduction of leguminous hedges on the contour, with or without drains and vetiver protection, for a mixture with bananas initially and subsequently complete removal of the banana crop (which seems desirable). Produce plans for other sites to include an agrosilvo-pastoral alternative.
4. Demonstrate phased replacement of bananas using alley cropping system and a variety of other crop/animal use and other levels of investigation as appropriate, including low levels for dry scrub woodland areas and show income attainable.
5. Investigate farmer problems of implementing agroforestry and solve.
6. Evaluate costs and benefits of alternative uses.
7. Complete land use planning model (Project 5.02) evaluate previous projects, strategy and policies developed.
8. Review possible combinations of development options (a) within catchments; (b) among parts of catchments and optimisation in relation to achievement of policy goals, and any other constraints. Prioritise group activities/projects in relation to available funds.
OUTPUTS
1. Agroforestry demonstration sites developed within the identified critical watersheds (ref: project location).
2. Detailed plans developed for rehabilitation of targeted watersheds.
3. Final project choices made in relation to capability, need and readiness of target group.
4. Problem watersheds redeveloped.
PROJECT BUDGET EC$'000
COMPONENT
LOCAL
FOREIGN
TOTAL
REMARKS
1. Land Acquisition
60 acres leased EC$4,000/acre per acre for 5 yrs
2. Preparation 6 Maintenance of Demonstration Plots
3. Erosion Control Specialist
Consultant for 1 yr US$5,000/month
4. Agroforestry Specialist
Consultant for 1 yr a US$5,000/month
5. Local support staff
Project Manager, Maintenance staff for 5 years
6. Watersheds Redevelopment
Six targeted Watersheds
7. 10% Contingency
8. Grand Total
PROJECT NUMBER:
PROJECT TITLE:
Fond St. Jacques Watershed Management Project
PROJECT DURATION:
Five (5) Years
ESTIMATED COST:
EC$1,067,000
BENEFICIARIES:
Fond St. Jacques farmers
EXECUTING AGENCY:
Ministry of Agriculture - Forestry & Engineering visions/National Farmers Association
BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Fond St. Jacques, a rural community approximately four miles south east of Soufriere (Map 2), has a population in the region of 2, 000. Like all other rural communities in St. Lucia, farming is the main source of subsistence for the members of households. The natural attributes of the region, such as a moist humid climate, good vegetative cover and fertile soils, apart from its steep terrain, affords this region the potential for tremendous agricultural output. As such Fond St. Jacques has been traditionally known as the "Food Basket" of St. Lucia. However a number of interrelated problems inhibit the area's ability to measure up to expectations, in terms of potential agricultural output. Foremost among these is the continued degradation of steep slopes, which is the characteristic of the area, during cultivation of short term cash crops, such as bananas and dasheen. If not checked immediately, this situation could have irreversible effects both on the ecology and
agricultural potential of this area, and as a direct result the income and survival of its inhabitants.
Execution of the earmarked project is therefore justified for the following reasons:
1. To conserve the fertile land resources of the area for the benefit of present and future generations.
2. To preserve valuable watersheds.
3. To maintain and increase farmers' income and livelihood.
4. To enable the area to live up to its reputation of 'food basket' of St. Lucia.
PROJECT CONTRIBUTION TO ST. LUCIA'S DEVELOPMENT
The project will contribute to St. Lucia's development in the following areas:
1. Assist the island in its overall agricultural diversification effort, away from its almost total dependence on bananas.
2. Contribute to the government's agricultural import substitution programme.
3. Increased agricultural exports, other than bananas, and improved balance of payments.
4. Protection of valuable watersheds for present and future generations.
OBJECTIVES
Long-term
To devise a long-term watershed management plan for the entire Fond St. Jacques area.
Immediate
(a) to identify and improve conservation farming practices on all watersheds in the area;
(b) to provide farmers with adequate financial and technical support in order to undertake major conservation measures.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The project will consist of the following major components, selected on the basis of their potential to facilitate realization of the earmarked objectives over the planned period:
i. Watershed survey
It is proposed to thoroughly survey the Fond St. Jacques area during the first year of project implementation. With the assistance of aerial photo interpretation, all perilous areas will be identified, classified and mapped. Additionally research will be conducted on land use practices and the land ownership structure.
ii. Reforestation
Immediately following the completion of the survey and the submission of the report, activities will be directed towards the complete reforestation of severely damaged areas, areas where viable agricultural practices have become more or less impossible.
iii. Agroforestry
An important component of this project will be the implementation of an agroforestry sub-project, utilizing tree species with a strong root system - citrus etc. - on less steep parts of slopes, while forest trees are planted on the steep slopes.
iv. Improved Agronomic/Engineering Practices
Farmers will be introduced to improved conservation farming practices, such as inter-cropping, terracing, drainage and the use of stream banks. They will also be advised on the importance of continually adopting such practices in the interest of sustained income and output from their farms.
v. Social Forestry-Medicinal Plant Production
In seeking to minimise traditional/intensive farming in the area, farmers should be encouraged to extend their thoughts towards creative economic enterprises which do not degrade the environment. To this end, a pilot scheme will be implemented to encourage farmers to cultivate herbal plants on a commercial basis. The pilot scheme will serve to test marketing and processing possibilities before embarking on a large project.
vi. Technical and Financial Assistance
Farmers will be provided with technical and financial assistance and incentives to implement the desired programmes. For example in the area of agroforestry, inputs will be supplied by the executing agency at a drastically reduced cost. Also, some form of compensation will be paid for loss of income during the gestation period of certain tree crop species, planted on land previously under short-term cash crops.
PROJECT BUDGET EC$ '000
COMPONENT
LOCAL
FOREIGN
TOTAL
REMARKS
1. Watershed Survey
1.1 Consultancy services
2 consultants × 3 mths × 5000 US$/mt
1.2 Accommodation/office space
Hotel accommodation 3 EC$200/day
1.3 Vehicle rental/maintenance
Two 4×WD vehicles
1.4 Supplementary services
Typists, equipment rental etc.
2. Reforestation Activities
2.1 Seedlings
20, 000 seedlings 3 EC$2.50 each
2.2 Vehicle/maintenance
Purchase of 2 4×WD vehicles
2.3 Labour
2.4 Supervisory services
3. Agro Forestry Sub Project
3.1 Seedlings
20, 000 seedlings 3 EC$2.50 each
3.2 Supervisory services
3.3 Labour
4. Social Forestry - Medicinal Plant Production
5. Financial Assistance
6. Agri-Engineering Structures
7. Sub Total
8. 10% Contingency
9. Grand Total
PROJECT NUMBER:
PROJECT TITLE:
Choiseul Watershed Management Project-Phase I
PROJECT DURATION:
Two (2) years
ESTIMATED COST:
EC$ 1,309,000
BENEFICIARIES:
Choiseul farmers
EXECUTING AGENCY:
Ministry of Agriculture - Forestry & Engineering Divisions
BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Choiseul, located along the south-western coast of St. Lucia, has traditionally been the major and most important source of sweet potato production on the island, for both local consumption and export, while extensive cultivation of other vegetables is undertaken during the dry season. The terrain which farmers have to deal with is characteristically hilly, low in top soil and nutrients and highly prone to sheet erosion during the rainy season.
Most farmers in the Choiseul area have no 'direct' titles to the land they farm; farming is either done on 'family' land or on land rented from absentee land owners. Although efforts have been made in the recent past to rectify these land tenure issues, the situation remains more or less the same today. Only a small percentage of farmers actually farm land completely owned by them.
Due to this high level of 'tenure uncertainty' affected farmers have, over the years, tended to neglect the use of improved agronomic practices that would assist in conserving the land's potential. This, coupled with the high natural erodibility of the lands in question, has resulted in serious and continuous erosion of the area's agricultural land base.
In addition to exacerbating soil degradation, the land tenure problems of the area have militated against approaches to agricultural and natural development of the area. Attempts have been made at soil conservation and evidence of this is still apparent. Presently, efforts are being made with the assistance of the French Technical Mission for an Integrated Rural Development Project in an area adjacent to the target project area. This project will have spin-offs for the target area if approaches are found for the land tenure problem, for meaningful crop and livestock farming systems and rehabilitation of the area.
Unless appropriate remedial action is taken, the future of farming activities in Choiseul could well be doomed. This will result in disastrous socio-economic consequences as alternative areas of general employment and livelihood are relatively nonexistent within the area.
PROJECT CONTRIBUTION TO ST. LUCIA'S DEVELOPMENT
In accordance with the Government of St. Lucia's development strategy of diversifying the agricultural base of the economy away from total dependence on bananas, the implementation of a soil conservation, and related development programme, within the Choiseul area will enhance the probability of this goal's eventual achievement. As has been stated earlier, farmers from this area produce large quantities of sweet potatoes and to a lesser extent vegetables. Once the erosion and related problems are contained the scope for a substantial increase in production over present levels is enormous. It should also be mentioned here that the activities of the 'French Co-operation Mission on Agriculture' in the Choiseul area have been severely constrained to date, because of the problems outlined within the foregoing problem tree.
OBJECTIVES
Long-term
The overall goal of the project is to reforest degraded areas within Choiseul and increase crop yields over present levels.
Immediate
(a) Establish baseline data
(b) Demonstrate improved soil conservation practices
(c) Demonstrate crop/livestock management system to rehabilitate area
(d) Rehabilitate water course for improved water availability
(e) Reforest degraded areas
(f) Management of improved crop and livestock systems, soil and water conservation.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Project activities will be conducted within the following most critical areas within Choiseul, namely Delcer, Industry, La Points, Morn Sion and Le Riche. The major components of the project are as follows:-
1. Baseline Survey
Because of the complexity of factors affecting Choiseul, it is recommended that a base-line survey of the entire area be completed initially. Completion of the survey would reveal the exact nature of the socio-economic parameters of which to be aware during preparation of development plans for the area.
2. Integrated Watershed and Management Plan