<title>National Forestry Action Programme - Dominica: Executive Summary</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This document comprises two parts:
Executive Summary
Project Profiles
The Executive Summary is based on that which was included in the main report of the Country Mission Team (CMT). It has been revised to include more factual background information so that this document can suffice as a working document for the Roundtable III meeting. Where necessary, reference should be made to the main report for further detail on specific points.
There are sixteen Project Profiles proposed for implementation over a five year period at a total cost of US$ 12,456,220. Of this, the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica will provide US$ 2,014,420 and donor funding of US$ 10,441,800 is being sought. It is recommended that a rolling format be used involving annual revision and updating of programmes and projects.
Reference is made to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA, July 1993.
Forestry development initiatives at the regional/subregional level - regional project proposals 01 - 05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of the European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special report as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map 1. General map of the East Caribbean showing the location of Dominica
Source: Country Environmental Profile, Dominica. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Background Information
1. Dominica has been heralded as the region's premier nature island. Its terrain is very rugged and steep with any flatter areas restricted primarily to river valleys, the coastal areas of the north east and Bell's Wet Area in the centre of the island (Map 2). There is little reasonably flat land available for expansion of human settlement. The geology is volcanic, but is now relatively stable.
2. The climate is humid tropical marine with little seasonal or diurnal variation, and strong steady trade winds. Dominica is one of the wettest islands in the Caribbean and hence has very lush vegetation.
3. The soils are unconsolidated and friable and hence are readily erodible, especially on steep slopes denuded of their tree cover. The undisturbed forests have been identified as the most extensive in the Lesser Antilles, while its rain forest is considered the finest in the Caribbean.
Forestry Sector and the National Economy
4. The forest sector GDP, as a percentage of total GDP, has been in general decline since 1983. Two recent sawmill enterprise failures have resulted in the total loss of mechanized industrial capacity. Forest sector employment is about 0.3% of the employed labour force.
5. There is a large trade imbalance in forest-based products, dominated by the import of cardboard boxes, about 50% of the total forest imports. These are used for the export of bananas. An increase in the import of finished and semi-finished wood products is likely. Total lumber imports have risen to about double the maximum production of the 1980s, with coniferous lumber imports now four times their volume in 1981. Export earnings from the forest industry are insignificant, but there is opportunity for increased revenue from the export of value-added secondary manufactured products.
Domestic Consumption and Production of Wood-based Products
6. The roundwood equivalent annual per capita consumption of forest products is well below other comparable forest producing less developed countries. Domestic production has collapsed with the closure of the sawmilling industry. However, if it were to be revived, domestic lumber production could probably be increased to about 15% of demand by the early 21st century.
Map 2. Location map for Dominica
Source: Country Environmental Profile, Dominica. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991.
Governmental Revenue and Investment in the Forest Sector
7. The average annual inflation rate 1978-1990 was 9.2%. Revenue data is not clear, but in 1983/4, the Forest and Wildlife Division's revenue contribution to the government amounted to less than 0.03%. Royalty rates were increased in 1988, but no royalty is collected on the felling of private timber. Revenues from the forest are only a fraction of the required investments. An increase in royalty rate is recommended, and this would have the added incentive of reducing wastage, which is currently a problem.
8. From 1980-1990, recurrent expenditure on forestry field operations kept pace with inflation; it was more or less constant in forest administration, research and extension, and utilisation and promotion; whilst recurrent expenditure on National Parks ceased at the end of 1981/2. Since 1984, government has provided the funding for national parks at more or less a constant rate that has not kept pace with inflation.
Tourism
9. Stay-over visitors account for the major portion of revenue earnings from tourism. Cruise ship arrivals have increased steadily over the past five (5) years and Government has invested heavily in cruise ship docking facilities. The usage of the National Parks has grown to such an extent that the "Saturation point" is being exceeded at two specific sites.
10. While Government has invested heavily in infrastructural improvement to facilitate the cruise ship arrivals, this has proven to be the low end of tourist trade. Government has therefore recognised the need to extract more spending from cruise tourism and expand stay-over tourism. Government needs to exercise caution in its planning to ensure that further tourism expansion does not adversely impact on the island's fragile environment.
Plantations and Industrial Production
11. A predicted worldwide shortage of fine hardwood over the next few decades is a niche which Dominica could fill. White (1990) has identified some 4680 ha of forest reserve, i.e. 6.5% of the country, as land remaining with any potential for industrial development. A full feasibility study, coupled with the need for road construction and logging trails is suggested.
Forest Development Fund
12. To address the need for increased revenue, suggestions are made to impose levies on certain sectors e.g. water, tourist carriers and agricultural production. These fees would be deposited in a 'Forest Development Fund' for the benefit of the forest environment.
Forest Resources Policy
13. A Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy was prepared (Gane, 1988) with 'imperatives' considered as critical for the future development of the forestry sector. This wide-ranging policy is detailed in the main report and is recommended for acceptance by government. Relevant legislation has been revised and improvements suggested. Enforcement is an area of weakness. Legal and policy areas that require attention include: forestry and wildlife; national parks and protected areas; environmental impact; and planning. Specific recommendations with respect to amendments to legislation in all these areas are made.
14. For forestry, wildlife and national parks, two recommendations for early implementation are:
(i) the development of more effective measures to safeguard threatened and endangered species
(ii) strengthening of the institutional capability of the Forestry Division.
Additional amendments to the National Parks and Protected Areas Act are necessary for the protection of marine areas within Dominica's territorial waters.
15. Legislation is proposed requiring the preparation of EIAs for all major projects especially those within the coastal zone, within designated protected areas, or affecting other critical areas. Coupled with this, there must be the creation of an appropriate unit with the technical capability for executing and interpreting these EIAs. Logically, this unit might be in the Physical Planning Division.
16. The physical planning structure and process need to be strengthened, and new planning legislation is reportedly being formulated which will address many of the issues raised. The creation of a National Environmental Coordinating Committee (NECC) with responsibility for coordinating all national environmental activities is proposed.
Administration
17. The Forestry and Wildlife Division is one of five divisions within the Ministry of Agriculture. There are, however, serious institutional weaknesses which must be addressed, including the lack of formal mechanisms for systematic and regular coordination with other government departments. Recommendations for restructuring the Forestry and Wildlife Division are made. A significant component will be staff training, and training needs are detailed.
18. Two regional project proposals are also relevant - project profile 01 'Establishment of OECS Forestry, National Parks, Wildlife Service' and project 02 ^'Forestry and Related Training Needs'.
Land Use
19. Broad categories of land use are presented. Dominica depends directly on agriculture and agriculture-based industries, with agriculture contributing 30% of GDP and processing (mainly of coconut) contributing about 6%. Bananas and coconut dominate exports; dasheen dominates the local market. However, with the change in EC policy towards Caribbean banana exporters from 1992, diversification is essential. The major issues and problems associated with banana cultivation are described (Section 3.7.2). Improved agroforestry techniques for banana and other crop production are proposed (project 1.07). This is recommended as being crucial to achieve sustainable land use, and effective watershed management.
20. The absence of a national land use plan is a serious drawback to the rationalisation of current land use in the country. It is recognised that the problems of land use in Dominica are numerous and in some cases intractable. It is recommended that a GIS containing resource data, an economic model and a mathematical model of all or part of the economy be utilised to solve these land use problems.
Watershed Management
21. Background details to Dominica's water resources and watershed management are presented in the introduction to project document 1.04. Serious watershed degradation has occurred as a result of the banana industry. This has been accompanied by a large increase in the incidence of soil erosion and landslips, an increase in flash floods and sedimentation, and a reduction in base flow. The lack of consistent rain fall data has made it difficult to make accurate analyses and predictions of future trends. Some defunct rainfall stations should be re-established. Extensive flow data gathering is also essential. A survey of watersheds to determine their relative status is required as a long-term planning tool. Project 1.04 also includes rehabilitation of water catchments, whilst project 1.07 on agroforestry provides for rehabilitation and subsequent management of whole catchments in sustainable agroforestry systems.
Silviculture and Forest Management
22. Plantations were established in the 1960s and currently comprise 600 ha of mainly blue mahoe (Hibiscus melatus) and to a lesser extent Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea) and teak (Tectona grandis), but these were badly damaged by Hurricane David in 1979. A 'Programme for Reconstruction' was initiated in 1981, and the plantations have since been tended. Current silvicultural activities include plant propagation, plantation maintenance and agroforestry plot maintenance. Some enrichment planting has been done using mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) and local hardwoods. Under the NFAP, a vastly expanded programme of tree planting is proposed, hence construction of a new nursery is recommended (project 1.01) to produce approximately 100,000 plants per year.
Tree planting projects are proposed - project 1.02 'Establishment of Industrial Plantations', and project 1.03 'Multi-purpose Tree Planting Project'. Incentive programmes to encourage plantation forestry are recommended.
23. Deforestation results from a wide variety of causes and is considered to be one of the most crucial issues confronting Dominica. Recent forest inventories have given conflicting estimates of the growing stock. Five species contribute 86-88% of the total volume: gommier, chataignier, carapite, mahot cochon and bois diable. It is essential that management plans for the Northern and Central Forest Reserves are prepared, and project 1.05 addresses this need.
24. Demarcated forest reserves and national parks comprise 20% of forest lands which is considered to be insufficient for resource management purposes. Suggestions for increasing this percentage are made, with a target of 38% of the land area, according to the National Structure Plan. Wetlands account for less than 1% of the land area, but are threatened by development. Recommendations are made for their future management.
Agroforestry (crops)
25. It is considered that agroforestry can contribute considerably to more ecologically sound cultivation practices and counteract some of the negative effects of banana cultivation. An estimated 50% of the 5,000 ha under bananas are suffering from soil erosion. Contour stripping practices for soil protection of banana fields on slopes of more than 20% are recommended. However, decreasing production and increased economic inputs are feared. The national policy aims to concentrate banana production on larger farms and enhance diversification of the smaller farms. DBMC's extension service should be involved. Diversification with cocoa, mango, avocado and passionfruit is recommended. Suggestions are also made for the utilisation of marginal steep lands by planting firewood plantations. This will reduce pressure on existing forests for charcoal production and firewood which is used in the distillation of bay oil.
26. The potential for organic farming in Dominica and for more processing of local agricultural products is evaluated, and considered to be good.
27. To coordinate all the efforts within this broad field of agroforestry, it will be necessary to set up a new Agroforestry Unit within the Ministry of Agriculture. Research should be coordinated regionally by CARDI. Marketing should be more efficiently coordinated locally.
Agroforestry (livestock)
28. Agroforestry involving livestock is also considered. This can help solve some of the problems including soil erosion. Livestock product imports into Dominica (other than poultry) are relatively low. Self-sufficiency in pork, lamb. goat meat and beef should be easily obtainable. There appears to be a good potential export market for meats to the French West Indies and CARICOM countries.
29. The introduction of multi-purpose trees of which one output is fodder is suggested. A 'Three Strata Forage System' (TSFS) is described which refers to planting and harvesting forage so that a source of feed is available year round. The potential for wildlife farming for small farmers would appear to lie mainly in the breeding of agouti.
30. Recommendations are made to safeguard the suggested expanded agroforestry ventures by reviewing the praedial larceny act, making available from the Government Stock Farm more top quality livestock, controlling damage done by stray livestock, compensating farmers for damage done and setting up farmers organisations.
Fuelwood and Charcoal
31. With regard to charcoal production, feasibility studies should be undertaken into the use of various species. Forests in Dominica have fantastic potential for biomass energy.
Industrial Forest operations
32. The problem of a lack of an industrial sawmill operation is considered. Independent sawyers use Alaskan type chainsaw mills and use practices that minimise environmental damage. Transportation problems do arise because of the terrain, but proper road location and engineering control could eliminate many environmental and maintenance problems. Before large industrial operations are initiated, the conflict with ecotourism has to be addressed. The National Structure Plan is recommended as a good starting point from which to approach this problem. Three approaches to commercial forestry are presented and evaluated. However, forest based industrial development does not appear to be high on the agenda of the government. Forest based industrial development should be planned for, and recommendations with regard to log supply, road construction, lumber drying, wood preservation, efficient utilisation, rattan and bamboo. Cottage Forest Industries (CHI), financial incentives and
public involvement are made.
Forest Research
33. A report on Forestry Research for Dominica (Buford Briscoe, 1991) was used by the Mission for the preparation of this Section. The report was commissioned by FAO as part of the CARICOM TFAP.
Constraints
34. The constraints to forestry research are:
1. Inadequate funding.
2. Lack of trained professional officers in the required field.
3. Minimum monitoring or evaluation of the few past research programmes.
35. Partly for these reasons, additional constraints on the long-term viability of forestry and agroforestry are:
1. Trespass and deforestation on forest reserves and parks. This is at least partially because of inadequate forestry legislation, lack of surveys and boundary demarcation on the ground, increasing population and shortage of manpower and transportation in the Forestry Division.
2. Illegal tree cutting and charcoal production appear to be a minor direct problem overall, but they constitute a continuing species selective drain on forest reserves and private lands and the assumption that round wood is a free product discourages any private or public inclination to manage forests for sustainable yields.
4. Destruction of the biological patrimony. There is a need to identify, demarcate and preserve representative stands of remaining local ecological systems. There is urban and some rural recognition of the importance of natural resource management.
5. There is an appreciable primary forest industry based primarily on Alaska mill chainsaws, using Dacryodes excelsa and other well-formed native species, plus mahogany, blue mahoe and white cedar (Tabebuia spp.) for construction, furniture, boat building and fuelwood/fence posts/charcoal. There is also one small sawmill, and there have been others at various times. Secondary forest industries consist of small enterprises making furniture and specialty items, plus construction.
Research Needs
36. As with most of the other islands, action programmes have been suggested by a number of individuals and organizations. A brief list is given below, with comments.
1. Determining growth and yield by establishment of a dynamic inventory system, equivalent to simple Continuous Inventory Plots, is a fundamental need in the management of all perennial tropical vegetation and should be initiated as soon as locating and demarcating forest reserves and conservation areas is well underway.
2. There are more than a dozen useful tree species now being utilized for timber and other products and services. Utilization information on others is lacking and could perhaps best be obtained as part of a regional network, as described by Maeglin.
3. There exists a variety of agroforestry practices, applied with varying degrees of skill but mostly at a rather low level. Vegetative barriers to control erosion, for example, are rare and tend to be discontinuous; instead, most lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus) is in irregular patches, for which it has little conservation value. The few live fence posts are rarely managed for green manure production or high quality fodder. Windbreaks were barely observed. A programme of on-farm verification/extension would appear to be an important, perhaps the most important, possible step toward increasing the value of both products and services from trees around homes, around and in fields, along roads, along streams, and on private or leased lands in general. On-farm verification and demonstration need to be carried out with local landowners and organizations. An experienced agroforestry researcher should be helpful in study planning and in the review of methods and results at
critical stages.
4. Seed trees should be selected rigorously for any artificial regeneration, for all species but especially for mahogany (Swietenia spp.) red cedar (Cedrela odorata) and white cedar (Tabebuia spp.).
5. A start has been made in cooperating with non-government organizations. The programme should be expanded as possible.
37. Support for forest research may come from the proposed regional project 04 'Meeting Regional Research Needs in Forestry and Related Areas'.
National Parks
38. There are at present no areas in Dominica designated specifically as Wildlife Sanctuaries or Nature Reserves. An assessment is made of two existing national parks, Morne Trois Pitons and Cabrits. Management plans are already in place for these and for the proposed third park, Morne Diablotin National Park. These national parks are important in affording some protection to wildlife and other biological resources. However, there are currently some non-compatible uses including quarrying within the Morne Trois Pitons National Park. Recommendations to address such incompatible uses are given.
39. There is discussion on how park lands are affected by human and environmental factors, and on policy and legislation. Suggestions and recommendations throughout the section deal with the interactions of the various governmental bodies, or lack of interaction; and the need for enhancing the relations between the Forestry and Wildlife Division and the Dominica Conservation Association (DCA), international governmental organisations and international NGOs. Solid waste, water pollution from human sewage, soil erosion, sedimentation in water courses and wildlife habitat encroachment are all issues warranting the concern of government and the international funding community.
40. It is suggested that Dominica should focus future conservation activities in four prime areas: freshwater swamps along the north coast; on the Indian River and along the surrounding area; on the Trafalgar Falls area (to ensure that it receives protected area status in view of the continued threats from hydro-electric power activities); and at Scotts Head in the south.
Wildlife and Biodiversity
41. The new challenges presented by ecotourism are described and considered. Ecotourism fits in well with Dominicans initiatives thus far to protect natural resources, and Dominica has the potential to earn significant revenue from ecotourism. However, greater research is recommended into Dominicans wildlife, fisheries, vegetation and ecosystems. There is a particular dearth of information about threatened, endangered and sensitive species. Particular recommendations are made pertaining to the two endemic parrots, the black-capped petrel, the leatherback turtle, the green turtle and the hawksbill turtle. The loggerhead turtle is considered rare.
42. It is reported that rainforests and other vegetation zones, particularly those in coastal regions, such as littoral and dry scrubland, have been considerably reduced in the past thirty years (Evans, 1988). Additional areas which are threatened or are vulnerable include elfin woodland, fumarole vegetation communities, freshwater swamps, mangroves, seagrass beds and coral reefs. The threats to each are analysed and recommendations made.
43. Hunting and fishing are considered. Both seasons last six months and both present major threats to wildlife and fish respectively. Legislation is inadequate, fees and fines are low. Neither resource is managed on a scientific basis and little is known about the extent of the resource or safe exploitation levels. Recommendations are made separately for hunting and fishing, and the increased involvement of NGOs in the development and implementation of Dominicans wildlife and fisheries policy is seen as being vital. Efforts should continue for Dominica to become a signatory to CITES.
Social Forestry
44. Ideas are presented for meeting critical rural socio-economic needs which include establishment of woodlots, horticulture and training in, for example, rattan furniture manufacture. There are many possibilities for recreational activities to involve rural, forest-dependent communities.
Public Education
45. Several agencies are already involved in public education, though there is no Forestry Extension Service. The extension service of the Division of Agriculture targets farmers. The Dominica Conservation Association (DCA) is potentially the key organisation for undertaking programmes in environmental education. It suffers from a lack of funds to expedite its proposed programmes involving newsletter, video and poster production, and the organisation of educational seminars, workshops and conferences. Project profile 4.03 specifically addresses the need to strengthen DCA's capability to undertake environmental education and conservation programmes. This would complement the significant interest shown by the local media in environmental issues.
46. There are also regional initiatives such as the proposed regional project 05 'Public Education/Awareness in Forestry and Related Areas'. The FAO video production unit is located in Dominica and will continue to have a significant role to play in future forestry and environmentally related public education campaigns throughout the region.
Priority Areas
Forestry in Land Use
47. The role of forests in Dominica's socio-economic development is threefold:
(i) as a source of wood raw material for industrial use, construction and energy
(ii) as an ecological entity primarily for the protection of watersheds, as a provision of wildlife habitats and the preservation of genetic resources and biodiversity
(iii) as a source of recreation in particular for the nation's urban population but also for visiting tourists.
This threefold role should continue in the long-term development of the forestry sector.
48. Projects which have been proposed in this area are:
1.01 Construction of a New Nursery
1.02 Establishment of Industrial Plantations
1.03 Multi-purpose Tree Planting Project
1.04 Watershed Rehabilitation and Management
1.05 Preparation of Management Plans
1.06 Wildlife Farming
1.07 Agroforestry Development
1.08 Petit Savanne - Point Mulatre Feeder Road.
Forest-based Industrial Development
49. A sustainable forest industry is possible based upon the conversion of 4680 ha of forest into plantations. However, for this to result in a viable industry, investment in road construction amounting to EC$ 160,000/km will be necessary. A training course in safe and effective felling techniques will also be required. At present, timber felling is very difficult for a variety of reasons including thick growth of vines and lianas, asymmetrical crowns, steep and wet slopes. The furniture industry is currently only small and is hampered by poorly seasoned lumber and a lack of wood preservation treatment facilities. The handicraft industry suffers in a similar way, and the growing of rattan and bamboo should be encouraged. This could well provide suitable employment for rural, forest-dependent communities (particularly women) and take advantage of the tourist trade in souvenir handicrafts.
50. Projects proposed in this priority area are:
2.01 Logging Roads for Cottage Forest Industry (CFI)
2.02 Establishment of Handicraft and Furniture Workshop and Handicraft Plantations.
Fuelwood and Energy
51. This is not a high priority area in Dominica. However, there is some dissatisfaction with the use of metal kilns, and it is recommended that new kiln designs be explored.
52. The project proposed in this area is:
3.01 Fuelwood and Charcoal Production
Other relevant proposed project:
1.07 Agroforestry Development
Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
53. The overriding issue of defining exactly what type of park system is most desired by the Dominican people has not been addressed at the policy-making level of government. Other matters which must also be addressed include park infrastructure, access system, adequate park management and staffing to ensure a good standard of visitor services, resource protection and interpretation, and a reasonable application of recognised protected area land management.
54. Wildlife habitat reduction, closely associated with deforestation, has resulted from the expansion of agriculture into forest lands. It is important that specific areas of importance to wildlife should be protected. Public education must play an important role in sensitising the population about the value of wildlife protection, preservation of biological diversity and proper conservation of forest ecosystems. DCA must take a leading role.
55. Projects which have been proposed in this priority area are:
4.01 Upgrading and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Other Attractions
4.02 Development of an Environmental Information Base for Dominica
4.03 Protection of Mangroves and Other Wetlands
Other relevant proposed project:
1.06 Wildlife Farming
Institutions
56. This is becoming the most important priority area for Dominica. Without action on relevant institutional matters, it will not be possible to advance forestry to any appreciable extent.
57. Projects proposed in this priority area are:
5.01 Strengthening and Upgrading the Forestry and Wildlife Division
5.02 Legislation for Natural Resources Management
National Forestry Action Programme
Long-term Strategies
The long-term approach to forestry development in Dominica involves the implementation of the new Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy and Legislation which, along with other activities, make up the following strategic elements (summarised by topic):
POLICY AND PLANNING
- Evaluation and improvement, where possible, of the contribution of the forestry sector to the national economy.
- Revision of forest and forestry development policies to keep them in line with technological advances and changes in the overall development policies of the country.
- Establishment of a land use policy.
- Repeal of the Forest Industries Development Act.
FUNDING
- The establishment of a forestry development fund.
- An increase in government revenue from forestry through increases in royalty rates, compounding fees, temporary visitor licences, hunting licences and penalties, an entrance fee into National Parks and a access on water obtained from forests.
- Provision of adequate funding in the national budget for forestry development.
INSTITUTIONAL CAPABILITY
- Provision for adequate local staffing both at the professional and sub-professional levels.
- Restructuring of the Forestry and Wildlife Division.
- Provision of adequate transport and telecommunication equipment for field staff.
TRAINING AND EDUCATION
- Provision of short-term consultants with specialist skills to supplement long-term technical assistance staff in implementing specific projects.
- Training of both professional and technical staff in all aspects of forestry.
- The preparation, implementation, monitoring and periodic review of a social forestry and public education programme to meet the needs of the country.
FOREST MANAGEMENT
- Increase in the size of the forest resource base.
- Preparation, implementation and revision of ten-year management plans for the Forest Reserves and National Parks.
- Undertaking of periodic forest inventories.
- The development over a twenty-year period of at least 2000 ha of plantations to provide furniture timber, charcoal and handicraft.
UTILISATION
- Improvement of timber felling techniques.
- The introduction of cable systems for the extraction of logs.
- The construction of well designed roads to facilitate timber exploitation and the establishment of industrial plantations.
- Provision, where possible, of adequate supplies of logs to the industrial operators.
- The introduction of seasoning and wood preservation facilities.
- The exploration of new kiln designs and models for use in charcoal production.
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT
- The rehabilitation of at least 1000 ha of degraded watersheds over a twenty year period.
- Cooperation with other agencies in obtaining hydrological data such as rainfall and stream flow.
AGROFORESTRY
- Encouragement of the practice of agroforestry.
- Promotion of organic farming in agroforestry.
CONSERVATION AND NATIONAL PARKS
- Promotion of ecotourism.
- Introduction of coastal zone management.
- Protection of wetlands.
- Institution of the necessary mechanisms to allow Dominica to become a signatory of CITES.
- Development of an environmental ethics plan 