<title>National Forestry Action Programme - Barbados: Executive summary. National Forestry Action Programme --  Barbados: Executive Summary</title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviations
ASL
- Above sea level
BADC
- Barbados Agricultural Development Corporation
BIDC
- Barbados Industrial Development Corporation
CCP
- Country Capacity Project
CIDA
- Canadian International Development Agency
CMT
- Country Mission Team
EIA
- Environmental Impact Assessment
FAO
- Food and Agricultural Organization
GIS
- Government Information Service
IDB
- Inter-American Development Bank
NCC
- National Conservation Commission
NGO
- Non Governmental Organization
NFAP
- National Forestry Action Programme
ODA
- Overseas Development Agency
SCB
- Soil Conservation Board
SCU
- Soil Conservation Unit
TCDC
- Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
UWI
- University of the West Indies
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1. This document presents proposals for a National Forestry Action Programme for Barbados. The proposals are based primarily on the findings and recommendations contained in the Main Report of the multidisciplinary Country Mission Team (CMT - see Appendix I) supported by FAO/ODA, which visited the island between 11th February and 15th March, 1991, as a result of a request made by the CARICOM Secretariat to FAO in 1989, on behalf of the various CARICOM Governments.
2. The aims and objectives of the mission were to identify the principle causes of deforestation in Barbados and to facilitate preparation of a 20-year forestry development plan for the country.
3. The exercise was carried out in close collaboration and with active participation of national counterparts from relevant agencies in the public and private sectors, and NGOs. (Appendix I).
4. Eight working papers were prepared (list at Appendix II) in which the Barbadian situation was analyzed according to the five priority areas of the TFAP). These reports were subsequently used to integrate the main report which forms the basis for the proposed Barbados NFAP. The main areas treated were as follows:
- Forestry in Land Use,
- Forest-based Industries Development,
- Fuelwood and Energy,
- Conservation of Forest Ecosystems,
- Institutions.
5. The Main Report which was prepared by the CMT, was presented to the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries in May 1991, from where it was circulated to various agencies/organisations, private individuals and landowners, for study and comments.
6. The Report was considered and discussed at the National Round Table in July 1991, where the extent and focus of the NFAP exercise was determined. Modifications were therefore required to the CMT report and proposals to bring these more in keeping with economic, social and institutional requirements and realities of the country.
7. The NFAP programme proposed in this document is nested within the framework of the national development objectives. Its basic aims are focussed towards the establishment and management of a national forest area on Government and private lands to ensure conservation of soil and water resources, protection of forest ecosystems and production of wood and related products, and towards the generation of social and economic benefits for the community on a sustainable basis.
8. Achievement of these goals is conceived through a balanced strategy of study, conservation, development and utilization of land and forest resources in the context of the national and sector objectives.
9. The proposed NFAP for Barbados includes strategies to attract technical assistance and investment to optimise the potential contribution of forestry and a tree cover to sustainable social and economic development for the country. The NFAP is now being incorporated into the Agricultural Sector Development Plan for 1993-2000.
10. Reference should be made to the following documents, which complement this NFAP:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA. July 1993 (includes a summary of proposed forestry development initiatives at the regional/sub-regional level - regional project proposals 01-05).
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean, Report to the Commission of the European Communities, as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special report as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map of the Caribbean Region showing the location of Barbados
<section>3</section>
2. Background information/ecology
2.1 Natural regions and ecosystems
2.1 Natural regions and ecosystems
10. Barbados is the most easterly of the Caribbean Islands, located at about Latitude 13째 10'N and Longitude 59째 35'W. Its land surface area is approximately 431 km^2, measuring 34 km from north to south and 22 km from east to west at the widest point. The climate is tropical maritime, with temperatures varying from 23째 to 29째 C, moderated by prevailing 16 to 24 kph winds from the North-east Trades. The annual precipitation averages 1516 mm, rising from 1000 mm in coastal areas to approximately 2220 mm in central and north-eastern areas. The majority of this precipitation is received between the months of June and November.
11. Geologically, the island comprises a largely coral limestone cap, overlying almost impermeable but easily eroded basement material of mudstones, sands and shales, exposed by uplift in the north-eastern/central section of the island (Scotland District).
12. Topographically, the island rises from the south and west in a series of gently sloping coral terraces to reach its highest point at Mt. Hillaby in the north-central part of the island, at the edge of the Scotland District. The topography varies from the gently sloping coral terraces, dissected by gullies in the limestone areas, to steep broken slopes rising to 340m above sea level in the Scotland District, where the basement materials are exposed.
13. The soils of the island, generally, are derived from limestone and are shallow and alkaline except in the Scotland District, where they are developed from the basement materials of sandstones, shales and clays, and vary from neutral to slightly acid.
14. The island was completely wooded when "discovered". However, in the space of 30 years following European settlement in 1627, the land was almost totally deforested to make way for sugar cane agriculture, an activity which has dominated the island's landscape since then. The flora and fauna of the island were so severely affected by this activity, that today only vestiges of the original forest and wetland ecosystems, and very little of the original macrofauna, can be found. The most notable of the remaining floral ecosystems is the Turner's Hall Wood, an area of approximately 30ha, located in the north-central part of the island. Other major associations of natural/succession vegetation can be found in the existing network of gullies, along escarpments, on sheltered cliffs and along the sea shore (Appendix III). The network of revegetated gullies (formed by the collapse of the roofs of underground drainage channels of the coral cap) is an important reservoir of
biodiversity, and has been a focal point of local NGO attention.
15. The ecosystems of the island consist of:
- moist tropical forests and gullies;
- drought tolerant forests and littoral vegetation;
- mangroves, wetlands and artificial swamps;
- windswept sea cliffs and sand dunes; caves; agricultural lands;
- urban and rural parks and gardens.
16. The above mentioned systems provide a range of habitats for plant and animal life, and produce a number of interesting faunal/floral associations, some of which are sufficiently unique to merit protection (See Appendix III & IV).
<section>4</section>
3. Review of forestry sector
3.1 Role of forestry and trees in the national economy
3.2 Relevant development policies
3.3 Legislative and administrative framework
3.4 Constraints affecting the forestry subsector's development
3.1 Role of forestry and trees in the national economy
17. In the past the concept of forestry in Barbados was never considered outside of the context of its land stabilization and soil conservation benefits, and its advantages were never seriously explored to any extent. Official national acknowledgement of the potential benefits and effects of trees in the urban landscape and as a means of agricultural diversification only came in 1982, with the enactment of the Tree Preservation Act (1982), which was designed to protect large trees in urban areas dominated mainly by casuarina and mahogany.
18. However, there has been a long national interest in the establishment of fruit trees, as is witnessed in the several official projects launched by the government during the past decade to promote the growth of orchards, primarily to replace reliance on imports and to earn additional foreign exchange.
19. In spite of such programmes, Barbados still has only 2% of its land area, some of which supports a high volume of forest biomass, under tree cover. There is also a marked absence of an official forest policy statement, and although tree planting has been encouraged in the past, there was no mention of the role of forests in any of the Government's Development Plans.
20. The country has no forest industry. Tree harvesting for industrial purposes is conducted by one company integrated directly with the furniture industry. Harvesting consists of the selective removal of native mahogany trees, for which prior Town and Country Planning permission is obtained.
21. There are, however, approximately 57 companies on the island involved in the manufacture of wooden products, which contributed some BDS $8.4 million (US $4.2 million) to GDP and 5% of employment in the manufacturing sector in 1989. A significant handicraft industry, utilising wood and non-wood products, many of which are derived from natural vegetation habitats, also exists.
22. As a small, open economy with a need to dampen fluctuations from economic shocks occurring in the wider world and in the travel and tourism industry, the Government has pursued a policy of economic diversification based on agricultural and manufacturing projects, and aimed at high value-added and skilled-market niches, in order to increase foreign exchange earnings.
23. Efforts are being made to intensify and maximise the returns from these sectors, and in particular to ensure that idle lands are brought back into agriculture while maintaining a constant level of sugar production. Because of the uncertainty of the tourism and sugar industries, the country needs to pay serious attention to all opportunities for economic growth and for the optimal use of its natural resources.
24. Additionally, the need to conserve water supplies, to protect against the hazards of climate change due to global warming and to minimize the effects of frequent flash floods and droughts, makes it imperative for Barbados to adopt a forest policy and implement a programme of reforestation to deal with these areas. The value of such a programme can be measured against the real costs of investment in new water facilities, construction of shoreline defences and replacement of damaged property and dislocated services which would be incurred without such a programme.
25. Under such circumstances, in tandem with other national strategies, the role of forestry and trees should therefore be heightened to become an integral contributor to maintaining Barbadian living standards on a sustainable basis.
26. Additional benefits which would stem from the adoption of such a programme include:
i) provision of rural employment opportunities;
ii) shelter of croplands from the desiccating effects of the prevailing winds;
iii) land stabilization and soil conservation/amelioration;
iv) production of timber, fuel, fodder, fruits, nuts and other products;
v) protection of natural habitats and wildlife for recreation, scientific research and tourism;
vi) utilization of idle lands.
3.2 Relevant development policies
27. Details of the Government's land use and environmental policy, and outlines of the overall programme for the socio-economic growth of each of the sectors in the country, are presented in the Development Plan 1988-1993, the Agricultural Sector Plan 1988-1993, and the Physical Development Plan 1988-1993, for both the long and medium term.
28. The medium-term strategy of the Development Plan is focussed on the maintenance of stable growth by correcting the sluggish performance of agriculture, tourism and manufacturing, and on the provision of increased employment for the work force.
29. Forestry and trees could contribute significantly to the above-mentioned goals in the following areas/activities:
i) Manufacturing - promoting the development of small enterprises; maximizing the use of indigenous resources; giving priority support to the garment, furniture and handicraft industries; forging stronger linkages with tourism and other sectors.
ii) Agriculture - effecting the optimal utilization of the land; enabling the sector to meet a greater share of domestic demand for food; stimulating non-sugar agriculture and agro-industrial developments-implementing the rural development programme.
iii) Housing - encouraging construction for low income families; shifting the subsidized cost to lower cost options to benefit a larger number of persons.
v) Spatial Development - better planning in the location of service and other activities, while protecting the proper use of land and other resources.
v) Education and Culture - orienting individuals towards the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for productive living to enhance the quality of the labour force; deepening awareness and understanding of the Barbadian heritage; promoting cultural cooperation through collaboration and exchanges at sub-regional, regional and international levels.
vi) Environment - priority attention to coastal erosion, ground water pollution, soil erosion, destruction of important natural habitats, dwindling of rare flora and fauna; strengthening linkages with NGOs, Caribbean countries, regional and international institutions; updating of legislation; introduction of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA); initiation of educational programmes.
vii) Transport and Works - protecting and conserving the island's water resources and road network.
30. The Government has also stated its intention, in the Agricultural Sector Plan 1988-93, to halt the alienation of agricultural land, to reverse the trends in production of major crops, to increase the output of newer crops for export and for the domestic market, and to create new job opportunities through an intensified diversification programme. Resource conservation, including the planting of trees, particularly in the Scotland District, is also targeted for intensification and extension throughout the island.
3.3 Legislative and administrative framework
31. Barbados has no specific legislation on forests. Existing enactments are directed towards the conservation of trees and animals, rather than the management of forests. The existing legislation is moreover fragmented and uncoordinated and not rooted in any central theme (McCalla, 1991):
i) The Cultivation of Trees Act (1951) provides income tax incentives for the establishment of woodlots of approved tree species.
ii) The Tree Preservation Act (1981) prohibits the felling of trees generally, except under specified conditions, while the killing of certain birds is prohibited by the Wild Birds Protection Act (1907).
iii) The Soil Conservation (Scotland District) Act (1958), which is of particular importance in this context, provides for the protection of soil, and the protection and rehabilitation of the vulnerable soils in the Scotland District, a region known for its geological instability and soil erosion.
iv) Other legislation provides for the protection of water, beaches and natural beauty, the prevention of praedial larceny, infestations, cane fires, animal trespass and floods; and for the establishment of various authorities to manage the provisions of certain of these acts (McCalla, 1991).
32. The Soil Conservation Unit (SCU), which functions under the aegis of the Minister of Agriculture (1991) and of a Soil Conservation Board (SCB), has been carrying out small-scale tree planting programmes in the Scotland District since its inception in 1957. Such activities have been geared primarily towards the protection of pockets of woodlands, for soil conservation purposes. The SCU has also been active in the installation of engineering and deep drainage systems to combat erosion and to stabilise land movement in the District.
33. There is also a National Conservation Commission Act (1982), which established the National Conservation Commission (NCC) as a statutory body with overall responsibility for public parks, beaches and caves, as well as for conservation of sites and buildings in the national interest.
34. As the current legislation stands, many of the statutes touch and concern the same areas. However, many issues are not covered by any existing legislation. This situation has arisen due to the fact that legal development has tended to deal with single issues, an approach which has contributed to confusion among agencies, non-enforcement of regulations, and a dilution of responsibility.
35. The Government has nonetheless stated its commitment to halt environmental degradation and to improve the quality of life for its citizens. Intrinsic to the achievement of such goals, is the requirement for the Government to move urgently towards a rationalization of environmental legislation to ensure adequate provisions for the protection and development of forests, natural habitats and wildlife, in the interest of conservation of the environment and biological diversity.
36. Comprehensive legislation is required under the circumstances, to provide for the wide coverage of environmental matters and to provide for a monitoring/coordinating role for the Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Labour, Consumer Affairs and the Environment for example, the revamping of the draft Environmental Protection Act, 1986.
3.4 Constraints affecting the forestry subsector's development
37. A significant opportunity for forestry production was identified by the TFAP CMT as a result of the evaluation of the forest plantings carried out by the SCU at Joe's River Forest with the assistance of the Trinidad Forestry Division in the 1960s. From the assessment made, it was felt that continued plantings of such species on abandoned farmlands in the Scotland District over the years, could have allowed Barbados to have controlled the land instability and soil erosion problems that have plagued the Scotland District for more than three decades. It was also estimated that by now the country would also have been able to utilise such forests to supply its wood requirements for the furniture and handicraft industries, while reducing imports, providing additional opportunities for ecology-based tourism and enhancing the availability of its water resources. At the same time, new job opportunities would have contributed to the relief of the rural unemployment problem and to
the revitalization of rural villages. (Raj Kumar, 1991).
38. Notwithstanding the potential identified, there has been negligible growth and development in the country's forestry subsector over the years. The following factors were identified as contributors to this state:
i) The country's overwhelming reliance on the SCU, a unit with no trained ecological, silvicultural or arboricultural personnel, to oversee its activities of tree planting (undertaken primarily as a soil conservation measure), or for monitoring the security of the forest cover on Government lands in the Scotland District, and which furthermore has not been given a mandate to pursue the management of the properties on which it operates under the Soil Conservation Act.
ii) Inadequate management of the Government's agricultural properties by the body responsible, the Barbados Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC) due to its preoccupation with commercial priorities under severe financial constraints.
iii) The absence of environmental planning and management skills in the NCC, an agency which seems logically to be the one entrusted with a mandate for the management of a system of national parks and protected areas.
iv) The lack of a coherent land use policy, of adequate extension services, and of incentives designed to encourage optimal utilization of land on a sustainable basis, which has been further compounded by the reluctance of local labour to work in traditional agriculture.
iv) The existence of a profusion of laws which seems to cause confusion within agencies regarding overlapping areas of responsibility.
v) Failure to enforce enabling legislation although this and other facilities exist for example, for the control of stray livestock.
<section>5</section>
4. Overview of priority areas
4.1 Forestry in land use
4.2 Forest-based industrial development
4.3 Fuelwood and energy
4.4 Conservation of forest ecosystems
4.5 Institutions
4.1 Forestry in land use
4.1.1 Land use distribution
4.1.2 Use of idle lands
4.1.3 Watershed management
4.1.4 Agroforestry
4.1.5 Forest management and silviculture
4.1.1 Land use distribution
39. The landscape of Barbados is generally dominated by sugar cane lands, with tree crops, woodlands and natural vegetation occurring only in pockets, and with cotton and intensive vegetable farming areas widely dispersed. Developed urban settlements are concentrated mainly along the western and southern coasts, with industrial facilities, sub-urban housing and abandoned land scattered throughout the island.
40. With the decline of sugar cane cultivation, active arable acreages, particularly sugar cane acreages, have been declining at a rate of approximately 500ac/yr since the early 1960's, falling from 66,000ac (26,730ha) to approximately 54,000ac (21,870ha) in 1991. This trend has led to a proliferation of idle properties, and to a rise in land speculation for housing/tourism development and more lucrative purposes. Abandoned farm-lands have also been reverting to scrub and grass, a situation which has led to an increase in the level of uncontrolled livestock grazing.
41. There is no definitive statement on forestry in the current land use figures for Barbados. The Agricultural Sector Plan (1988-93), projects the following land use targets, which give no estimate for tree cover:-
Sugar cane
14,590 ha
Cotton
2,430 ha
Cut flowers
405 ha
Vegetables
810 ha
Fruits
405 ha
Pasture
3,610 ha
TOTAL
22,250 ha
4.1.2 Use of idle lands
42. In the 1980's, fiscal penalties were introduced to discourage landowners from keeping land idle. However, this policy approach did not prove successful, as no realistic range of economically viable alternate options was provided for the owners. Suitable and attractive alternatives are required in such circumstances to make such policies a success.
43. In the absence of a national land use policy, the incidence of idle lands associated with shortcomings in the agricultural policy is envisaged to continue to constitute a major problem at both the national and individual property levels.
44. The following suggestions, which include forestry/agroforestry options, were advanced for consideration in the solution of this problem:
i) lease of lots to small farmers for vegetables (over a suitable period which would not create problems for either lessee or lessor), since market gardening can improve self-sufficiency in food production;
ii) provision of incentives to integrate small farms in the diversification effort as a nucleus for expansion;
iii) encouragement for spontaneous efforts by youth groups in beautification and tree planting on idle lands;
iv) initiation of community/cooperative projects, involving schools.
4.1.3 Watershed management
45. Barbados depends solely on its ground water resources for all of its water needs. Existing resources are extremely limited and are threatened by excessive use, potential contamination from salt intrusion, chemical pollutants and inadequate sewage and waste disposal facilities.
46. While measures are currently being put in place to attempt to cope with these problems, attention needs to be paid to the exploration of measures that will facilitate increased recharging of the aquifer to cope with increased water demands by the year 2000, and to maintain the land in optimal condition for percolation and soil water retention. Reforestation and the development of trees can provide an effective means of achieving these goals, while at the same time reversing in some measure, the problems caused by historical deforestation and abuse of the land.
47. However, the use of forestry as a solution to the problems outlined above involves a gestation period of 20 - 30 years before any returns on investment. Under such circumstances, a compromise which would allow the land to be used for short-term returns at minimal cost and risk of erosion, would therefore be needed. Such a compromise is achievable through an integrated watershed planning and management programme which is compatible with the existing ecological conditions of the various watersheds.
4.1.4 Agroforestry
48. The concept of agroforestry (the production of agricultural crops in combination with trees), has been practised in Barbados on large and small holdings for a long time. It has been viewed as an excellent conservation practice for the sustainable use of land and the maximization of returns, while protecting soil and water resources. The strengthening and/or reintroduction of this concept with intelligent modifications adapted to local situations, is seen as an important strategy for the revitalization of a portion of the sluggish agricultural sector.
4.1.5 Forest management and silviculture
49. The most important areas of forest/natural/succession vegetation in the island are found at Turner's Hall Wood in the Scotland District, in the Undercliff Woods at Hackleton Cliff/Foster Hall, and in some of the gullies.
50. Turner's Hall Wood was studied some 46 years ago (Gooding, 1944), and was documented to be a valuable habitat for flora and fauna. An update is now opportune to determine whether there has been any change in its structure and composition over the years. This is a unique area which needs to be protected. Its protection should be facilitated through the establishment of a buffer zone around the area, with entry being restricted except for scientific purposes.
51. The performance of the various species of trees planted on reforested areas in the Scotland District has been remarkable. Not only has their growth been remarkable, but their successful development has revealed an unexpected potential for timber production which enhances the conservation benefit for this area.
52. Exotic and native species (including Whitewood, Pink Poui, Honduras mahogany, Eucalyptus, Saman, Teak, Cypre and Casuarina) planted at Joe's River Forest in 1963, have survived remarkably well with a minimum of silvicultural care and attention. The resultant stand is a closed high forest, with the appearance and structure of a tropical rain forest, rich in lianas and epiphytes. The micro-climate and ecology of the site also represent ideal conditions for the introduction of specialised economic tropical plants, like rattan, which do not occur naturally in the western hemisphere.
53. Preliminary estimates indicate that Honduras mahogany and Cypre could yield 170 m^3/ha on a 30-year rotation, a yield which compares well with current projections for Trinidad and Jamaica. However, a more detailed inventory of the stands is required to verify these initial findings which suggest that mixed hardwood species would be a viable proposition for reforestation and land utilization throughout the Scotland District and on suitable sites elsewhere in the island. As the area now stands, it offers exciting opportunities for silvicultural research, ecotourism and public education to promote forestry. Any intervention in this area should be carefully planned and properly executed to obtain the maximum benefit. While this area could form part of a national parks system, it is recommended for preservation as an example of a managed forest.
54. In the absence of a forestry authority, the SCU has been functionally responsible for the protection of pockets of forests on government estates in the Scotland District. It has made a commendable effort, within its limitations, in the establishment of trees as a conservation measure. Its influence has, however, been limited basically to the Scotland District.
55. In urban areas, the performance of West Indian mahogany has also been impressive, in particular, the large size of older specimens and the large number of specimens occurring on a wide range of sites around the country. The occurrence of this valuable timber tree in such great profusion is a feature unique to Barbados, as this species is now a rarity in most Caribbean islands. Indications are that it has hybridised with the Honduras mahogany and that certain sites are particularly favourable to its growth. Generally however, many trees are suffering from die-back, either due to over-maturity, root-rot or some other disease, and should be effectively utilised before their timber decays.
56. The organised harvesting of such trees, combined with an inventory and replanting programme, could provide an excellent opportunity for urban forest utilization to provide a sustained supply of high-value raw material for the furniture and handicraft industries, while maintaining in perpetuity this unique feature of the Barbadian landscape. (Priority Project 2.0).
4.2 Forest-based industrial development
57. Barbados has been a nett importer of wood products since the island was deforested in the 17th Century. The major portion of this has gone into housing and construction. Imports are currently valued at almost Bds $50 million (US $25 million) annually. The country also imports some Bds $32.3 million (US $16.1 million) worth of paper products plus a further Bds $6.4 million (US $3.2 million) of fruits and nuts, many of which are products of trees. In recent years there has been a trend away from the use of wood towards concrete in residential construction, but nevertheless, the requirement for wood is still sizeable.
58. In the furniture industry approximately 2,000 m^3 of mahogany, valued at Bds $1.8 million is imported annually, representing a volume which could be met from a production forest of 1,500ha, harvesting 50ha annually on a 30-year rotation. A multi-purpose reforestation programme is strongly recommended under the circumstances (see projects 1.1, 1.2) with the short-term objective of early cover and rehabilitation of the land, and with the long-term objective of timber production and ground water storage.
59. The roots and leaves of certain species such as rock balsam, pandanus, cabbage bark, wild cane, khus khus and coconut shell are also being increasingly used in handicraft production. Although these are not considered as forest products, they comprise a significant demand for the natural items which can be derived from forested areas, and can generate sustainable income within the economy. There is a shortfall in supply with respect to most of these materials. Exploitation of the potential for the development of these resources merits active pursuit through resource inventory, planning and controlled management, to supply the existing market demand.
4.3 Fuelwood and energy
60. During the Second World War, Barbados carried out widespread plantings of Casuarina to ensure supplies of fuelwood. However, since 1952 the country has been able to supply most of its energy requirements from petroleum and natural gas from local sources. Progressive improvements in living standards have now also almost eliminated the demand for fuelwood at the country level.
61. The Government is nevertheless aware of the continuing world energy crisis and the need to conserve its resources. Accordingly, studies have been conducted to explore alternative sources such as wind, solar and tidal energy. It has been suggested by the CMT that this policy should be extended to include fuelwood for industrial purposes, particularly as a replacement for bagasse in the sugar factories and to provide for a more valuable use of bagasse as chicken litter or livestock feed. An offshoot of such a policy would be