<title>National Forestry Action Plan - St Vincent and the Grenadines: Executive summary. National Forestry Action Programme -  St Vincent & the Grenadines: Executive </title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This document comprises two parts:
Executive Summary
Project Profiles
The Executive Summary is based on that which was included in the main report of the Country Mission Team (CMT). It has been revised to include more factual background information so that this document can suffice as a working document for the Roundtable III meeting. Where necessary, reference should be made to the main report for further detail on specific points.
There are seventeen Project Profiles and an additional twelve projects listed which were originally proposed in the special regional study on forest research conducted as part of the TFAP process. One of the project profiles is essentially a phase II to the forestry development project currently being carried out in collaboration between the government of St Vincent and the Grenadines and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).
CIDA is assisting the government and in particular the Forestry Division, in the development of the forestry sector. This assistance is facilitated through a five year CIDA Forestry Development Project which started 1 April 1989 and is due for completion 31 March 1994. The project goal and a summary of the activities are given in Appendix I. However, it will be necessary to build on the achievements of the CIDA project through the TFAP Country Capacity Project (CCP), designated here as proposed project 5.01 'Forestry Development: Phase II'. This will be necessary to ensure that the country has sufficient capability to manage the forest resources in an effective manner and allow the reaping of long-term research data, follow-up management, modifications to management plans and institutional strengthening.
While the Forestry Division is now in a good position to perform its role as guardian and manager of the forest resources reasonably well, it lacks experience. The staff could not be trained before the commencement of the SVG/CIDA project and some of the training will be completed after the project has ended. Thus, only some of the staff were able to fully absorb the technology which was being transferred from the foreign experts. Technical support will therefore be required for some time (five years) in several specialist areas, including forest administration and planning, wildlife research and management, national parks planning, management and interpretation. External grant funding combined with some local counterpart funding will be needed to provide such support.
Consequently, 'Forestry Development: Phase II' is presented as one of the 17 TFAP priority projects but it is suggested that emphasis is placed on this and two other projects in the short-term planning process.
Reference is made to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA. July 1993
Forestry development initiatives at the regional/subregional level - regional project proposals 01-05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of the European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P.Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special study as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map 1. General map showing the location of St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Source: Government of St. Vincent and the Grenadines. St. Vincent and the Grenadines development plan 1986 -1988.
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Background
1. St Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) comprises over 30 islands, islets and cays. Land distribution between these is shown below:
ISLAND
AREA (km^2)
AREA (ha)
St Vincent
Bequia
Mustique
Canouan
Mayrean
Union
Prune (palm)
Petit St Vincent
2. The estimated population in 1991 was 107,598 compared with 98,604 in 1980. Population density at 305 persons per km^2 is high. Growth rate was estimated to be 1% per year 1985-1990.
Topography
3. St Vincent has a central north-south chain of rugged steep mountains and a coastal plain of varying width. Mt Soufriere (1180m) dominates the north, separated by a trough from the Morne Garu mountains whose highest peaks are Richmond Peak (1078m) and Mt Brisbane (933m).
4. However, the maximum elevations of the three largest of the Grenadines are:
Bequia
269m
Canouan
267m
Union Island
304m
Soils
5. Soils of St Vincent are entirely of volcanic origin derived from rocks which are mainly agglomerates, lavas and pyroclastic volcanic materials of basaltic or andesitic mineralogy. The central range of mountains contains volcanic cones. The soils are mostly medium to coarse (light) texture with high permeability. They are generally fertile but prone to erosion. Suitable uses for the soils in seven land capability classes are given. Degree of slope is the dominant factor.
Vegetation
6. The amount of forest remaining is remarkable. About 38% of the total land area (13,000 ha) is covered by forest. Nearly 5% of the land area is composed of mature, mostly undisturbed primary forest, most of which occurs on steep slopes. The existing vegetation is summarised:
FOREST TYPE
AREA (ha)
AREA (%)
young secondary
secondary
primary
plantation
palm
dwarf
dry scrub
7. Land above 305m is reserved for forest. Several other forest reserves have been specifically declared but demarcation is not always clear. The CIDA Forestry Development Project proposes to delineate the forest reserves and other forested lands.
8. Squatters have caused a fair amount of deforestation of natural forests. Rapid upward expansion of agriculture (especially banana cultivation) has occurred. Deforestation for agriculture is estimated to be 25-30 ha per year in 6 watersheds. Fuelwood cutting and charcoal production contribute significantly to deforestation. The Forestry Resource Conservation Act (1992) addresses, inter alia, the planning and management of the forest resource.
9. The natural vegetation of the Grenadines has been severely damaged by clearing and uncontrolled grazing. Heavily degraded cactus scrub and secondary woodland predominate.
Background to the Economy
10. Between 1986 and 1990, foreign debt increased by 60% and was 33% of GDP in 1990. GDP is projected to grow at 1.8% from 1990 to 1995 which is slow compared with 1980-1990. Inflation averages are:
11. Agriculture is the largest production sector contributing about 17% to GDP. Contribution to export revenue varied from 75-86% between 1985 and 1990.
12. The trade deficit increased substantially 1985-1989 with wheat and rice the major imported food items. These are likely to remain as high cost imports.
Forestry and the National Economy
13. Lumber accounts for 5% of imports and meets 50% of roundwood demand, 85% of lumber demand and 75% of other wood products demand. It is suggested that priority be given to non-coniferous plantations for lumber and charcoal production. These should be established away from important watersheds. Project 3.01 is for a long-term strategy on charcoal production, plantations, harvesting and marketing.
14. Forestry's contribution to export earnings by the agriculture sector was 1.6% (1985) and 1.4% (1989). Agriculture's contribution to export earnings was 86.2% (EC$ 23.3 million) in 1985 and 75% (EC$ 29.2 million) in 1989. Crops contributed considerably more to this than either livestock or fishing.
15. However, the full contribution of the forest sector to the economy is significant when employment, charcoal consumption, watersheds and furniture/wood product manufacture are considered. Forestry is expected to play a highly significant role in the development of the economy during the 1991-1995 period of the government's Development Plan.
Forest Policy
16. McHenry and Gane (1987/8) reviewed policy and legislation, and then prepared a draft policy for the 'Development of Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks' which is summarised in the appendix to the main report. This was used in the CIDA Forestry Development Project in collaboration with the Forestry Division, to develop the most recent version of the National Forest Resources Policy which is awaiting final sanction. It is quoted in the appendix to the main report.
17. Its immediate objectives are wide-ranging and are reflected in proposed TFAP projects. The objectives cover forestry sector contribution to welfare and economy (projects 1.05, 1.06), maintenance and management of Crown forest estate, development of forest industries (projects 2.01, 2.02, 2.03), public awareness (5.02) and outdoor amenities (4.01), conservation (5.05), training of personnel (5.03) and promotion of research (5.04).
Legislation
18. There are various deficiencies in the related legislation which need to be addressed by amendments or by new legislation. New legislation should be enacted for natural resource development based on sound environmental management, and for national parks and protected areas. Recommended amendments pertain to national water resources development and management, to forest reserves, to the classification of 'wildlife' and to town and country planning. Wide-ranging suggestions are made to remove some of the constraints to agroforestry. Suggestions are made for offsetting some of the costs of these new measures.
Administration
19. The SVG/CIDA Forestry Development Project proposed both interim and final organisational structures which have been considered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Industry and Labour (MAIL). These seem suitable for the Forestry Division except that the final structure needs strengthening in the areas of (i) wildlife, (ii) national parks and protection and (iii) watershed management.
20. However, the Forestry Division lacks experience. Staff training and technical support will be needed for five years in several specialist areas. Proposed regional project 01 for the establishment of an OECS Forestry, National Parks and Wildlife Service would be of enormous benefit to a small country like SVG in providing advice and assistance. Project 5.01 for 'Forestry Development: Phase II' also addresses these requirements.
Land Use
21. The State was the major land owner but the government now owns about 30% of the arable land of St Vincent. Some of this land has been divested to small farmers under the Rural Development and Land Reform Programme of the Structural Adjustment Programme. Lack of secure tenure remains a problem and squatters cultivating land in water catchment areas cause severe negative environmental impacts.
22. There is no clear land use policy and as a result, land use is not sufficiently well determined by land capability. There is limited land space with increasing pressure on land so it is essential that land zoning is introduced (see project 1.08) for efficient and ecologically sound land use. Land use management on Union Island (project 1.04) is recommended as one of the three TFAP projects requiring urgent attention in the immediate future. There is no land use map so project 1.08 for 'Land tenure, land use mapping and land zoning' addresses this need. It aims to provide information on land tenure, land titles, mapping and aerial photography.
Watersheds in St Vincent
23. There are 16 potable water supply systems and seven springs but no wells. There is a water shortage problem in the dry season, with a shortfall of up to 50%. There are some fears about the level of water supply contamination due to agrochemicals and a study to quantify this is recommended as proposed project 1.07 'Assessment of water pollution by agricultural chemicals'.
24. The water catchment areas have been assessed (Forestry Division, 1990) and described in the main report. Urgent attention must be given to improving some of these catchments.
25. Currently, irrigation is not required for the main crops (banana, root crops). However, the proposed year-round production of an expanded vegetable and food diversification programme will impose irrigation requirements. Proposed project 1.06 is for 'Small farm irrigation development'. A water supply sector development plan over the next ten years is required. Whilst the 'Colonarie Watershed Management Plan' was prepared under the CIDA project, implementation, monitoring and follow-up must continue after the end of the project in 1994. Thus, project 5.01 makes provision for this.
Watersheds in the Grenadines
26. There is considerably lower rainfall, no running rivers and no perennial streams. Domestic water supply depends on private and public rainwater cisterns. Wells are normally used for agriculture and livestock, but some of these are already slightly saline. Major hotels obtain water from desalination units.
Watershed Management in St Vincent
27. Many of the watersheds suffer from deforestation for fuel, poor management of agricultural lands, rapid expansion of banana cultivation including in the upper watersheds, erosion, siltation, heavy use of chemicals and squatter settlements. There is a hydroelectric project in the Cumberland watershed.
28. However, although St Vincent has had some of the best examples of soil conservation in the Caribbean, the farmers are not willing to contribute to the new cost sharing arrangement with the MAIL. A funding system needs to be worked out, with perhaps a cess (or tax) for soil conservation.
29. There is a pressing need for the Forestry Division to increase its reforestation programme to cover the already denuded areas for watershed protection. Proposed project 1.05 has as its objective protection of watersheds against poor and inappropriate use and deterioration. An information base for sustainable watershed development will be developed. A policy on squatting must be formulated and squatters should be removed from water catchment areas.
30. The Forestry Division and the MAIL are responsible for different elements of watersheds. There is fairly good cooperation but more interaction at the operations level is recommended. There is a need for a central authority for general development such as a National Land Authority or Commission, with responsibility for all lands in the watershed.
Watershed Management in the Grenadines
31. Recommendations are for increased storage of water in surface ponds particularly for agriculture, irrigation and livestock use. Also, revegetation and controlled grazing are called for. The proposed construction of two Forestry Division work stations in the Grenadines, as suggested under project 5.01, will be of benefit to local farmers in terms of advice and technical assistance.
Silviculture
32. Prior to the SVG/CIDA project, only minimal silvicultural and forest management (including plantation work) was done. This project has changed the situation enormously. Development of plantation forests has been a major activity involving (proposed) location, surveys, demarcation, establishment of flying nurseries, expanding plantations, initiating silvicultural operations and research. This ties in with recommendations by Buford Briscoe (1991) in projects 5.12 and 5.13.
33. Thinning operations are already showing positive results in all three main plantation species (blue mahoe, Caribbean pine and Honduras mahogany). More work is needed before these results can be applied more generally.
34. Currently, reforestation has mostly been carried out in the deforested upper watersheds for the purposes of water and soil conservation and management. Protection of watersheds must continue to be given top priority but it may be possible to allow limited harvesting using selected cutting in these areas. The use of pit sawing or alaska mills is encouraged as well as close monitoring of harvesting activities.
35. However, there will be a need to continue with silvicultural research after 1994. It is unlikely that the Forestry Division will be able to prepare management plans for individual forest reserves before then. Therefore, the second phase follow-up to the SVG/CIDA project is very important (5.01/CCP) and external technical assistance and grant funding should be sought.
Forest Management
36. Implementation of a management plan will be frustrated by the concurrent jurisdiction over the forests between the Forestry Division and the Central Water and Sewerage Authority. Legal provisions to facilitate coordination of initiatives are needed.
37. Undemarcated and ungazetted forest boundaries pose a problem. Proposed regional project 02 is for the monitoring of forest cover and forest resources using satellite techniques. The lack of a proper forest inventory is addressed in project 5.04.
38. The continued encroachment by squatters and expansion of banana plantations also make effective forest management difficult.
Forest Research
39. This was reviewed (Buford Briscoe, 1991) and the major constraints are considered in the main report. Proposed regional project 04 recommends addressing training needs in a coordinated way throughout the region.
40. It is recommended that a small forestry research unit be set up. Proposed projects include institutional strengthening for research (5.01), continuous forest inventory (5.04), a strategy for more efficient production and use of fuelwood and charcoal (3.01), development of a wildlife unit (4.02) and tree improvement (5.10).
41. Forest research will need to be an integral part of any follow-up SVG/CIDA project.
Agroforestry - Livestock
42. Livestock is viewed not as an industry in its own right but as an adjunct to crop enterprises. Livestock production of cattle, sheep, goats and pigs is at subsistence levels though commercial production of rabbits is on the increase. However, SVG can become self sufficient in milk, beef and broilers. The export of rabbits to Martinique is a possibility. Proposed project 1.01 'Intensive small ruminant production' is relevant here.
43. A livestock development programme is being launched which seeks to raise livestock production and integrate it more fully into crop farming systems. The specific problems associated with the livestock sector are described in the main report. Major recommendations involve permanent housing of animals (see project 1.04) and the increased use of improved grasses and multipurpose tree species for tree forage such as Gliricidia and Leucaena. Acacia mangium is recommended for Union Island.
44. Better training for farmers is needed and project 1.02 aims to demonstrate to the farmers the benefit of an integrated crop/livestock production system. Better coordination between the various ministerial divisions dealing with livestock and with crops is also recommended.
Agroforestry - Crops
45. Agroforestry has traditionally been practised and has good potential, but its development has been ad hoc and undirected. An Agroforestry Development Plan is required.
46. Banana is currently the dominant crop, estimated to cover 4,050 ha (1992). There has been rapid expansion of the banana crop with a decline in some of the other traditional crops particularly root crops. This is a potentially dangerous situation and diversification is essential. The government recognises this, but it will require additional support services for farmers who currently receive greatest support for banana production. Project 1.03 proposes to evaluate the effects of alley cropping bananas with multipurpose tree species.
47. The government proposes to target fruit tree crops in its crop diversification plans, and some of these have export potential. Currently the major tree crops are mango, coconut, breadfruit, avocado, golden apple, orange, grapefruit and lime. There is some potential for expanding the production of passionfruit and watermelon. Proposed project 1.05, 'Agroforestry', should lead to increased fruit production for export, and increased agriculture production generally.
48. Altogether, the MAIL has targeted 43 crops, tree crops and flowers for increased production, with 23 noted for priority attention, though the basis for prioritization is not clear. Floriculture should be targeted only with caution due to a scarcity of resources and skills. The arrowroot and coconut industries could be revitalized.
49. The combination of forest species or tree crops (e.g. coconuts, fruit trees) with food crops (e.g. banana, root crops) has agronomic, soil management and economic advantages. Specific systems should be detailed and appraised in relation to St Vincent's developmental objectives (see project 1.05). The prevailing conditions favour multiple cropping but there must be consideration of agronomic compatibility, time of planting and market factors. This would be advantageous in the future when reducing or phasing out the production of the currently dominant banana crop.
50. In addition, a project for intensive vegetable production with assistance in irrigation from the French Technical Mission has been devised for the Cane Grove area, though it is recommended that attention be paid to the cost effectiveness of irrigation under St Vincent conditions. Project 1.06 relates to irrigation for small farmers.
51. However, the agricultural diversification programme must be more clearly defined and market driven. More work on the finer details of this programme is recommended.
52. The Land Reform Programme which allocates 1-3 ha of land to farmers is contributing to the fragmentation of holdings and reducing the chances of success of agroforestry based on fruit trees. Viable agroforestry systems need to be developed for small holdings.
53. Agroprocessing research is recommended to examine the production and utilization profiles for the crops grown, and the economic viability of various types of agroprocessing. The Ministry of Agriculture has made various proposals in this sphere.
Forest Based Industrial Development
54. The bulk of the wood requirements are met by imports, worth EC$ 6.5 million in 1990. The wood production capability of the natural forest is low. Most of the forest plantations are on inaccessible sites and exploitation costs are prohibitive. Most logging and log processing operations are basic. A small secondary wood processing and craft sector exists, mostly for local consumption. No timber preservation or seasoning is practised. Fuelwood and charcoal are valuable and necessary commodities still being used by over 80% of the population.
55. The production of forest products such as poles, posts and timber has had a low priority because planting efforts were committed to 'Protection' rather than 'Production' forests. For industrial needs, transmission poles are imported. Local forest resources satisfy only basic needs.
56. Imports of wood and other wood based products are projected to increase. To ensure future timber supplies for commercial utilization on a sustainable basis, suitable land should be allocated under a land use programme. An integrated agroforestry approach to land use management must be considered as a priority for appropriate production forest areas.
57. Sawmill processes and technology are primitive and wastage is high. Costs are also high. The development of productive wood forest products industries will be constrained by a variety of factors. The advantages of establishing small commercial plantations either separately or as part of an integrated agroforestry programme is highly recommended. These should involve indigenous multi-use species to satisfy community needs for fuelwood, fenceposts and small amounts of timber for utilization. Project 2.02, 'Establishment of community forestry units' aims to improve employment for rural communities with better management of timber and raw material resources and products.
Fuelwood and Charcoal
58. Over 80% of the population uses charcoal. It is produced in shallow pits by private individuals. Although figures for supply and demand are disputed, there seems to be the potential for a profitable fuelwood and charcoal venture, if properly managed.
59. Recommendations include a register of producers, monitoring of activities, promoting sustainable use of forests and mangroves, and developing the propagation and planting of fast growing multi-use tree species to ensure a steady supply of fuelwood. Project 3.01 is for the development of a biomass energy utilization strategy. However, these efforts roust be linked to research into accurate demand and consumption patterns.
Furniture manufacture
60. Capital investment is small and about 100 persons are employed. Most production operations are poorly equipped. There is a need for the wood used to be properly seasoned and it is recommended that at least two 7m^3 Jakrap solar kilns are established. Project 2.01, 'A feasibility study into the development of solar drying of wood', addresses this need.
Handicraft Industry
61. Bamboo, lianas, straws and grasses are used and there is a market for these products in the tourist industry. There may be some over-exploitation of resources, and the industry has to compete with similar handicraft items imported from Asia.
62. It is recommended that attention be paid to the upgrading of skills by training to produce high quality marketable products. The National Craft Council should be developed into an institution fully representing the interests of craft producers. Marketing mechanisms and strategies must be actively pursued. For future viability, the industry has to become more technically efficient and competitive. Proposed project 2.03,/Re-structuring the craft industry', addresses these needs. Basic design criteria and small business management must be addressed.
National Parks
63. There is no formal system of national parks and protected areas. However, various proposals exist for the designation of areas as national parks. There is a system of forest reserves but this has not offered effective protection in the designated areas. There should be a stricter conservation classification for the Kings Hill Forest Reserve with a suitable buffer zone. The legality of the areas marked as 'reserves' on the Grenadines is dubious.
64. There are proposals for the designation of three areas as national parks. These are Soufriere Volcano National Park, Mount Royal National Park in Canouan and the Tobago Cays National Park. It is recommended that the existing plan for the Tobago Cays National Park be reviewed and revised. There are serious flaws in its heavy recreation/tourism orientation with no provision for management zones. However, the Tobago Cays National Parks Project (4.01) is recommended for early action.
65. A draft bill for the creation of national parks and the establishment of a department of national parks was prepared under an OAS programme in 1990. However, this draft was not preceded by preparation of a systems plan and so is seriously flawed. No steps should be taken to enact the draft National Parks Act until it is substantially revised. The first step must be the identification of a system of national parks and protected areas which is properly suited to SVG. IUCN guidelines should be referred to.
66. It is recommended that a small National Parks Department be set up under MAIL to avoid wasteful creation of parallel institutional infrastructures for the management of national parks, forests, wildlife and marine resources.
Wildlife Reserves
67. Eight areas in St Vincent and 16 areas in the Grenadines were declared wildlife reserves under the Wildlife Protection Act (1987). The largest of these is the 3075 ha St Vincent Parrot Reserve which is intended to protect the endangered St Vincent parrot (Amazona quildingii).
68. However, to date this system of wildlife reserves exists largely on paper. Not all their boundaries have been demarcated or defined. The capability of Forest Officers to function as Wildlife Protection Officers is doubtful, and so the reserves are not afforded adequate protection. The appointment of a Chief Wildlife Officer and advisory committee are recommended.
Marine Reserves
69. Ten conservation areas have been defined. However, there appears to be some confusion in the legislation which should be amended to ensure that these conservation areas are (legally) marine reserves.
70. Unregulated mining of sand and rocks from beaches for construction purposes is the most important coastal resource issue. It has caused significant beach erosion. The problem of coral die-back off the Grenadines should be addressed. The recommendations about solid waste pollution off the Grenadines (Ortiz, 1988) should be implemented.
71. The Botanical Garden in Kingstown, established in 1765, is the oldest in the western hemisphere. It is popular with both nationals and tourists. It is recommended that a fee be charged and the monies paid into a Conservation Fund.
Ecotourism
72. Annual expenditure by tourists is equivalent to about 40% GDP. The lack of an intercontinental airport has prevented some of the negative social and environmental impacts associated with mass tourism. Expansion of the cruise ship industry is being discouraged.
73. The potential for growth in the area of ecotourism is recognised and the nature trails, national parks and outdoor recreation sites could be developed. Various ecotourism initiatives are evaluated in the main report. These include the Windward Islands Nature Tourism Project, Forest Recreation Sites Programme and the low impact development at Petit Byahaut.
74. The occurrence of the endangered St Vincent Parrot and an excellent observation spot on the Vermont nature trail are big assets. Any ecotourism thrust could be based on rainforest, whale watching, the St Vincent parrot, Vermont nature trails, Soufriere volcano with its associated forests, Tobago Cays National Park and bird watching tours.
75. However, in the absence of any reliable market research data on the demand for ecotourism and the sensitivity of the resource base, proceeding with any ecotourism projects should be done with caution.
Biodiversity
76. Little recent botanical work has been carried out but the number of single island endemic species is expected to be low. It is recommended that the distribution and status of these species be ascertained. Conservation of wild flora should be stressed. The development of proper herbaria facilities should be pursued.
77. In St Vincent, rain forest covers about 12-13% of the estimated 13,000 ha of forested lands. It is a critical habitat for the endangered St Vincent parrot and important as a water catchment area. There is an urgent need to protect the remaining few areas of natural vegetation. Establishment of a wildlife unit within the Forestry Division is recommended and proposed as project 4.02.
78. In the Grenadines, reduction of forest cover occurs in differing intensities among the islands and moves by the Forestry Division to establish a presence on the Grenadines (within project 5.01) are encouraged.
79. Mangrove occurs as small fringe forests. It is suggested that an assessment of their importance nationally be done to complement other work (Bacon, 1991). Where clearfelling is occurring, sustainable harvesting methods should be implemented.
80. Surveys are recommended for butterflies, terrestrial molluscs, freshwater fish, and the endemic species of terrestrial reptiles and amphibia. Sea turtles are not protected. Taking of sea turtles should be banned and surveys are recommended to determine the existing stocks, the success of nesting activities and which beaches are important for nesting. The wildlife unit as proposed in project 4.02 would carry out much of this work.
81. The endangered St Vincent parrot is the national bird. The work of the Forestry Division has resulted in the stabilization of the wild population and a decrease in illicit trade. Some have been successfully bred in captivity and expansion of aviary capacity as advocated in project 4.03 is supported. There is some concern about the effect on bird populations of the use of the pesticide Furidan in the banana industry. Further investigation is called for.
82. Nine species of bat occur in St Vincent and four in the Grenadines. Their status is little known. The agouti, opossum and armadillo are game species and not thought to be endangered. Sightings of humpback whale can be made between Mustique and Bequia. Though a signatory of CITES, whaling occurs under a quota system and it is strongly endorsed that this will have a negative feedback on the ecotourism industry. Since SVG is one of the few places in the Caribbean where whale watching ecotourism ventures can be promoted, a total ban on whaling is recommended.
Hunting
83. Hunters are opportunistic and not organ