<title>Improved stove selection and dissemination: ASIA Regional Training of Trainers Workshop</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
In Asia, the need for improved cookstoves (ICS) is as pressing as ever. A re-evaluation of regional energy related data shows there has been no overall fuel switch away from biomass, and suggests that for many decades to come most people will remain dependent on woodfuels. Furthermore, notwithstanding the great advances made in China and India, not even half of the households in Asia have adopted ICS. Continuous efforts from both GOs and NGOs to disseminate ICS are required to improve the situation.
The socio-economic and environmental benefits of ICS and their benefits in terms of improved health and relief of drudgery, particularly for women and children, may be obvious. However, the complexities associated with the design, production and introduction of improved stoves are not always appreciated. Outsiders often find it difficult to understand why the dissemination of such a simple commodity meets so many obstacles. Unfortunately, also quite a few people who are personally involved in stove activities are not fully familiar with the intricacies of building and disseminating ICS.
To rectify this situation the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP) and the Asia Regional Cookstove Programme (ARECOP) have jointly developed a training module for use in national training courses to be held throughout the region, particularly in those countries where stove development is still highly centralized. These national training courses are envisaged as being highly participatory and aim to transfer the relevant design and dissemination skills by hands-on training. Training manuals for use by trainers and trainees, it should be noted, are translated into local languages and distributed in advance of any course. Such courses, it is believed, will lead to better quality control and more effective strategies for meeting users' needs and overcoming any obstacles to stove adoption. Where necessary, to ensure that national trainers fully understand the innovative content of the training module and are fully able to use a participatory training approach, a
training of the trainers workshop has been organized prior to the implementation of national training courses.
Thanks are due to the ARECOP experts and the many dedicated stove disseminators in the field, as well as Mr. Auke Koopmans, wood energy conservation specialist at RWEDP, for their tireless efforts to help improve the household energy situation in Asia.
Dr. W.S. Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, FAO/RWEDP
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
This document is a report on the Asia Regional Training of Trainers (TOT) Workshop on Improved Stove Selection and Dissemination, which was held in Mataram, Lombok, Indonesia from June 29 - July 8, 1997. In total 20 participants from 8 Asian countries (Nepal, Vietnam, Myanmar, Cambodia, Indonesia, India, Bangladesh, and Bhutan) were trained in the use of a training module developed by ARECOP (Asia Regional Cookstove Program) with the expectation that the participants would organise a national training course on improved stove selection and dissemination in their own countries, using the process of improved stove selection introduced in the training module.
The participants, mostly experienced trainers, came from diverse backgrounds including NGOs, government institutions and research institutions. Please see Appendix 6 for the list of participants along with brief biographies, and see Appendix 7 for the TOT schedule.
The TOT workshop was organised by ARECOP in partnership with Pusat Studi Pembangunan (PSP) and FAO-RWEDP (FAO-Regional Wood Energy Development Programme). The workshop was made possible through the support of FAO-RWEDP.
The TOT training team consisted of two main trainers, Emma Wibowo and Aryanto Soedjarwo who were the trainers for the Indonesian national training course held in December 1996, also on Lombok Island. It should be noted that the Indonesians pioneered the use of the training module and thus were in the best position to train prospective trainers from other Asian countries on the training content, methods and process which the module promulgates.
Mrs. Wibowo, who was the trainer in charge of social and gender aspects for the Indonesian national training course, is an experienced and energetic participatory trainer with a keen understanding of group dynamics and expertise in social assessment, gender analysis, community outreach, program planning and monitoring and evaluation.
Mr. Soedjarwo has been involved in ICPs and technical stove training workshops for two decades, working out of Yayasan Dian Desa. He brings in-depth technical knowledge on stove design and stove construction in addition to troubleshooting skills. His work has been both laboratory and field orientated.
Christina Aristanti, ARECOP manager, and Michelle Schullein, assistant manager, also served as assistant trainers and facilitators in addition to being the main organisers of the workshop.
From FAO-RWEDP, Auke Koopmans and Jaap Koppejan attended as observers. Mr. Koppejan acted as lead camera-man for the duration of the training, documenting important training sessions and video taping each participant's teaching practice for the purpose of evaluation. Tina Sriratana and Jaruwan Thananimit, from FAO-RWEDP, provided administrative support and also lead a number of energiser activities during the three days they attended the workshop.
Finally, Pingkan Wibowo and Marjan Koppejan attended in the capacity of volunteer organisers and observers, bringing much energy and enthusiasm to the many tasks they undertook during the workshop.
<section>3</section>
2. Background of the TOT workshop
Among the primary obstacles faced by attempts to improve the effectiveness and success rates of improved cookstove (ICS) dissemination programs in Asia is the concentration of technical and programmatic skills among a few given experts in improved cookstove research and design. This concentration of technical expertise is most evident at the national level where the skills gap separating technical stove experts and the organisations that take on field level dissemination is a large one. In some countries, such as Nepal or Bangladesh, there may be only one recognised stove expert who takes on all R&D and training activities. In recognition of this, the Asia Regional Cookstove Program (ARECOP) based in Yogyakarta, Indonesia and the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP) based in Bangkok, Thailand embarked on a co-operative effort to develop a training module for use in national training courses to be implemented in selected Asian countries.
The module, which essentially consists of a model training course, comprises 2 manuals:
(1) A Trainee Manual which contains information related to the model training course promulgated by the module and handouts used during the training course. It includes chapters on biomass use in Asia; assessing the community context, the kitchen, the stove user and gender analysis; stove design; stove construction; stove dissemination; monitoring and evaluation; and there is a chapter on stove selection as a socio-technical process. There are also a number of annexes consisting of assessment tools, samples of assessment information, various ICS designs, a pre-training assessment form and a list of references and contacts. This manual is for distribution to participants before the start of a training course.
(2) A Trainers Manual which is divided into three parts. The first part, which is the briefest, provides a framework for a 10 days training course and introduces a four stage model of the stove selection process; the second part, comprising the bulk of the manual, presents the 40 sessions which comprise the model training course (a list of these sessions can be found in Appendix 1); the third part of the manual gives advice and guidance on formulating a training agenda.
The goal of the training module is to increase the acceptability of improved stoves within the countries where the training is held. The targets of the training are ICP field workers. The training aims to transfer skills so that ICP field workers are able to:
· evaluate current stove designs based on combustion and heat transfer concepts, knowledge of raw materials and technical stove parts in addition to the needs, wants and conditions of the target group;
· determine appropriate modifications/improved stove designs based on the needs, wants and conditions of the target group in addition to technical knowledge;
· become familiar with construction techniques for a selection of different stove designs;
· determine an appropriate dissemination strategy based on existing technology dissemination channels and the improved stove design to be disseminated;
· incorporate gender analysis into stove design selection and introduction; and
· monitor the progress of a stove program and troubleshoot where necessary.
Essentially the model training course is designed to develop the trainees' understanding of the four stage stove selection process (see Figure 1). Practically, this is to be achieved by means of the trainees determining an improved cookstove design for a case study area, and then, during the final day of the training course, determining an improved cookstove design for the area in which they normally work. The training is highly participatory in nature.
As mentioned earlier, the first national training course was held in Indonesia from November 27 through December 5, 1996 on Lombok Island. This national training course was viewed as a 'test' of the training module. One of the specific questions that needed to be answered was would trainers be able to take the module and run a successful training course on their own.
Overall the Indonesian national training course was successful, thus confirming the module's utility. The process-centred module was successful in getting the Indonesian trainees to integrate technical and social factors into the two stove designs which they came up with. This in itself was a leap ahead of most other improved cookstove training courses which have been held throughout Asia during the last few decades and which have mainly focused on the transfer of one or two improved cookstove designs in isolation from their intended social context.
A number of improvements to the module and suggestions for future training courses were discussed at regular evening feedback meetings of the training team and a few experts, and at the training team's final evaluation meeting. It was generally felt that it was very important that trainers of future training courses should understand and be able to internalise the flow and steps of the stove selection process used in the training module, to ensure that the module is used correctly. Secondly, translation of the module (the original is in English) to the local language was thought to be crucial and it was recommended that translation be done by someone who is familiar with the content, flow and process of the module so that the translated version will not deviate from the original. Failing this, at the very least the translation should be edited by someone who is familiar with the content, flow and process of the module. The prospective trainers were thought to be the best
group to carry out this translation or editing work as they were familiar with the technical and social concepts used in the module and it would give them an opportunity to clear up any confusion regarding training content and methods, which might creep in to a translation, before the training course gets off the ground. A further recommendation was that each national training course should allow for two days of preparation time for the trainers immediately preceding a course.
In recognition of the highly specific and innovative content of the module, especially the unique process of stove design selection, and the need to use trainers with experience in participatory training methods, it was suggested that an Asian Regional Training of Trainers (TOT) Workshop should be organised to prepare future trainers in the region. The fact that separate parties are responsible for the creation of the module and its implementation also merited a TOT to provide an opportunity to ensure that prospective trainers have a full understanding of the module. A TOT would undoubtedly benefit trainers who needed to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the stove selection process. For example, it was acknowledged that experienced trainers in stove design might not be familiar with participatory training methods and that technical experts are usually inexperienced in social assessment and vice versa. Moreover, in some countries in the region (e.g. Cambodia) it
was not possible to find trainers with improved cookstove technical experience and the TOT would be able, to some extent, to remedy this.
The expected outputs of the TOT were that prospective trainers would:
· understand adult learning styles and the reason behind using participatory training methods;
· understand why the stove selection process is used and understand how the training progresses towards the identification of an appropriate stove design and work plan;
· be familiar with the technical and social components of the training module;
· have the opportunity to practice the participatory training methods employed and receive feedback for improvement; and
· be clear about their individual roles and responsibilities while being able to work harmoniously with their colleagues on national training teams.
Figure 1: Model National Training Framework
<section>4</section>
3. Training of trainers framework
The training sessions
In order to familiarise the participants with the framework of the model national training course described in the module, the TOT followed this as closely as possible. The TOT also endeavoured to cover the contents and process of the model training course. However, as the TOT Workshop had to cover a number of sessions specific to a TOT, such as sessions introducing the trainees to participatory training concepts and methods and had to provide an opportunity for teaching practice (a critical component of the TOT), there was not enough time to cover all of the sessions described in the model national training course (see Appendix 6). However, the trainees were given the opportunity to ask for clarifications about these sessions and even to try out a selection of these sessions during their teaching practice. The participants, it should be noted, were grouped into national training teams for the teaching practice sessions.
The model national training framework, which is based on the 4 stage stove selection process, is shown in Figure 1. Components that were not included in the TOT due to time constraints are shown in italics and with the text shaded light grey. TOT sessions can be seen in Table 1.
Table 1: TOT Sessions
Objectives and agenda TOT
Objectives, target group and flow of national trainings
Teamwork
Learning styles/adult learning
Two way communication and visual aids
National training team contract and selection of national training team micro-teaching sessions
Giving and receiving feedback
Nepal micro-teaching and feedback
Dealing with problems that may come up...
Bangladesh micro-teaching and feedback
Cambodia micro-teaching and feedback /participatory methods
Myanmar micro-teaching and feedback
Group dynamics
Vietnam micro-teaching and feedback
Indonesia, Bhutan and India micro-teaching and feedback
National training plan
The training sessions
Introduction
As stated in the previous section, the workshop consisted of two types of training sessions: the sessions to be covered in any national training course, based on the model training course contained in the training module and special training of the trainers sessions which emphasised the use of different training methodologies, especially non-conventional teaching methodologies which are considered more appropriate for training adults. In addition, the principles of adult learning were presented to the trainees and the importance of a training team contract was stressed. As far as possible the two types of training session took place in an integrated manner.
During the workshop, the trainees were given an opportunity to experience, to some extent, all of the components of the training module, thus they also had to do field exercises, follow and practice the different steps in designing a stove for a particular community group as well as to practice constructing several different stove designs.
The following are two examples of the sessions covered during the training, one technical session and one non-technical session.
Combustion stations and processing
The principles of combustion are usually taught in classroom-based theoretical sessions. It was felt that this was inappropriate for adult learners in the field as it may be too difficult for them to follow a lecture or too boring. Thus in order to provide the trainees with a more appropriate methodology which they could use in their own future training courses a methodology using 10 different 'combustion stations' was introduced. These 'stations' were simply places on the floor where different combustion materials were placed along with various cards containing instructions for the trainees. Participants were divided into pairs and invited to carry out various experiments and make the observations asked for on the instruction cards.
Later, classroom sessions focused on questions and answers about the combustion stations, with some explanation of the importance of the principles of combustion for stove design.
Thus, the combustion stations are an example of how the two types of training were integrated in the workshop.
Gender
The session on gender (a non-technical subject) was also designed as an integrated training exercise whereby the trainees could learn about the concept of gender in a stove program as promulgated by the training module as well as gain an understanding of the possible different methodologies that can be used to convey this information. In this particular session three different methodologies were used.
First, the sessions were introduced through a traditional Indonesian song which reflects gender relations. This was translated into English as follows:
For centuries men have dominated women
Put in a cage as beautiful sweet ornaments
Somehow, sometimes men can be made so very weak
Made to bow down with a woman's flirtatious wink
Afterwards, trainees were grouped by country of origin and asked to think of the concept of gender in their own country context and to draw a picture representing this concept of gender.
Each group explained its artistic product and Emma the trainer, noted differences and similarities. The Bangladeshi team explained that gender is often thought of as meaning development projects for women. Bhutan, Cambodia, India, Nepal and Vietnam concentrated on gender as meaning the division of labour. Indonesia brought in some aspects of access to resources and Myanmar was more specific looking at relationships between men and women, domination specifically, for different classes within society. Emma summed up by using a transparency as follows:
SEX refers to the biological differences between females and males.
GENDER refers to the socially defined differences between men and women.
After the discussion on the national perspectives, participants were asked to think about how gender influences a stove program and the responses of trainees from the pioneer Indonesian national training course were shared with them, as below:
Discussing the differences and similarities of gender concepts
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 1
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 2
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 3
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 4
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 5
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 6
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 7
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 8
Some of the group work visualizing gender within the trainees' own country context 9
Gender is...
Gender in the field...
The difference between the roles of men and women due to socialisation
The role of women is in the kitchen; the role of men is outside, making a living
The division of roles between men and women, in relation to: equity-togetherness-partnership-mutual respect in the lives of people according to their place and time
No real reflection on the meaning of gender in the field as yet. One example: kitchen work is dominated by women
The relationship between men and women in household life; besides this, gender is to fulfil biological needs and represents a process to ensure descendants
Observation has been made of the household tasks of women and men
Equity in household activities-equity in work division-mutual understanding of the reproduction process
Not yet the same as our statement of "gender is..."
This session helped the trainees right from the start to be aware of the importance of integrating gender issues into the overall planning of a stove program as well as for developing or selecting the most appropriate designs for their respective target group. From the TOT point of view the participants also learned the different methodologies introduced and used during the gender sessions. All other sessions were conducted in the same manner.
<section>5</section>
4. Field exercises
These are an essential component of the training module. Before starting the participants were made to understand that, according to the module, there should be three field exercises covering the four stove selection stages in any national training workshop on Improved Stove Selection and Dissemination (see Fig. 1). However, since this was a TOT, and there were time constraints, only two field exercises (see Fig. 1) were carried out. Nevertheless all the stove selection stages were covered.
For the field exercises, trainees were divided into four field groups. Each group was supervised by one of the TOT trainers. Each group was assigned to one village. The groups and villages were as follows:
Group 1 - Merembu
Group 2 - Bedugul
Group 3 - Mapak 1
Group 4 - Mapak 2
Indu
Sushila
Sadhana
Lulu
Sulpya
Adhong
Nazmul
Luitel
Han
Zaher
Thong
Lwin
Thayut
Jigmela
Beang
Koma
Hong
Vu
Myo
Husni
Pingkan
Michelle
Christina
Aryanto
Before leaving for the four respective villages the trainees were given guidelines which were explained by the trainers. The trainers also went over the community context profiles and activity profiles that were to be used to conduct the field exercises.
Once the first field exercise was completed, the groups were asked to start working on stove selection stage 1. To facilitate this, stove selection stage 1 guidelines were distributed. Then the groups freely discussed their findings and reported their results. Through sharing their findings the groups learned from each other.
The same process was followed for the other field exercise and stove selection stages. The results of the stove selection stages are presented in Appendix 2.
In addition to the field exercises and stove selection stages, a field visit to analyse stove performance testing and analysis in the field was organized in the middle of the training. This also combined a period of relaxation.
The participants were divided into four different groups and asked to monitor stove performance from four different perspectives: the kitchen environment; community involvement; integration; production and dissemination. Each group was assigned to one particular kitchen in the community visited where several different stoves, traditional as well as improved stoves, were used. After completion of the observations, discussions were held at one of the community houses. The results of the discussions were in effect a set of recommendations to PSP, the local NGO, and co-organizer of the TOT which is working on an improved cookstove program in the village.
Discussing cookstove issues with key informants during the field study
The Bedugul group sit down to discuss their findings from the field work for "Stove Selection Stage I"
<section>6</section>
5. Stove construction exercise
The best way to acquire the necessary technical skill to construct a stove is to try to construct one. This rarely takes place in training workshops because the trainers have only theoretical knowledge of stove construction and lack the technical skills needed to construct a fully operational stove. Although trainees could have been taught how to construct a wide range of stove designs and types which use all sorts of materials, only the most commonly used materials and stove designs in the trainees' respective working areas were actually taught. Thus, four different stove designs were constructed by the four groups of trainees using mud and bricks. The groups were as follows:
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Indu
Sushila
Lulu
Sadhana
Hong
Thong
Sulpya
Luitel
Nazmul
Zaher
Lwin
Adhong
Han
Myo
Beang
Vu
Jigmela
Koma
Husni
Thayut
The mud stove construction
Each group was given one stove design. The following diagrams illustrate the different mud stove designs to be constructed and two examples of the stoves made by the trainees.
In the first stage, which took one whole afternoon, each group mixed the mud and formed the stove body. The stove bodies were then left to dry for three days, and later the trainees returned for another afternoon session to make holes and chimneys to complete the stoves. Because the trainees were so eager to know the results of their work (although in reality they understood that this should not be done) they attempted to fire their stoves.
The brick stove construction
Similarly, different brick stove designs were given to the four groups. Under the supervision of the technical trainers and some of the trainees with technical experience in stove construction, the brick stoves were finished in one afternoon session and the results were quite satisfying. The different brick stove designs and pictures of the finished stoves are shown below. Unlike the mud stoves that need to be left to dry for several days before making the holes, the brick stoves can immediately be shaped and finished. However, to prevent cracking, the users must wait for several days for the stove to dry before using it.
In general the participants really appreciated the hands-on experience constructing stoves and they admitted that they learned a lot more from being able to construct the stove themselves. Some related that this was the first time they had attended a stove training workshop which allowed real construction work.
Some of the mud stove designs and actual samples built by the participants are shown in the accompanying diagrams.
Some of the mud stove designs and actual samples built by the participants 1
Some of the mud stove designs and actual samples built by the participants 2
One and two pot brick stove designs and the stoves as built during the training 1
One and two pot brick stove designs and the stoves as built during the training 2
<section>7</section>
6. Teaching practice sessions
The teaching practice sessions were designed for the trainees to start teaming up in preparation for future national training workshops in their own countries and to evaluate their understanding of the training module, especially the stove selection process. All sessions were conducted in English and this proved quite a challenge for some of the trainees.
Each country group was assigned to select some of the 40 sessions covered in the training module. Sessions had to be selected from all of the four stove selection process stages so that the teaching practice sessions covered the entire stove selection process. Each member of the country training teams was then asked to take responsibility for specific sessions and if possible, in order to avoid duplication, to co-ordinate his or her teaching practice with that of members from other countries who chose sessions from the same stove selection stage. They were also given to understand that they were free to choose any training methodology from those provided in the training module as well as any others which they thought were appropriate for their country. They could also modify sessions to suit national situations and the materials available for use. Each teaching practice session was recorded on video for evaluation purposes.
The evaluation of teaching practice was done in many different ways. Direct feedback in the form of verbal comments was used. This was done particularly in the first two sessions. Before the practice sessions cards with questions reminding the trainees of good teaching practice were pasted onto the wall. After the teaching sessions these cards were then distributed to a number of trainees and written responses were solicited. The questions were in the form of: Does the teacher
· encourage active learning?
· provide plenty of opportunities for practical experience?
· make sure shy trainees are given a chance to speak?
· openly admit mistakes or lack of knowledge?
· Heave out what is not important or too detailed?
· prepare session plans and materials in advance?
· modify the teaching methods so they are culturally appropriate?
· show honesty and openness?
· encourage quicker trainees to help those who have more difficulty?
· make him/herself available to trainees after and in between training sessions?
· show loyalty to trainees?
· avoid embarrassing trainees?
· evaluate whether trainees will be able to use their learning in real-life situations?
· give examples to illustrate new ideas and ways?
· use the vocabulary of trainees and avoid fancy jargon?
· relate the subject to the trainees' experience?
· respond to trainee mistakes with positive criticism and patience?
· use imaginative teaching aids?
· know the subject well?
· treat trainees as friends and as equals?
· encourage participation by asking questions and presenting problems?
The results of the teaching practice were in general quite good and, as admitted by the participants themselves, such teaching practice really helped the trainees to start internalising the contents of the training module, especially the stove selection process. The different methodologies used and introduced during the teaching practice sessions were very interesting and showed that some of the participants were experienced trainers, which augured well for future national training workshops.
However, the trainees also felt that the teaching practice was difficult because of the limited time provided. Perhaps this shows that trainees need to work on being able to budget their time more effectively.
Some participants clearly found it quite an obstacle to teach in English. However, from the limited presentations, the trainers were convinced that the teaching would be a lot smoother and more effective if done in the participants' own languages.
One of the positive things about the teaching practice was the serious response from the other trainees while their colleagues were engaged in teaching. No one regarded the teaching practice as unimportant and all gave it their full attention. In summary, the teaching practice sessions were successful and all trainees claimed that they benefited greatly from the feedback from their fellow trainees and from the training team.
There was no doubt that the country teams will be effective in providing future national training workshops in their respective countries.
A more detailed description of the teaching practice sessions and general feedback comments are provided in Appendix 3.
<section>8</section>
7. Formulation of national training plans
After the ten-day learning process, the country training teams were asked to develop national training plans. This was designed to:
· enable the country training team members to work together and begin planning for their respective national training workshops.
· give the country training teams time to review the training module and discuss possible modifications for their countries.
· give the country teams time to start planning a national training wor