<title>Woodfuel flow study of Phnom Penh, Cambodia (GCP/RAS/154/NET)</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Cambodia joined RWEDP as a member country in 1996. Its membership was welcomed as wood is by far the largest energy source in the country and its per capita consumption of wood energy is amongst the highest in Asia. The important roles of wood energy in terms of energy supply, the economy and rural income generation have become well recognised by the government.
Since 1996 the country has organised four national workshops on wood energy development with support and advice from RWEDP. These activities have focused on improved stoves, wood energy planning, gender aspects of wood energy, and natural resource management in the Tonle Sap area. Case studies on data collection and area-based planning are also currently being prepared and more national activities are in the planning stages. Furthermore, delegates from Cambodia have actively participated in regional RWEDP consultations and training courses.
The unique features of woodfuels mean that any policies and interventions aimed at developing wood energy must, in order to be effective, be suited to local conditions and be based on a thorough understanding of local woodfuel flows (RWEDP's Report No.30 on Wood Fuel Flows (1996) gives an overview of four highly relevant studies which readers may find illuminating). The current study on woodfuel flows in Phnom Penh by a team of Cambodian researchers, with support from three international agencies, focuses on an urban market. The results add to our understanding of the situation in Phnom Penh and these and the methodologies used may also be relevant for other countries.
Many thanks are due to the study team for their excellent work under difficult circumstances, and to the project advisor for her advice and support.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Cambodian ministries and the various counterpart agencies in Cambodia for their enthusiastic cooperation and the FAO representative in Cambodia who provided valuable assistance and advice.
Dr. W.S. Hulscher,
Chief Technical Adviser
FAO/RWEDP
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgments
The Woodfuel Flow Study Team would like to express our sincere thanks to all the people who contributed to the study and enabled its successful completion. The team acknowledges assistance from the following:
HE Khieu Muth, Director General of the Ministry of Environment
HE Chan Sarun, Director of the Department of Forestry
Mr. Chay Samith, Director of Department B, the Ministry of Environment
Mr. Chy Sona, Director of Department D, the Ministry of Environment
Mr. Nhek Chroung, Director of the Department of Energy
Mr. Tun Lean, Deputy Director of the Department of Energy
Mr. Ty Sokhun, Deputy Director of the Forest Management Office, the Department of Forestry
Mr. Chea Sam Ang, Technician, the Department of Forestry
HE Chieng Om, Governor of Kampong Thom Province
HE Neu Si Thong, Governor of Kampong Speu Province
HE Pou Horn Pan, Deputy Governor of Kratie Province
Provincial Agriculture Departments of Kratie, Kampong Thom and Kampong Speu
Provincial Environment Departments of Kratie, Kampong Thom and Kampong Speu
Provincial Energy Departments of Kratie, Kampong Thom and Kampong Speu
Provincial Forestry Offices of Kratie, Kampong Thorn and Kampong Speu
Mr. Doug Henderson, CEMP
Mr. Andrew McNaughton, IDRC
Mr. Peter Johnston, UNDP/ETAP
Staff at checkpoints around Phnom Penh and forestry officials in the provinces who joined the team in the rural areas.
CARE
National Institute of Statistics
<section>3</section>
Summary
This report presents the results of a six-month inter-ministerial study of woodfuel flows into Phnom Penh. The study was initiated by the Cambodian Environmental Management Program, and the study team was drawn from the Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Department of Forestry) and Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (Department of Energy).
The study highlights the importance of wood energy in government policy formulation and provides an overview of the urban market structure and the main supply areas.
Woodfuels are the most commonly used energy sources for the majority of the population in Cambodia. In Phnom Penh, the country's economic centre, 84% of households rely on firewood and charcoal as their main energy sources for cooking, and these energy forms are also used extensively by industries and services. Fuel switches to liquid petroleum gas (LPG) are observed in wealthier households, but the majority of the city's population is found in low-income households. Population growth is, therefore, likely to be highest in this sector, and it is unlikely that the demand for wood energy will decrease in the foreseeable future because it is cheap and can be bought in small quantities.
The woodfuel flow system is unregulated, informal and complex, and the urban traders provide an important link between suppliers and consumers, both within Phnom Penh and in the surrounding forest-poor provinces.
The provision of wood energy is often associated with forest loss. Although not always the main cause, demands for woodfuels by the commercial markets in Phnom Penh contribute to forest loss and degradation. Firewood and charcoal are renewable and indigenous sources of energy and require integration into forest and energy planning processes.
<section>4</section>
Units and conversions
Traditional units
Conventional units
Conversions
Traditional units
Kampong Speu
firewood - metre, bundle
1 metre = 1m x 1m x 0.5m
1 bundle = 10cm x 10cm x 50cm (4 sticks)
charcoal - sack, kg
1 sack = 55 kg
Kampong Chnang and Pursat
firewood - hand
1 hand = 3 split logs
charcoal - sack, kg
1 sack = 55 kg
Kampong Thom
charcoal - sack, kg
1 sack = 55 kg
Kratie
firewood - bundle
1 bundle = 15cm x 15cm x 50cm (3 sticks)
charcoal - sack, kg
1 sack = 60 kg
Phnom Penh Markets
firewood - stere, metre, bundle
1 stere = 1 metre = 1m x 1m x approximately 0.5m
1 bundle = 15cm x 15cm x 50cm (sawmill)
12cm x 12cm x 32cm
10cm x 10cm x 32cm
8cm x 8cm x 36cm
7cm x 7cm x 36cm
6cm x 6cm x 32cm
charcoal - sack, kg
1 sack - weight depends on place of origin (55 or 60 kg)
Conventional units
firewood - stere, cubic metre
1 stere = 1 m x 1 m x 1 m (stacked wood)
1 cubic metre =1m x 1m x 1m (solid wood)
charcoal -ton, kg
Conversions
US$1 = 2,500 Reils
1 conventional stere = 2 traditional steres or metres
1 stere of firewood produces approximately 2.5 sacks of charcoal (this is a general estimation from charcoal producers in all the study areas)
1 stere of firewood produces approximately 795 bundles
1 stere of firewood = 600 kg (MIME, 1996a)
heating values (adopted from MIME, 1996a)
1 kg firewood = 14.5 MJ
1 kg charcoal = 29 MJ
1 kg LPG = 45.26 MJ
1 kWh electricity = 3.6 MJ
carrying capacities
firewood (stere)
charcoal (ton)
moto-cart
car
pickup
truck
train
boat
Note: values in tables may not add up due to rounding off.
<section>5</section>
1. Introduction
Woodfuels are the most common sources of energy for the majority of the population in the Kingdom of Cambodia. Firewood and charcoal are often referred to as traditional fuels, yet they remain the dominant source of energy for cooking within the domestic sector, and are used extensively by industry and services.
Cambodia is a predominantly rural society, although the urban areas are the regions of most rapid growth. Data from the National Institute of Statistics (1997) show that 97.7% of the population of Cambodia uses wood energy for household cooking.
Phnom Penh is the economic centre of Cambodia. The city is divided into 7 districts with a total population of approximately 796,939, or 150,280 households, and an average density of 14,480 per square kilometer. Within Phnom Penh, 84% of households rely on woodfuels as their main source of energy for cooking (NIS, 1997). In 1995, firewood and charcoal were estimated to account for over half of the energy sources in Phnom Penh (MIME, 1996a).
As the country's economic centre, it is likely that increased incomes in Phnom Penh will lead to an increased demand for more conventional fuels such as LPG and electricity. Switches from wood energy to LPG have been observed within high-income households, although the overall demand for woodfuels is unlikely to decrease in the foreseeable future due to the increased population. Energy transitions are limited by financial and spatial constraints, and the majority of the population of Phnom Penh are low-income households.
The provision of wood energy is often associated with forest loss. Although not the main cause of primary forest loss, the demand for woodfuels in Phnom Penh contributes to forest loss and degradation. The urban centre is supplied with wood energy from forests as distant as Kratie (approximately 220 km). Unregulated forest cutting has adverse environmental impacts and the inhabitants of the supply areas have already experienced some of these.
The demand for wood energy in urban areas is of concern to relevant government departments, but in order to form and implement appropriate policies for the wood energy sector, it is important to have good information.
In view of the lack of reliable information in Cambodia, the Cambodian Environmental Management Program (CEMP), with financial support from USAID, initiated a small study project to gain an overview of the wood energy flow system in Phnom Penh. The data analysis and report writing stages of the project were supported by the International Development Research Centre of Canada (IDRC) and the Environmental Technical Advisory Programme of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP/ETAP).
The study is an inter-ministerial one, involving the participation of the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (Department of Energy) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Department of Forestry).
The objectives of the project are:
· to describe the woodfuel distribution system, including market structures, resource flows, woodfuel types, volume estimates and prices
· to outline the social and economic aspects of energy use, particularly in the residential sector
· to promote the incorporation of wood energy analysis into relevant policy-related initiatives
· to establish and demonstrate a capacity for wood energy research and policy analysis in key government agencies.
Activities conducted to obtain the information include:
· interviews with wood energy traders in Phnom Penh
· discussions with traders at destinations outside Phnom Penh
· observation at checkpoints at the municipal boundary of Phnom Penh
· visits to brick kilns
· research in the main supply areas.
Due to the informality of the urban market, it was difficult to establish a research methodology, so traders were selected for interviews following observation tours of the main depot areas. A detailed questionnaire was prepared for traders, transporters and customers, which was field tested before the data collection began. The project was to provide a broad overview rather than a detailed assessment, so this methodology was quite efficient. Focusing on the main traders soon revealed the forward and backward links to customers and suppliers, enabling the team to quickly recognise the complexities of the distribution system, and to gain an idea of the main supply areas. The supply areas were confirmed by surveys at Department of Forestry checkpoints on the major roads into Phnom Penh, as well as on the River Mekong.
Areas which supply wood energy are Kratie, Kampong Thom, Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Speu and Pursat. Areas selected for study were determined by the proximity of the supply area to the provincial town, and security in the area of study. Therefore, Kratie, Kampong Thom and Kampong Speu were selected.
In the supply areas, a less formal approach was taken, with information gained through discussions with members of the communities. Commune and village chiefs were interviewed initially to gain background information about the area, and then individual charcoal producers and traders, firewood collectors and transporters were interviewed to gain more specific information regarding the amounts traded, sources of wood, destination of product, prices, etc.
The vast majority of woodfuels coming into Phnom Penh are consumed in the town, but onward destinations include Takhmao, Prey Veng and Svay Rieng, indicating Phnom Penh's role as a trading centre.
The information given in this report relates to a short study conducted during the dry season. The volumes traded vary depending on the season, many traders are temporary, and there appears to be no consistent pattern of buying and selling in Phnom Penh. Accurate figures concerning the quantity and value of the trade and forest loss are difficult to determine. Figures given for the supply areas relate to the study areas only and therefore they are likely to be low, as woodfuels are supplied additionally from other areas in the five provinces. However, these figures are used in conjunction with those obtained at the checkpoints. These too are slightly unreliable as the study was undertaken during 12 hour periods in the daytime whereas some transporters reported travelling at night. The associated forest loss is also difficult to assess because fuel supply is not always the main reason for cutting trees, there is no forest inventory, and insecurity prevents detailed study in
the forested areas.
The next chapter of this report identifies consumption trends and is based on a study of secondary information from the National Institute of Statistics (1995 and 1997), and the Department of Energy (MIME 1996b and 1996c). Chapter 3 provides an overview of the rural study areas with an assessment of the amounts of wood energy supplied from each area and highlights the differences between the communities in the different areas. In Chapter 4, the urban market structures are described showing the complexities of the flow system and giving estimates of volumes of firewood and charcoal entering Phnom Penh. The socio-economic issues in Chapter 5 illustrate the constraints on fuel switching and therefore, the continuing demand for woodfuels, particularly in the short term. Chapter 6 outlines the environmental impacts of the current unsustainable supply of wood energy and a consideration of those relating to alternate energy forms. An examination of current policies concerning wood
energy is outlined in Chapter 7 and conclusions and recommendations are given in Chapter 8. All wood energy figures are stated in conventional units.
<section>6</section>
2. Consumption of wood energy
2.1 Population statistics
2.2 Wood energy consumption in households
2.3 Wood energy consumption in industry and services
2.4 Destinations outside Phnom Penh
2.5 Consumption of other forms of energy
2.6 Estimates of future domestic consumption
The Kingdom of Cambodia is a poor country with low living standards for the majority of the population. Throughout the country woodfuels are the most widely used sources of energy and contribute 85% of the total energy consumption (including the transport sector) (MIME 1996a). In Phnom Penh 84% of households use firewood and charcoal as their main fuel for cooking (NIS 1997), although some households use agricultural residues and others use LPG. Woodfuels are also used extensively by the industry, handicrafts and services sectors. Firewood and charcoal consumption in Phnom Penh in 1995 was estimated to account for 59% of total energy consumption (excluding transport) (MIME 1996a).
2.1 Population statistics
The population of the Kingdom of Cambodia is predominantly a rural one. The Socio Economic Survey of Cambodia (SESC) estimated a national population for 1996 of 10.3 million (NIS, 1997), of which only 8% live in Phnom Penh. The SESC shows an annual national increase of 2.4% between 1994 to 1996. However, urban areas grew much more quickly: Phnom Penh, for example, showed an annual increase of 5.5%.
Due to the loss of records during the 1970s, and the subsequent lack of any population census, statistics from different sources give varying estimates of population for Phnom Penh as follows:
- Population register from police statistics, 1993
690,928 people
117,794 families
- Socio-Economic Survey, 1993/4
717,300 people
121,100 families
- Estimates from the Department of Forestry, 1994
784,984 people
139,215 families
- Estimates from the Department of Energy, 1996
132,000 families
- Socio-Economic Survey, 1996
796,936 people
150,280 families
This study will adopt the figures from the Socio-Economic Survey 1993/4 and 1996, as these two studies employed similar methodological techniques.
2.2 Wood energy consumption in households
2.2.1 Firewood
2.2.2 Charcoal
The National Institute of Statistics (1997) gives the following figures for domestic fuel use in Phnom Penh for 1996:
Table 1: Domestic Energy Consumption in Phnom Penh by Main Fuel Used for Cooking
Fuel Type
No. of Households
No. of People
Percentage of Households
Firewood
Charcoal
LPG
Kerosene
Electricity
Other
Total
Source; NIS/ADB, 1997
2.2.1 Firewood
During the study, people using firewood as their main energy source for cooking gave the following information:
Table 2: Daily Firewood Consumption
Place of Interview
Household Size
Bundles/Day
Boueng Salang
Toekloak
O'Russei
Toul Tom Pong
Chhbar Ampeou
Chhbar Ampeou
Chhbar Ampeou
Chhbar Ampeou
TOTAL
This suggests that the average amount of firewood consumed per person is:
37.3 bundles/50 people = 0.75 bundles = 0.00093 steres per day.
According to the National Institute of Statistics (1997), the percentage of households using firewood as their main cooking fuel was 46.5%. This means that 69,880 households in Phnom Penh, or 370,575 people use firewood. Using the consumption figure indicated above, annual demand from households using mainly firewood for cooking is therefore 125,791 steres. The estimated demand by the Department of Energy (MIME, 1996b) for 1997 was 87,356 steres.
2.2.2 Charcoal
During the study, people using charcoal as their main cooking fuel gave the following information:
Table 3: Daily Charcoal Consumption
Place of Interview
Household Size
Amount Used (kg)
Wat Phnom
Russei Keo
Psa Silop
O'Russei
Bodeng
Wat Mohamontrey
Wat Ko
Olympic
Bodeng
Chhbar Ampeou
Toul Tom Pong
TOTAL
This total suggests that the average consumption of charcoal per person is:
19.3 kg/54 people = 0.36 kg per day.
In 1996, 56,355 households consisting of 298,851 people or 37% of the population (NIS, 1997), used charcoal as their main cooking fuel. Using the average consumption figure indicated above, the annual consumption is 38,986 tonnes. The estimated annual consumption for 1997 was 21,862 tonnes (MIME, 1996b).
2.3 Wood energy consumption in industry and services
2.3.1 Brick kilns
2.3.2 Bakeries
The Department of Energy estimated that in Phnom Penh the service sector would consume 7%, and the industrial sector 12% of the wood energy supplied to the city in 1997 as follows:
Services
Industry
Firewood (steres)
Charcoal (tonnes)
Source; MIME, 1996
A full survey of this sector was outside the scope of the Wood Energy Study. However, as it became clear that brick kilns are huge consumers of wood, an overview is given below.
2.3.1 Brick kilns
There are many brick and tile kilns operating in Phnom Penh to supply the construction industry. These kilns are usually of the 'boat shaped' variety because they can produce bricks faster than other types of kiln. The brick kilns consume mixed types of firewood, from natural forests, flooded forests, rubber plantations and sawmills, especially Kasotim (at Nhek Leoung) and Kolexim (at Prey Preou). As Phnom Penh has no forest areas all the firewood has to be brought from outside the area.
There are 71 brick kilns in Phnom Penh, 63 in Russei Keo, 4 in Meanchay and 4 in Dangkor. In these 71 kilns, 50% use wood from the natural forests and the others use firewood from sawmills, rubber plantations and flooded forest. Each kiln measuring 2.7m x 16m x 2.7m, consumes 30 steres of wood from natural forests, or 50-60 steres of wood from flooded forests, rubber plantations and sawmills. Each kiln can produce bricks or tiles twice per month, but this depends on the demands of the market, so most kilns produce only once a month. The annual consumption of firewood is therefore:
35 kilns x 30 steres x 12 cycles = 12,600 steres
36 kilns x 55 steres x 12 cycle = 23,760 steres
giving a total of 36,360 steres per year.
Table 4 shows the annual total quantity of firewood consumed in kilns in Phnom Penh to be 51,143 steres.
Table 4: Quantity of Firewood Consumed by Kilns in Phnom Penh
Kiln Type
Number of Kilns
Average Firewood Use Per Kiln (stere)
Cycles per Year
Firewood Use Per Year (stere)
Firewood
Electric
Natural Forest
Other
Natural Forest
Other
Total
Brick
Cake
Bread
Total
2.3.2 Bakeries
There are more bakeries in Phnom Penh than in other provinces in the Kingdom of Cambodia. Bakeries are of 2 types:
· Cake Bakeries
There are 39 of this type which use small ovens, and the average consumption of firewood for each is 0.5 steres per day. Firewood used is purchased from stores in Phnom Penh. The annual consumption of firewood is:
39 bakeries x 0.5 steres x 365 days = 7,118 steres.
· Bread Bakeries
There are 42 bakeries in Phnom Penh of which 12 are powered by electricity and 30 by firewood. Bakeries have the capacity to produce many times each day, but for this study a production of 1 cycle per day was used. The annual consumption of firewood is:
30 bakeries x 0.7 steres x 365 days = 7,665 steres.
2.4 Destinations outside Phnom Penh
2.4.1 Firewood
2.4.2 Charcoal
The study showed Phnom Penh to be developing as a trading centre for woodfuels consumed in Kandal, Prey Veng and Svay Reing (see Table 5).
2.4.1 Firewood
According to the study, there are 13 firewood stores in Takhmao town, which sell on average:
26 bundles x 13 stores x 365 days = 123,370 bundles or 155 steres per year.
Information from other sections of the study shows that:
3,285 steres are transported annually from Kampong Speu
4,015 steres are transported annually from Pochentong
155 steres are transported annually from other depots in Phnom Penh.
2.4.2 Charcoal
Takhmao
According to the study at Takhmao, one depot among 13 purchases from Phnom Penh, and the other 12 depots from Chhbar Ampeou. The average quantity of charcoal purchased from Phnom Penh per year is:
1 sack x 365 days = 365 sacks = 20 tonnes
The quantity of charcoal purchased from Chhbar Ampeou per year is:
3.67 sacks x 12 depots x 365 days = 16,075 sacks = 965 tonnes
The total quantity sold in Takhmao each year is:
16,440 sacks = 985 tonnes.
Nhek Leoung
The study showed that at Nhek Leoung, there are 12 charcoal depots on the eastern bank of the river, of which one purchases charcoal from Chhbar Ampeou. The average annual purchase of this depot is:
5.33 sacks x 365 days = 1,945 sacks = 117 tonnes
There are an additional 6 charcoal depots in the western part of Nhek Leoung which purchase charcoal from Chhbar Ampeou, and their annual purchases total:
0.61 x 6 depots x 365 days ^= 1,336 sacks = 80 tonnes.
Therefore, the total quantity of charcoal transported annually to Nhek Leoung is:
1,945 sacks + 1,336 sacks = 3,281 sacks = 197 tonnes.
Table 5: Wood Energy Traded Through Phnom Penh
Location
Quantity of Firewood
Quantity of Charcoal
stere/day
stere/month
stere/year
ton/day
ton/month
ton/year
Takhmao
Nhek Leoung
TOTAL
2.5 Consumption of other forms of energy
2.5.1 Liquid petroleum gas (LPG)
2.5.2 Consumption of agricultural residues
2.5.1 Liquid petroleum gas (LPG)
As the country improves its economy, the population and their living standards are likely to increase, especially in Phnom Penh. Raised incomes will allow some households to switch to LPG for cooking. LPG is also increasingly used by services such as restaurants. All LPG is imported into Cambodia, by three companies:
· Cambodia Gas Company who import from Thailand
· Uni Gas Company who import from Thailand
· Mittapheap Gas Company who import from Vietnam
It was found that these companies sell to depots in Phnom Penh for resale, so it was not possible to determine the amount sold for domestic use only. Overall, their monthly sales are:
· Cambodia Gas Company -100 tonnes
· Uni Gas Company -130 tonnes
· Mittapheap Gas Company -120 tonnes
This gives a total of 350 tonnes per month, or 4,200 tonnes per year. As the study reached finalisation, another company, Totalgaz, began trading in Phnom Penh.
· Household LPG Consumption
According to the study, people using LPG gave the following information:
Table 6: Monthly LPG Consumption
Name of Family
Household Size
Amount Used per Month (kg)
Psa Thmei trader
O'Russei trader
Ing Thoeng
Chea Sophea
Soum Bunthein
So Somali
Hang Bannak
Kim Seng
Ouk Heil
TOTAL
The average amount of LPG consumed by each person is:
174 kg/30 days x 1/67 people = 0.0865 kg per day
In 1996, 14,427 households (9.6%), or 76,506 people used LPG as their main cooking fuel (NIS 1997). Using the consumption figures above, this implies an annual consumption of 2,417 tonnes. This figure is quite close to the Department of Energy's 1997 estimate of 2,276 tonnes (MIME, 1996b).
· Industrial and Service Sector LPG Demand
The Department of Energy gives the following figures for LPG consumption in 1997:
Terajoules
Tonnes
Services
Industry
2.5.2 Consumption of agricultural residues
In Cambodia, the majority of the population are farmers, and their products provide important supplies for the people of Phnom Penh. Phnom Penh generates a lot of waste, although some can be used as fuel, such as coconut husk, crushed sugar cane (bagasse), rice husks etc. Some households in Bakheng use these fuels. In other areas, sellers of sugar cane, rice and sweetcorn keep the waste for their own domestic use. Some people use sawdust from sawmills and wood processing companies for domestic use.
2.6 Estimates of future domestic consumption
A comparison of energy demand forecasts by MIME and those based on more recent NIS figures illustrate the difficulties involved in planning for future energy demand, particularly in the absence of past consumption and population growth trends. The figures shown in Table 7 relate to households using a particular energy source as their main form of energy for cooking. In reality however, most households use more than one form of energy, so the figures are likely to be underestimated.
The table shows that in 1996, the estimated demand by households was approximately 87,816 steres of firewood and 21,310 tonnes of charcoal per year (MIME). In comparison, the wood energy flow study shows approximately 125,792 steres of firewood and 39,006 tonnes of charcoal. A comparison of forecasts for 1998, also shows different figures. Those of MIME are based on a per capita daily consumption of 0.37 kg for firewood and 0.196 kg for charcoal. Forecasts by the WFFS team, based on the household breakdown from NIS (1997) and from the study findings, use a per capita daily consumption of 0.56 kg for firewood and 0.36 kg charcoal.
Based on NIS (1995) data, MIME forecasted a population growth rate of 4.4% per year, with a constant household size of 5.923. In fact, the population grew at 11.1% over the 2 year period to 1996, and household size reduced from 5.9 to 5.3 (NIS, 1997).
Table 7 shows that the demand for firewood is decreasing but demands for charcoal, LPG and kerosene are increasing. The wood energy study found an energy transition from woodfuels to LPG by wealthier households, but the above figures also suggest a transition from firewood to charcoal, which indicates that the demand for wood energy will continue into the future.
Table 7: Estimated Annual Domestic Energy Consumption
Year
Source
Firewood
Charcoal
Gas
Kerosene
Other
(stere)
(ton)
(ton)
(ton)
MIME/ADB
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
NIS/WFFS
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
MIME/ADB
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
NIS/WFFS
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
MIME/ADB
Change in Energy Use (%)
NIS/WFFS
Change in Energy Use (%)
MIME/ADB
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
NIS/WFFS
Number of People
Annual Consumption
Percentage of Households
Notes:
· MIME/ADB: Energy Demand Forecasts (MIME, 1996b)
· NIS: Population figures and percentage of households using energy types
· WFFS: Calculations of annual consumption based on NIS figures and the findings of this study related to per capita consumption.
The figures shown in the table give different information from different sources, which highlights the need for a good information base which can be continually and consistently updated for energy planning.
<section>7</section>
3. Resources and supply areas
3.1 Kratie province
3.2 Kampong Thom province
3.3 Kampong Chhnang province
3.4 Kampong Speu province
3.5 Tree species used for firewood and charcoal.
3.6 Total firewood and charcoal supplied from the study areas
3.7 Issues affecting communities in the supply areas
Cambodia is located in the tropical region with a humid and warm climate which facilitates tree growth. According to the records of 1970, forests covered 73% of the surface of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Due to over two decades of war, over exploitation and uncontrolled logging, the forests have decreased considerably. Estimates of forest cover now range from 63% (Japan Forest Technical Association (JAFTA) 1995) to 30% (Global Witness 1995). JAFTA's estimate is used by the Department of Forestry, and is shown below:
Table 8: Land Classification of Cambodia
Classification
Area (hectares)
Percentage of Land Cover
Evergreen Forest
Mixed Forest
Deciduous Forest
Wood and Scrubland
Pine Forest
Mangrove Forest
Rear Mangrove Forest
Flooded Forest
Flooded Area
Grass/Scattered Trees
Rice Fields
Rubber Plantation
Orchards/Other Trees
Slash and Bum
Town
Water
Other Surfaces
TOTAL
Source; JAFTA, 1995
The forest area (in hectares) of the provinces researched during this study is as follows:
Province
Total Land Area
Forest Area
Share of Forest Area
Kampong Speu
Kampong Chhnang
Kampong Thom
Kratie
Pursat
Source; JAFTA, 1995
Of the five provinces which supply wood energy to Phnom Penh, Kratie, Kampong Thom and Kampong Speu were selected for more detailed study, and a brief observation visit was undertaken in Kampong Chhnang. Areas were selected for detailed study according to the level of security in the province, and its proximity to the provincial centre.
The results given in this section are from the study areas only and not for the whole of the supply area.
3.1 Kratie province
3.1.1 Forest resources
3.1.2 Supply area
3.1.3 Firewood transportation
3.1.4 Charcoal
Kratie Province is located in the Northeast of the Kingdom of Cambodia along the Mekong River, about 220 km from Phnom Penh.
3.1.1 Forest resources
Kratie has a total land area of 1,200,137 hectares with forest cover as follows:
Forest Type
Area (Hectares)
Evergreen
Mixed
Deciduous
Trees and Flora
Flooded
Source; JAFTA, 1995
3.1.2 Supply area
The research team spent 4 days conducting studies in Kratie Province. The source of firewood for Phnom Penh is off-cuts from sawmills in the area, particularly those located along the Mekong River. Charcoal is supplied to Phnom Penh from the districts of Prek Prasap, Sambo, Kratie and Chhlong. The focus of this study was Prek Prasap, directly across the Mekong River from Kratie town. Prek Prasap was selected for study as it is the main charcoal producing area in Kratie Province.
· Overview of the Study Area
Prek Prasap consists of eight communes, of which three produce charcoal. These are Prek Prasap, Sob and Chroy Banteay. These three areas have a population of 3,522 families, of which 218 produce charcoal. Charcoal producers therefore account for a small proportion of the villagers. The majority of the families are farmers who are also involved in collecting wood for the producers, especially in the dry season. Migration is rare in the region, and other employment opportunities include growing rice, fruit and vegetables, tobacco, and working for the logging companies.
· Harvesting
Prek Prasap is an area with abundant natural forests. Trees used for charcoal production are cut from the natural forest, including from some concession areas about 7-15 km from the villages. Some families collect the branches which are left after the companies finish exploiting the concession areas. Ox-carts, and sometimes trucks, are used to transport wood to the charcoal kilns.
· Land Tenure