<title>Gender aspects of woodfuel flows in Sri Lanka (GCP/RAS/154/NET). Gender aspects of fuelwood flows in Sri Lanka</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Wood energy sources and users are typically scattered over a wide geographical area. This situation is very different from coal or oil products, which come from one or a few sources only, such as a harbour, refinery, etc. Like other fuels, woodfuel is a commodity serving the users, but it is much more than that. Numerous different sources, actors, routes and markets are involved in the woodfuel flow system, and under a variety of local conditions they provide for the production, harvesting, processing, trading, transporting and retailing of the fuel. Thus woodfuel is a far more complex commodity than any conventional fuel. Indeed, the woodfuel business is somewhat unique in that it has many intricate linkages with the rural society and economy.
Studying the flow of woodfuels helps us to understand the socio-economic linkages and appreciate the real problems of this most important energy source. In Sri Lanka as in many other countries in Asia, woodfuel provides more than half of the country's energy. As such it is worth the attention of policy makers in various sectors, which include forestry, energy, agriculture and several other sectors.
Although the findings of Prof. Anoja Wickramasinghe refer to Kandy District in central Sri Lanka, her main conclusions are not unique to that area, and indeed point to many problems that are shared by other countries in the region. These include impediments to woodfuel harvesting and trade, the lack of encouragement to farmers to produce woodfuel for the market, the restricted but important role of women in the harvesting and processing of woodfuels, the male dominance in the commercial flow, and the adverse impacts on state revenues. The best way to improve the current situation would be to promote woodfuel as an easily tradable commodity. Similar conclusions have been reached in other woodfuel flow studies.
Prof. Wickramasinghe's report is one in a series of RWEDP woodfuel reports on woodfuel flows. Others include 'Woodfuel Flows: An overview of four studies' (RM No. 30); 'Woodfuel in the Philippines - Production and Marketing, Baguio City' (RM No. 41); and 'Woodfuel Flow Study of Phnom Penh, Cambodia' (FD No. 50). There are also various RWEDP workshop reports on the subject. However, the Sri Lanka study is the first one to focus on the gender aspects of woodfuel flows. The results suggest that such a focus can provide a more comprehensive understanding of the issues at stake, including the health risks to which women are subjected.
It is a pleasure to thank Prof. Anoja Wickramasinghe and her colleagues, Mr. Tara Bhattarai and Mr. Conrado Heruela of RWEDP, and the numerous people who cooperated in the local interviews. Their efforts have resulted in a document that is highly relevant to policy makers and scholars alike.
Dr. Willem S. Hulscher,
Chief Technical Advisor,
FAO/RWEDP
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The field research presented in this report was made possible by the co-operation of many people, including those involved in the woodfuel trade, and the women who are engaged in gathering and headloading fuelwood for self-consumption. The people with whom this research was conducted spent a large amount of time answering our questions, broadening our understanding of on-the-ground situations and discussing their problems.
The members of the households, carters, traders, saw mill owners, woodfuel depot owners, representatives of industries, contractors, transporters and the commercial woodfuel suppliers that we visited and interviewed during the course of this research, entertained us graciously. This study would not have been possible were it not for their interest and participation. In addition to these numerous role players involved in the woodfuel flow process, I would like to express my gratitude to the field researchers for their consistent, dedicated and excellent work. My special thanks are due to Mr. P.B.S. Dissanayake, Ms. Rheka Niyanthi, Mr. Thilak Bandara, Mr. A.G.S.S. Nandana and Mr. Keerthi Rajapakse for their excellent collaboration and sustained interest.
I wish to thank Mr. S.M.B. Amunugama of the Department of Geology, the University of Peradeniya for the cartography work. I also greatly appreciate the cooperation of my husband, Mr. Ranjith Wickramasinghe, who made important contributions throughout the research - from the organization of the field investigations to the preparation of the report.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the financial and technical support provided by the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme of the FAO. I am extremely grateful for the collaboration of Dr. W. Hulscher, the Chief Technical Adviser, and Mr. Tara N. Bhattarai, the Wood Energy Resources Specialist - their numerous comments and suggestions on the field methodologies and on the draft of this report were invaluable.
Although many people were involved in conducting the field research and in gathering information from various sources, I am solely responsible for the analysis presented herein and for any errors, omissions or inconsistencies in the report.
Dr. (Mrs.) Anoja Wickramasinghe
Professor of Geography
Dept. of Geography
University of Peradeniya
Peradeniya
SRI LANKA
FUELWOOD - CUT AND READY FOR SALE (A. W.)
SPLITTING FUELWOOD TO THE DESIRED SIZE BRINGS IN AN INCOME (A. W.)
<section>3</section>
Executive summary
INTRODUCTION
Woodfuel is the primary source of energy in rural Sri Lanka but in the industrial sector consumption of woodfuel is limited to 18.2% of the total energy consumption. The ways in which woodfuel is distributed from production sources to the end users are little understood. Indeed the national wood energy picture currently available reveals little about woodfuel flows, particularly about gender related patterns of engagement in woodfuel related activities and other gender issues, or about the flow mechanisms that have a direct bearing on the commercial trade in woodfuel. Our limited understanding impedes our ability to plan and formulate strategies of local significance, to promote cash returns from woodfuel to both men and women equitably and efficiently, and to contribute to improving the living standards of those who are engaged in the woodfuel distribution process without remuneration or with only marginal benefits. Investigations covering the local situation are essential
to identify local priorities of national and regional significance.
This manuscript presents the findings of a study conducted in Kandy district, Sri Lanka. Kandy district, according to previous studies, is a woodfuel deficit area. The national scenario constructed during the preparation of the Forestry Sector Master Plan (FSMP) in 1995 shows that the national demand for biofuel is about 9.1 million tonnes whereas the supply is about 9.8 million tonnes. In fact, Kandy district, like many others, reflects the crucial imbalances prevailing locally. Kandy is noted with its 57,990 hectares of land under homegardens, 58,490 hectares under tea, 6,020 under coconut, 3,860 under rubber, all of which contribute significantly to woodfuel production.
From the perspective of studying the gender aspects of woodfuel flows a wide range of situations has been taken into consideration. The first is the widespread phenomenon pertaining to free gathering for self-consumption. The second is the multiple production systems that cater for the local commercial woodfuel demand, particularly in the rural areas. The third is the flow of commercial woodfuel mainly from the producing areas outside the district to Kandy urban area.
The research was conducted by selecting Kundasale area, one of the administrative divisions of Kandy district, and the Kandy urban area where urban woodfuel depots are located and the commercial woodfuel business is concentrated. The study conducted in Kundasale area has enabled an examination of the activities pertaining to free gathering and the commercial flow of woodfuel mainly from local resources for local industries from the perspective of gender. The urban study has enabled an examination of the gender relations and the flow mechanism linking external suppliers and urban woodfuel depots, and urban depots and end users. The major findings of the study are presented in the following sections.
· GENDER ASPECTS OF WOODFUEL GATHERING FOR SELF-CONSUMPTION
The total number of households covered in this study is 105. Fifteen households each were selected from 7 villages. All 105 households depend on fuelwood for domestic cooking, all depend on free gathering and a few partly use commercial fuelwood and substitutes. The flow mechanism includes a number of activities such as harvesting, trimming and cross- cutting, bundling and carrying, splitting, and gathering deadwood. All households reported using multiple harvesting sources, but not all households use all sources. While all households use homegardens, only 89 use fences/hedges, only 14 use other household lands and only 14 use non-household lands. This gave a total of 222 household records of use of the various sources. The involvement of men and women (not differentiating between joint or separate involvement) in the activities comprising the flow mechanism was investigated taking into account all four production sources. About 95% of the 222 records showed women to be
involved in harvesting, while for men the figure was about 44%. For trimming and cross-cutting the figures are 31% for men and 100% for women. For bundling and carrying the figures are 26% for men and 100% for women. For splitting wood the figures are 43% for men and 97% for women. For gathering and carrying dead wood the figures are 8% and 100% for men and women, respectively.
This general overview reflects that among all activities, men's involvement is fairly high only in harvesting and splitting. In contrast, women's involvement is consistently high in all activities. The domination of women in the procuring of woodfuel for self-consumption points to the fact that the non-commercial flow is heavily associated with women's reproductive responsibilities and the conventional ideology which regards women as responsible for providing fuel for the home.
· THE COMMERCIAL FLOW AND TRADE IN RURAL AREAS
The commercial woodfuel in rural areas is for rural industries such as bakeries, the pottery industry, lime and brick kilning. The commercial flow of woodfuel is mainly from saw mills and household production systems, primarily homegardens. Trading and transporting are the two activities in the mechanism that take place between sawmills and industries. These are completely dominated by men. Delivery is by hand carters, tractors and lorries, which are considered beyond the domain of women's work. Although the number of households providing woodfuel for commercial channels was limited to 15 (nearly 14%), another 28 (26%) mentioned that they also contribute when trees are felled for timber and tree pruning is done at a stretch in homegardens. The commercial flow is dominated by men. Right from the level of trimming, cross-cutting and stacking, in the activities done at the sites where wood is harvested, men select the wood of market potential, women provide free labour as
'helpers'. Trade and transportation are attended to by men. None of these activities are free from the conventional ideology about the masculine and feminine nature of work. Men, with their greater mobility, are engaged in the work dealing with trade, transportation and cash transfer.
· FLOW MECHANISM IN RURAL AREAS
The rural trading system is rather complex. The system consists of producers, contractors, tree buyers, traders and transporters who undertake trading as well. The involvement of intermediaries depends heavily on the location of supply sources, woodfuel types and personal contacts with the buyers. An important role is played by hand carters who provide the cheapest mode of transport for the consumers. The earnings of various intermediaries vary widely. A generalized picture is that of the total amount paid by industries in rural areas, nearly 18-27% goes to hand carters while the producers' share is in the range of 73-82%. As earnings from woodfuel are low, it is not considered a profitable income venture. When whole trees are sold directly to the traders no extra payments are made to the producers for the parts traded as woodfuel. Trees are valued in terms of timber so there are no additional payments for the woodfuel. This implies that in the system of tree trade, fuelwood
is a by- product only, so no value is added for the standing fuelwood segments. The general practice of free gathering of branchwood, twigs etc. as fuelwood affirms that fuelwood is often seen as a by-product of trees.
The rural woodfuel trading system is informal and influenced by the demand for specific woodfuel types like round wood, split wood, logs, wood sticks etc. and their availability. None of the flow mechanisms add to the price given to the producer. It has been noted that it is slightly cheaper for industrial users to purchase woodfuel stocks from the suppliers and pay for the transportation rather than wait for doorstep delivery. The intermediaries engaged in trading and transportation do not make an exceptionally high profit. As hand-carts are owned by carters, they make a living out of it. As most of the tasks like harvesting, trimming and cross-cutting are attended to by household members the involvement of hired labour is minimal. Paid labour is often engaged when activities like high level branch pruning, and tree felling take place. Fuelwood from sawmills comes as a by-product, so no extra labour is employed. This implies that income from fuelwood sales earned by mills
is quite similar to the returns for the homegarden fuelwood, and it is an additional income. It is difficult to simplify the local flow mechanisms and rural trading system because these are situation specific.
· URBAN WOODFUEL FLOW
Urban woodfuel flow mechanisms fully cover the trading system. This system is completely different from the trading system in the rural sector because it is interregional, it involves large scale trading and a delivery system from urban fuelwood depots to end users is also well marked. It was found that of all the woodfuel which comes to Kandy urban area nearly 76-88% goes to the consumers through fuelwood depots. All 11 fuelwood depot owners interviewed in this study are major intermediaries between supply sources and consumers. The woodfuel flow process can be characterized as consisting of two main divisions, the first involving the flow between the producers and urban wood depots where processing/splitting takes place, and the second involving the flow between the urban wood depots and the end users, and where another set of intermediaries is engaged.
Fuelwood is transported from the dry zone areas and rubber growing areas. In both cases forest wood and rubber wood is transported in large volumes and is mainly conveyed by lorries. Split wood from wood depots is delivered by bullock carts. Coconut husk is transported from rural areas to urban areas on a small scale by bullock carts.
The price paid for doorstep delivery per 1 kg of split wood is about Rs 2.40. The price at a production site varies tremendously according to size of logs, type and straightness etc. At the production sites the price received by the producer is about 0.31-0.43 cents. This implies that only about 13-18% of the price paid by the consumer goes to the producer, and the remaining 87% gets fragmented in the process. For good quality cross-cut wood nearly 0.90 cents is paid per kilogram at wood depots. Between contractors and urban fuelwood depots nearly 27% of the end price remains. At the wood depots where splitting takes place 56% of the price remains. Nearly 17% remains in the last segment related to retail deliverers, i.e. the carters. Among all intermediaries urban wood depots receive the highest returns for their involvement and 30-37% of the end price goes directly to the depots.
The outstanding feature here is the male-dominated mechanism. No women are involved in the trade, in processing and in the delivery system. Fuelwood trade is not conventionally accepted as women's work. The flows of fuelwood for self-consumption and commercial use reflect two contrasting situations. Although the domestic sector is the largest consumer, the large-scale flow patterns with profit making intermediaries are in the commercial woodfuel trade in the urban setting.
· POLICY ISSUES
The commercial woodfuel flow, or the woodfuel trade, has to pass through a number of impediments. The most crucial ones are associated with state regulations on harvesting trees and transporting the fuelwood of some species like jak and forest wood. The adverse affect of these regulations is that transportation is controlled by permit holders, so neither the producers nor the end users can play a key role in making decisions. As harvesting permits are not valid for transportation, another cumbersome process has to be followed to get transport permits. Rather than going through such difficulties fuelwood is sold to illegal transporters who pay a relatively low price. In such situations the transportation cost is relatively high because the transporters secretly charge for the risk factor too. As a result of these conditions women are rarely engaged in the woodfuel trade, and they rarely consider the fuelwood trade a potential means of improving their income and earning
opportunities. To help improve women's livelihood from the woodfuel business well-targeted policies need to be introduced to promote woodfuel as an easily tradeable commodity. These would also motivate women to adopt woodfuel conservation measures and woodfuel saving devices.
On the one hand state policies, mainly woodfuel-related legislation, do not encourage farmers to produce fuelwood for the market. But on the other hand, such policies do not generate more revenues for the government. The income earning potential of fuelwood is not considered seriously by producers, mainly because it cannot be traded openly. For many, fuelwood is only a by-product and not a prime income source. The problems of inefficient, informal and irregular transportation are connected partly with the state regulations.
In the process of commercial woodfuel flow, women's roles are marginal, so the benefits of the trade are directly reaped by men. At local, national and regional levels, the goals of empowering women and improving their socio-economic status must be integrated into the policies and programmes related to wood energy development. 'Woodfuel trade' needs to be considered as a means to provide women with income earning opportunities. To achieve the broader goals of gender equity, a Regional Advocacy Network, 'RAN' is proposed under the umbrella of the RWEDP. The 'RAN' will take the initiative to help organise national networks. Further research is recommended to plan for the creation of the necessary institutional arrangements.
<section>4</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Present situation
1.2 Consumption patterns
1.3 Spatial patterns in the fuelwood flow
1.4 Purpose and scope of the study
1.5 Why study gender aspects?
1.1 Present situation
The importance of woodfuel as a primary source of energy is often associated with its widespread use in the domestic sector as the sole source of cooking energy, as well as in home-based and village-based industries. The renewability of woodfuel makes it economically attractive and its production has been widely promoted in order to save the expenditure on the import of alternative commercial energy types like petroleum, electricity etc. and to support local sustainability. International agencies like the RWEDP of the FAO have influenced Sri Lanka to address, particularly since the 1980's, the issues pertaining to woodfuel production, transportation, marketing and the efficient management of consumption at the national level.
A significant attempt has been made to integrate the national concerns over fuelwood production into national forestry policies and improving non-forest production systems has been identified as a means to relieve the pressure on forests and to meet the people's woodfuel needs (Nanayakkara, 1990; and FSMP, 1995).
Biomass energy has remained a popular source of energy in Sri Lanka. The practice of using 'fuelwood', the non-converted raw wood, rather than converted woodfuel types like charcoal, has remained unchanged for generations. The most influential factor here is not the reluctance of the people to adopt converted types of woodfuel, but the practice of gathering fuelwood freely from whichever sources are available within an accessible distance. The advantage of using fuelwood, even in the situations where procuring and portaging are cumbersome, is that users do not have to bear the cost of raw materials, conversion, and transport.
The consumption of a whole cluster of biomass including wood sticks, split wood, husks, crop residues etc. seems to be much cheaper than using one solid type of woodfuel, so, 'fuelwood' remains a common type of energy. The household sector consumes the bulk of the fuelwood in Sri Lanka because of its comparative advantages. It either incurs no financial costs or is cheaper to use. The end users, primarily the majority in the household sector, do not depend on external resources or delivery systems. The locally available sources and resources enable local people to satisfy their needs locally by allocating family labour for gathering and portaging. Under these circumstances, women's greater involvement in gathering fuelwood as part of their household responsibilities has tended to continue in rural areas.
However, there is a wide spatial disparity in the distribution of woodfuel sources like forests, tree crop plantations, homegardens, common lands etc. Further disparities exist in regard to fuelwood types, which include species as well as the type of biomass used. While more than three fourths of the country's forest cover is located in the dry zone (See Figure 1), the trends in landuse point to the fact that more and more forests and other land is being converted to non-forest uses including settlements (see Figure 2).
Figure 1: Spatial distribution of forest cover in Sri Lanka in 1992
Figure 2 : Land use in Sri Lanka in 1956, 1984 and 1995 (in thousands of hectares)
TABLE 1: LAND USE PROJECTIONS ('000 HA.)
Land use category
Paddy and other annuals
Sugarcane
Sparsely use cropland
Tea plantations
Rubber plantations
Coconut plantations
Homegardens
Other perennials
Wetland and barren land
Urban land
Natural forests and mangroves
Forest plantations
Other open land
Total
Source: FSMP, 1995.
According to FSMP (1995), if current trends continue a number of changes will take place (Table 1) regarding land use. Between 1995 and 2000 a clear expansion of sparsely used croplands, homegardens, urban land, forest plantations, and other perennials and croplands will tend to occur.
Similarly, a further reduction in the natural forest cover of the country and the conversion of some areas currently under rubber plantations to other uses have been predicted. How impacts of these losses/trends on the fuelwood situation should be addressed by introducing coping strategies into energy consumption behavior is an important issue pertaining to the country's regional development.
Although the forest cover has been continuously decreasing, Sri Lanka is fortunate when compared with other countries in the region as it has diverse sources of fuelwood supply. Of the total of 6.5 million hectares of land, the area under forests has been reduced to isolated islands. The total area under closed-canopy forest cover has been reduced from 80% in 1881 to about 24% in 1992. Based on the trends in the forest cover it has been projected that the natural forest cover of the country (exclusive of riverine, sparse forest and mangroves) will be about 22.8% in 1995, and it will be further reduced to about 21.3% by the year 2000. When compared with the proportion of the population depending on fuelwood, which is about 93.8%, the decreasing forest cover points to two crucial consequences: high pressure on the available sources of supply and fuelwood scarcities.
As a result of the depletion of forest resources, their contribution to the fuelwood supply has been reduced. The supply as a whole is dominated by non-forest production systems (see Table 2). The country must be well-equipped not only to match the demand and supply but also to ensure that the systems of fuelwood flow are maintained to satisfy the consumers and producers and to address the issue of spatial disparities.
TABLE 2: ESTIMATED SOURCES OF BIO-ENERGY SUPPLY
Source
Percentage share
Homegardens
Cropland
Coconut
Rubber
Processing residues
Natural forests
Forest plantations
Others
Source: FSMP, 1995
1.2 Consumption patterns
Despite the well-marked spatial disparities in the distribution of production sources, the share of bio-energy in total energy consumption has been exclusively high when compared with other types like petroleum and electricity. In 1992, for instance, bio-energy accounted for about 66% of the total energy consumption in Sri Lanka (see Figure 3). Bio-energy comprises fuelwood (67%), and crop residues (33%). According to the surveys carried out in 1993 for the preparation of the Forestry Sector Master Plan (FSMP), fuelwood alone contributes nearly 44% of the country's total energy consumption, while crop residues, mainly from coconut, contribute nearly 22%. The important changes in the energy consumption patterns are connected with the increased demand for energy since the 1970s. Its consumption has increased an average of 2.33 percent per year between 1982-1992. The increase in consumption in the household sector has been faster than that in the commercial sectors. The
household sector consumed 81% of the bio-energy in 1992, while the industry sector used nearly 16%. The implications of these figures for fuelwood production, flow and commercial use are crucial, because in spite of the depletion of forest cover and the expansion of settlements etc., national fuelwood requirements are on the increase. The total fuelwood consumption by households was nearly 8 million tonnes in 1993. However, the forestry sector shows that its contribution to the energy sector has not been fully recognized.
While a number of commercial energy types are used in Sri Lanka, woodfuel has remained critically important in the domestic sector (See Table 3). According to the Forestry Sector Master Plan, the total consumption of bio-energy by households in 1993 was estimated at about 8.15 million tonnes, and this is to be increased to 8.82 million tonnes in 2020 (FSMP, 1995). The estimated consumption by the industrial sector is to be 1 million tonnes. The same estimates have shown that between 1993 and 2020 the tendency in the household sector is for consumption to increase from 8.15 million tonnes to 8.82 million tonnes; whereas in the industrial and commercial sectors the tendency is to decrease consumption from 1.02 million tons to 0.82 million tonnes between 1993-2020, due to the adoption of improved technology and efficiency. Although the expected increase primarily in the household sector does not point to a dramatic increase in demand, with the depletion of forests and the
conversion of lands to settlements etc. the share derived from homegardens, coconut, rubber and croplands comes to about 71% of the total supply. Under the present conditions the non-forest production systems are the major supply sources.
This situation suggests a few defining features. The first is that production is heavily dependent on the private sector, both on small-scale units of production and tree crop plantations. The second is that while a spatial imbalance in production is determined by the land use, the consumption patterns are associated with the distribution of population, and industrial and commercial activities. Improving the flow of fuelwood is a way to smoothen out the acute scarcities faced by the end users and excess production, and also the spatial imbalances.
TABLE 3: THE SECTORAL ENERGY SUPPLY AND CONSUMPTION
Household sector %
Industry sector %
Fuelwood and other bio-energy
59 (includes agro-residues)
Hydro-electricity
Oil
Kerosene
LPG
TOTAL
Source: Sri Lanka Energy Balance, 1992.
According to the results of the survey conducted in 1993 for the preparation of the FSMP, other types of energy are slowly being substituted for bio-energy due to the increasing cost of fuelwood. The consumption of fuelwood by the industrial and commercial sub sectors in 1993, shows that the tea industry is the main consumer (see Table 4). The spatial distribution of these industries and commercial sectors tends to decide the patterns of commercial woodfuel flows and the concentration of trade and processing activities.
The analysis of the present scenarios and trends in the woodfuel sector and of the projections made for the preparation of the FSMP in Sri Lanka indicates that 8 administrative districts experience woodfuel shortages. Sixteen districts are noted to produce surpluses, while in one district, the Kandy district, demand and consumption are almost equal. The overall country situation in 1995, according to the FSMP projections, was favourable, because while total demand was projected at 9.2 million tonnes of biomass energy the country's supply was projected at about 9.8 million tonnes. Projections for the year 2020 indicate that the country will continue to produce a surplus. While the demand is expected to be about 9.7 million tonnes per annum, the biomass supply will be about 10.1 million tonnes. In such a scenario biomass accessibility and biomass trade mechanisms will have important implications for woodfuel consumption.
FIGURE 3: ENERGY CONSUMPTION SHARES IN 1992 BY TYPE
1.3 Spatial patterns in the fuelwood flow
The flow of fuelwood from production areas/systems to the consumers is controlled by intermediaries. Fuelwood availability as well as its scarcity are complex issues. Both depend on what types of fuelwood are needed and on the level of consumption. Biomass fuel as a whole comprises dense wood, small branchwood, twigs, wood shavings, crop residues etc. The users' selection tends to vary according to the use, while the traders' choice depends on the transportability, profitability of sales, and the market. The type of fuelwood available for transportation or random gathering cannot be generalized because in most cases the flow patterns are determined by what is available, preferred and demanded by the end users.
TABLE 4: ESTIMATED CONSUMPTION OF FUELWOOD BY THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SUB-SECTOR IN 1993
Sub-sector
Consumption ('000 tonnes)
% share
Tea curing
Hotels & eating houses
Brick & tile manufacturing
Coconut
Bakery
Rubber
Tobacco
Others
Total
Source: FSMP, 1995.
Howes and Endagama (1995), based on an extensive study conducted in Sri Lanka, divided the fuel used by domestic and industrial consumers into 3 categories. These include 'exportable fuelwood', 'other fuelwood' and 'other fuel'. The 'exportable wood' comprises rubber wood, and coconut and forest wood and accounts for nearly 57.8% of the total, which is equivalent to about 9,556.5 thousand tonnes. In fact this category accounts for almost all the industrial biomass fuel and the greatest portion of transacted fuels.
The 'other fuelwood' category which comprises many types of fuelwood coming from homegardens, croplands etc., accounts for nearly 12.8% of the total, which is equivalent to 2,128.3 thousand tonnes. The category referred to as 'other fuel' comprises crop wastes and is made up of coconut by-products from plantations and homegardens and accounts for nearly 28.8% of the total, which is equivalent to 4,759.1 thousand tonnes.
As 'exportable fuelwood' comes from large-scale production systems which are primarily located in the wet zone and from the dry zone forests (see Figure 4), industrial and commercial consumers heavily depend on the systems of trade and market flows. The availability of 'other fuelwood' and 'other fuel' depends on the locality, resource distribution etc. The flow patterns are connected with the location of producing areas relative to consumers and the type of fuelwood available and needed. The flow patterns are interregional and intra-regional as well as local. The four districts in the hi