<title>Case studies of people's participation in watershed management in Asia (GCP/RAS/161/NET)</title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations
Al
Aluminium
ANGOC
Asian Non Government Organization Coalition
AMSL
Above Mean Sea Level
AVARD
Agency of Voluntary Agencies For Rural development
BTRT
Begnas Tal (lake) and Rupa Tal (lake)
C+
Total Carbon or Organic Matter
CCC
Catchment Conservation Committee
CDC
Community Development Board
CDCC
Community Development Conservation Committee
CF
Conservation Farmer
CTA
Chief Technical Advisor
DDC
District Development Committee
DR
Development Region
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
FO
Farmers' Organizations
FUGC
Forest Users' Group Committee
ha
Hectare
hh
House holds
HMG/N
His Majesty's Government of Nepal
gm
Gram
GO
Government Organization
IG
Interest Group
K
Potassium
Km
kilo meters
KW
Kilo Watt
meq
milli equivalent
mg
milli gram
mm
milli meters
mu
1 ha = 15 mu
MW
Mega Watt
N
Nitrogen
NFP
National Focal Point
NGO
Non-Government Organization
P
probability
P
Phosphorus
PCC
Panchayat (village) Conservation Committee
PCSD
People Centred sustainable Development, ANGOC/FAO/UNDP
PO
People's Organizations
PP
People's Participation
PUCD
Participatory Upland Conservation and Development inter-regional project
RCUP
Resource Conservation and Utilization Project
RMB
Renmimbe, Chinese Currency
RRA
Rapid Rural Appraisal
SCWM
Soil Conservation and Watershed Management
PCPA
Participatory Community Problem Analysis
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
RAS
Asia Regional
SW
Sub-Watershed
UG
Users' Group
UGC
Users' Group Committee
UNDP
United Nations Development Program
UNIDO
United National Industrial Development Organization
US$
US Currency
VDC
Village Development Committee
WM
Watershed Management
yr
year
<section>2</section>
Local terms
Anna
A local term for elder brother in south and western India
Andolan
Movement in Hindi/Nepalese language
Bari
Upland rainfed area
Besi
Flat low lands
Bhajans
Hymns
Dalits
Untouchables a lower caste in India
chautara
Village resting places along trails
Gauchar
Grazing lands in India
Gaon
Village
Gram Sabha
Village assembly in India
Harijans
A name given by Gandhi to lower and deprived castes in India
heralu
Guards in Nepal
Juthe Pokhari
Kitchen waste water collection ponds
kharbari
Marginal Grazing Lands
Khet
Lowland irrigated areas
kinehouse
A place to keep stray animals
Kuwa
Open shallow dug well
Mahila Mandals
Women's groups
Pucca house
Stone or brick masonry house
Ropani
0.05 ha area
Sahukar
Traditional money lenders in Indian villages
Shramdan
Voluntary labor in India
Taluka
Equivalent of a county in India
Ward
Hamlet consisting of no. of villages with in a VDC, in Nepal
Approximate exchange rates in July 1995
Nepal:
1 US$ = NRs. 50
China:
1 US$ = Yuan 8.6 RMB
India:
1 US$ = Rs. 31.25
<section>3</section>
Foreword
This field document is a part of a series of publications of the Participatory Watershed Management Training in Asia (PWMTA) Program of the Netherlands/FAO (UN), GCP/RAS/161/NET and the Farmer-Centred Agriculture Resource Management Program of the UNDP/FAO, RAS/93/062. The earlier WMTUH sub-program, RAS/93/063 fully merged into the retuned FARM program, RAS/93/062, in April, 1996. At the very onset of the watershed management thrust area (earlier called sub-program RAS/93/063) of the FARM program, it was realized that by now some successful cases of people's participation in watershed management have started emerging in Asia. Hence, in Nov. 1994, the focal points of this area agreed to try to locate such cases in their respective countries. The UNDP/FAO, RAS/93/063 commissioned these studies in the beginning of 1995. Three of the studies i.e. for Nepal, China and India (sponsored by the PCSD/FARM, RAS/93/067 and included here with their permission) are presented here. The
case studies from Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam have been published as Part II of this series (Field Document No. 5). The authors have analysed them in their national contexts. The three case studies presented in this publication are distinctly different. In the case study from Nepal, the government agency has been assisted by an international organization in its funding and execution. The China case is a fully national effort, hence is a complete reflection of national policies and programs mainly after the reforms were instituted in 1982. The India case is a case of Gandhian approach to watershed management by a village level farmers' organization led by a highly dedicated and motivated local leader. Thus, the three case studies cover a very broad spectrum of approaches to people's participation ranging from international assistance to government (Nepal), national efforts (China) to completely farmer driven local efforts by Gandhian approach (India). In Oct., 1996, a
regional workshop of the PWMTA, GCP/RAS/161/NET, was held to analyse all these case studies. The outcome of this analysis has been published in June, 1997 as Field Document No. 7, "Participatory Processes for Integrated Watershed Management".
I thank the authors of these studies for their efforts. It is hoped that soon the design of the national WM programs will emphasise on the mechanisms of people's participation such as highlighted by these case studies. In selecting the cases as well as in conducting these studies, the national watershed management focal points of Nepal and China assisted the authors for which they are highly appreciated. Special thanks are to the PCSD/FARM, RAS/93/067, and Dr. B. Mishra for permitting their India study to be reproduced here. The third edition of this document is being printed to meet the contineously growing demand as the 1,500 copies of first edition as well as 1,000 copies of the second edition exhausted by June, 1997. Your comments on this edition are welcome.
July, 1997
Prem N. Sharma
Regional Coordinator/Chief Technical Advisor & Senior Natural Resources Management Advisor (WM) PWMTA-FARM, FAO (UN), Kathmandu, Nepal
<section>4</section>
A case study of people's participation in Begnastal and Rupatal (BTRT) watershed management in Nepal
Rabin Bogati^*
[^* Under Secretary, Soil Conservation and Watershed Management, Department of Soil Conservation, P. 0. Box 4719, Kathmandu.]
Abstract
Introduction
Review
Methodology
Result and discussions
Problems and constraints
Conclusions and recommendations
Acknowledgement
References
Abstract
The Begnas Tal (lake) and Rupa Tal (BTRT) watershed area is located at about 10 km east of Pokhara in Western Nepal which is about 200 km west of Kathmandu. The watershed covers an area of 173 km^2 of two main lakes Begnas and Rupa and three other minor lakes. There are seven Village Development Committees (VDC) in the BTRT. About 31,000 people inhabit in the BTRT area.
For the last ten years, the BTRT Project has been concentrating its efforts on watershed management using participatory approaches. Hence, it is thought to be the best area for studying participatory approaches in watershed management in Nepal. In the BTRT Project area, participatory approach is mandatory for all activities at all stages, today. Local people are actively involved in planning, implementing, follow-up, and maintaining community watershed resources. The role of watershed management technicians is relegated to that of technical facilitators.
Communities are organized in order to ensure peoples' participation. Community Development Conservation Committees (CDCC), instead of users' groups, are the organizational unit. A CDCC serves a community as a natural socio-ecological unit. It is not defined by a VDC or a VDC hamlet (called ward in Nepal) boundary. Each household in the community is represented in the CDCC. At the project's initiation, a CDCC analyzes its problems using a participatory community approach and then presents its conservation needs to the project office. As of the end of 1994 there were 100 CDCCs in operation in the BTRT area.
The BTRT Project's push for agricultural diversification has minimized the risk of crop failure and enabled farmers to earn income throughout the year. Nowadays, an average farmer grows about six kinds of fruits, five types of fodder and local grasses, as well as cultivates cereal crops.
The project has handed over the responsibility for managing natural forests near villages to the local users. This is resulting into denser forests. Women's CDCCs are especially keen on managing forests. The use of traditional farm management technology is common and farmers manage their land very well. Terrace slopes are within the prescribed limits and in general in good condition.
The Project identified the need for quality agricultural inputs and support services needed for utilizing marginal lands. Many groups of farmers are involved in the marginal land improvement agro-forestry program initiated with the help of the project. Farmers are not only ready to pay for fruit saplings, but they also convince their neighbours to participate in the program so that there will be a larger group fund.
Local women are very active in forest management and conservation farming activities and are fully involved in the decision making process. The major factors facilitating women's participation in CDCC proceedings were: a clear prospect of benefit sharing, support from their families and the small size of the group area served.
Many conservation farmers have adopted improved agricultural practices and share these experiences with their neighbours. They have setup demonstrations on their farms and have converted many followers, who are monitored by the conservation farmers themselves. In this way improved farming practices were spread throughout the area. Homestead agro-forestry plots were established and kitchen gardens introduced to great economic benefit. The sale of coffee, pineapples, oranges, cardamom, broom grass, and other varieties of fruits and vegetables is generating cash income for the farmers.
A Community Development Board, which operates at the village level, was formed to foster communication between the CDCCs and the VDCs. All ward members of a VDC and the chairmen of the CDCCs in a VDC are the members of the board. Technical staff in the VDC serve as advisors and facilitators of farmers' groups/organization.
In sum, an overall impression about the factors that contributed to the success of people's participation (PP) in the BTRT watershed management are outlined as follows:
- Clear and transparent decision making procedures by project management.
- Clear and simple guidelines, and flexible operational procedures to facilitate PP in watershed management.
- Well defined programs, budgets, plans, implementation procedures and benefit sharing mechanisms.
- Integration of a wide range of diversified watershed management activities and guarantee of benefits.
- Strong motivation among project staff.
Introduction
Background
Study site selection
Objectives of the study
Background
Nepal is a small mountainous country covering an area of 14.74 million ha. It is drained by four major river systems, namely: Mahakali, Karnali, Gandaki and Koshi, and about 6000 other medium-sized and small rivers join these systems. The country's average elevation varies from 60 m in the south to 8848 m AMSL in the North. Nepal is divided into five different physiographical zones: Terai, Siwaliks, Middle Mountain, High Mountain and High Himal.
Nepalese economy is based mainly on agriculture. In fact, more than 80% of the total population depends on farming for sustenance. The Nepalese have strived hard in order to overcome the harsh physiographic environment and raise crops successfully. The terrace systems found on steep slopes is one of the outstanding examples of battling the severe impediments to farming.
The population of Nepal today is about 20 million, and the annual rate of growth is about 2.7%. In order to meet the increasing demands of the growing population for food, fodder, timber, and fuelwood, marginal lands are being cultivated. Consequently, much forest and shrub lands have been degraded.
Farms in the hills and mountains are classified as upland (bari) and lowland (khet). Upland farms are rainfed and planted with crops like maize, mustard, wheat, millet and buck-wheat. Lowland areas are usually irrigated and planted with rice and mustard.
Nepal is divided into five development regions: Eastern Development Region (DR), Central DR, Western DR, Mid-Western DR and Far-Western DR.
The Western Development Region (WDR) exhibits the typical Nepalese farming system of traditional style terraces on hill slopes and cultivated marginal lands, on which both annual and perennial crops are grown. One-fifth of the total population resides in this region.
Study site selection
To arrest watershed degradation in the Western Development Region, His Majesty's Government of Nepal has been implementing many watershed management projects over the last two decades. Some of these projects are: Phewatal Watershed Management Project, Resource Conservation and Utilization Project (Upper Kaligandaki and Daraundi Watersheds), Tinau Watershed Project, Begnas Tal (lake) Rupa Tal (BTRT) Watershed Management Project, Upper Andhi Khola Watershed Management Project, and Participatory Upland Conservation and Development Project. These projects pioneered watershed management by developing technical packages based on different models. In fact, considerable variation in the concepts of implementation, the organizational structures and the degree of people's participation are found among the projects.
The BTRT Project has focused its effort on watershed management using the participatory approach. Since the BTRT's participatory approach has been found note worthy in different reports as a best example of participatory soil conservation and watershed management in Nepal, it was chosen for this case study.
Objectives of the study
The objectives of this study are:
- to study and analyze in detail one of the best cases of people's participation in watershed management in Nepal.
- to assess individual farmer's and groups of farmers' efforts in and contributions to watershed management.
- to develop and recommend suitable policy guidelines for people's participation in watershed management.
- to make this case study available to FARM-member countries interested in watershed management in the tropics and the upper Himalayas.
Review
Overview of the study area
The concepts and mechanisms of people's participation
Review of people's participation in watershed management in the western development region
Overview of the study area
Climate
Vegetation
Land use
Livestock
Socio-economic conditions
The BTRT watershed area is located at about 10 Km east of Pokhara, in the Kaski District of the Western Development Region. In 1985, the Department of Soil Conservation and Watershed Management initiated a watershed management project in the BTRT watershed area with the cooperation of CARE International. The project aims at improving the lives of the approximately 31,000 people inhabiting in the project area. It covers an area of 173 Km^2, including the two major lakes Begnastal and Rupatal and three other minor lakes namely: Khaste, Dipang and Maidi. There are seven Village Development Committees (VDC) in the watershed area, namely: Rakhi, Kalika, Majthana, Begnas, Rupakot, Lekhnath and Hanspur. Two motorable roads link the watershed area to the Kathmandu-Pokhara highway and several foot trails are well established inside the watershed.
The watershed has steep north and south facing slopes of 40°-65° and 35°-40^0, respectively. The topography determines the demographic distribution. The majority of the population is concentrated on the south-facing slopes suitable for agriculture. North facing slopes are often covered by forests. The watershed altitude varies from 600 m to 1120 m AMSL (K.C. et al, 1987).
Climate
The climate is sub-tropical and humid, and is marked by monsoon rainfall. The pre-monsoon period is generally hot and dry, and sometimes there are hailstorms. The average annual rainfall is about 3,580 mm and it occurs mainly from May to September. The mean peak temperature in July and August is 35.5°C but falls to just 13.2°C in January (K.C. et al, 1987).
Vegetation
Vegetation and crop cultivation are largely determined by the climate. Forests are predominantly sub-tropical and wet, although some patches of temperate forests exist at higher altitudes. The predominant species of sub-tropical wet forests are Castanopsis indica, and Schima wallichii, and other species include Engelhardtia spicata, Syzygium cumini, Myrica esculenta and Rhus javanica. Temperate forest species include Quercus glauca, Euraya accuminate, Prunus cerasoides and various species of Rhododendron.
Land use
About 50 % of the land is under cultivation with slightly more cultivation on bari land (rainfed) man on khet land (irrigated). Most terraces are on the south-facing slopes. In fact, terraces on the north-facing slopes are found only at the base of a sloping area. Khet lands are located on low lying areas around lakes and rivers. The cropping patterns are greatly affected by slope, altitude, and irrigation. The main crops are rice, maize, millet, and wheat, but seasonal vegetables are also grown. Fodder trees and grasses are usually maintained at the edges of bari land (K.C. et al, 87).
Livestock
Raising livestock is an important economic activity in the watershed area. In spite of the time involved in collecting fodder and looking after the livestock and other social costs, raising livestock is profitable. Livestock is also the main source of manure for improving soil fertility and of draft power for ploughing. The availability of forest and water resources encourage the farmers to raise livestock.
Socio-economic conditions
The watershed inhabitants are of many ethnic groups and castes and practice Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam. Due to economic, social and ecological pressures, the local people are forced to leave their villages for short and long-term employment. The lower castes often work as seasonally paid labours. A socio-economic study carried out in 1990 indicated that about 2% of the population were landless, and that 60% of the farmers own less than one hectare of land. Only an average of 3.8% own above 1 ha of cultivated land (Poudel, 1985).
The average literacy rate for men and women is estimated at 46% (men 65%, women 28%), a figure higher than the national average of 29% (Poudel, 1985).
The concepts and mechanisms of people's participation
No participation model
Information sharing model
Political participation model
Users' participation model
Individual participation model
In the past, people's participation was usually conceived of in terms of the percentage they contributed to a project's total cost and their contribution was generally in the form of voluntary labor. But, since the local people cannot contribute cash, their contribution is most significant in activities that require a lot of unskilled labor.
During the Sixth Plan (1980-85), the spirit of community participation was first incorporated in the process of planning and implementation at the district level by focusing users' committees. However, due to lack of understanding of mechanisms of people's participation among the members, the user's committees did could not mature. Also, in the absence of legal framework for people's participation in the past, influential persons tried to get all the benefits of a project's activities in the name of community participation.
Some of the issues and experiences of people's participation in watershed management in the past, are as follows (Shakya and Bogati, 1991):
- Watershed management focused on public lands and activities like conservation plantation and gully control were popular. Work was carried out in the field either by directly hiring local laborers or by operating through a contractor. The beneficiaries were hardly involved.
- Mass education materials were published and disseminated, but extension services were focused on privileged and well-off people.
- Users' committees were seldom formed. Participation was limited to political leaders and local elites, and users meetings were organised only to satisfy the formalities.
- Few activities such as water source protection, water supply and hill irrigation channel improvement did receive contributions from the people in terms of their labor. However, these activities were nominal and unsustainable.
- Activities accomplished by peoples' participation did not adequately represent women, underprivileged castes and ethnic communities.
Participation means taking part in a process with a view to determine or at least influence the outcome of the process. In watershed management tasks, it is vital that local farmers, users and beneficiaries play an active role. Their participation should start from the initial stage of problem identification and continue into the subsequent stages of planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
Different models of people's participation which are commonly practised in watershed management projects in Nepal are:
No participation model
In this model, information about programs, budgets and project evaluation is given only to the members of the Nepalese parliament.
Information sharing model
In this, the project shares information with the district level political unit and discusses project evaluation.
Political participation model
Here, the project field staff share information with the village level political unit and elicit input about identifying, planning, monitoring and evaluating activities.
Users' participation model
Here, the resource users form groups and put pressure on village and district level political units to identify, plan, implement, and maintain project activities. Projects negotiate with the users' groups through field staff.
Individual participation model
In this model, the individual farmer is considered in planning and implementing farm-level conservation packages on private land. Projects negotiate with individual farmers, who in turn strengthen the users' groups.
Review of people's participation in watershed management in the western development region
For the first time, in 1979, the Phewatal Watershed Project established a Panchyat (Village) Conservation Committee (PCC) to address the issues of people's participation.
In 1978, the Tinau Watershed Project developed a watershed management plan which aimed at providing opportunities for attracting people's participation. This project documented that the integrated conservation approach can only succeed if the people in the target area participate in planning, implementing and evaluating project activities.
Similarly, the Resource Conservation and Utilization Project (RCUP) in 1980 observed that an integrated program results in meaningful output only when the beneficiaries participate in planning and implementation of project activities. For this reason, the RCUP established a Catchment Conservation Committee (CCC) similar to the PCCs in the Phewatal watershed area. The CCCs, however, could not be effective because the area they served was too large to coordinate.
The BTRT Watershed Management (WM) Project which was initiated in 1985 with the support of me Dutch Government through CARE International in Nepal, adopted the users' group approach by capitalizing the Decentralization Act to form users' group committees. This project has been considered as one of the most successful projects in ensuring people's participation. A sister project of the BTRT has also been initiated in the Upper Andhi Khola watershed of Syangja in 1992 with a similar approach to people's participation. By now, the Upper Andhi Khola WM Project has become well known for applying the Participatory Community Problem Analysis (PCPA) approach to map village resources and plan grassroots level activities.
HMG/N started a District Soil Conservation Program in the Parbat and Tanahun districts in 1990. Although it institutionalized the subsidy policy, the mechanism for ensuring people's participation was left open to accommodate various approaches.
The Inter-Regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD) in Bhusunde Khola watershed area in Gorkha District has been operational since 1992, with the assistance of the Italian Government and the FAO. In seeking participation of the local people during the assessment and the planning phases, the PUCD has taken a unique step in the participatory approach. It focused on the socio-economic aspects of the participating community by incorporating gender analyses and participatory assessments from the very initial stages.
Methodology
For this case study, the author reviewed relevant reports and documents. Discussions and meetings with project personnel and field implementors in Bhusunde and Phewatal watershed areas and in Palpa and Syangja were held. A Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) was conducted in several villages of the Begnastal Rupatal (BTRT) watershed area to gather information on different aspects of people's participation in watershed management.
The RRA was organized in the following manner:
- informal interviews were conducted with farmers, conservation groups, members of users' groups and CDCCs;
- information gathering from professional project field staff and local leaders;
- issues related to watershed management were discussed with former project managers and other concerned individuals;
- reports, studies, and plans related to the BTRT watershed Project were reviewed;
- information triangulation was done by interviewing farmers on randomly chosen sites; and
- village level meetings were conducted for gathering information in groups.
Result and discussions
Evolution of participation
Activities of the Begnastal Rupatal watershed management project
Consequences of the BTRT project
Influences of the BTRT project on people's participation
Result of people's participation in the BTRT area
Evolution of participation
First stage (1974-80)
Second stage (1981-85)
Third stage (1986-90)
Fourth stage (1991-94)
The approach to people's participation in watershed management in Nepal, has been evolving since 1974. Its evolution can be divided into four stages. In each stage people's participation has been described in terms of a five-part project cycle: watershed resources assessment; project activity planning; implementation, maintenance, followed-up on and benefit sharing; and extension efforts.
First stage (1974-80)
Maps and aerial photos were used to assess land and forest resources. Applications for terrace improvement were collected from individual farmers and these works implemented within project quotas. The project subsidized eighty percent of the cost of terrace improvement, which made it popular. Other activities were planned for public lands. All activities were implemented by hiring contractors or local laborers and the projects themselves repaired and maintained the activities implemented by them. Messages to conserve natural resources were displayed in public places.
Second stage (1981-85)
The spirit of decentralization was practised by inviting village leaders to assess their needs and to plan activities. Some key villagers were also involved in implementation. All these projects tried to convince people that conservation activities will yield benefits in the future.
Terrace improvement subsidies were reduced to 70 % so that more farmers could participate in this program. Users' developed benefit-sharing mechanisms, conservation education and extension programs reached more people. Following the ratification of the Soil Conservation and Watershed Management (SCWM) Act, catchment conservation committees were established in a few districts in order to coordinate the watershed management activities within each district.
Third stage (1986-90)
Bio-physical characteristics were used for resources assessment. In line with the decentralization policy, VDCs and DDCs were made to involve in planning the activities.
The effectiveness of SCWM activities in small watersheds was noted. Subsidies for terrace improvement were further reduced to 50%. The User-developed works were repaired and maintained by the users themselves with the support of the projects.
The decentralization Act 1982 authorized formation of users' groups for all rural development activities. They used this act to obtain land use titles of community lands. With this, natural as well as planted forests were handed over to the communities to convert the Government managed forests into user-managed community forests.
Fourth stage (1991-94)
RRA/PRA surveys as well as bio-physical characteristics were used to assess farmers needs. Sub-watershed planning was institutionalized and on-farm conservation packages were developed. Up to 60% of the total resources were channelled to priority sub-watersheds and most activities were implemented through users. In fact, users took lead roles in repairing and maintaining activities and in benefit sharing.
Conservation related extension was focused on increasing community awareness. Guidelines for people's participation were produced and establishment of users' groups to run SCWM activities was made mandatory. The policy for subsidizing activities was institutionalized.
A summary of evolution of the people's participation approach in soil conservation and watershed management in terms of the project cycle is presented in Table 1.
Activities of the Begnastal Rupatal watershed management project
First phase (1985-89)
Second phase (1990-94)
The BTRT project, which was initiated in 1985, completed its first phase in 1989 and its second phase in 1994. Currently the project is running on a three-year, no-cost extension basis. Community participation and subsidies are vital to the Project. The following pages discuss the project's efforts in both phases to help community organizations manage their community and private lands.
First phase (1985-89)
(i) On public lands
Resource assessment
Land use, laud system and topographical maps, and aerial photographs were used to assess the bio-physical condition of the area. Project staff visited villages to observe and to conduct village meetings. A questionnaire for soliciting the demands of village panchayats was developed.
Activity planning
First, the Panchyat Conservation Committee (PCC) prepared a list of all the SCWM activities needed and ranked the top three in order of priority and forwarded the list to the project office. Secondly, the project's mid-level technicians, together with the concerned users and the PCC members, carried out a feasibility survey and prepared a list of technically and economically feasible activities. Then the PCC, with the assistance of the project, finalized the activities and forwarded them to the District Panchayat for concurrence. Finally, the project sent the plan to the Department of Soil Conservation and Watershed Management, Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation, HMG/N, for final approval.
Implementation
The Decentralization Act has provided the legal basis for implementing project activities at the ward level. First, a users' group committee (UGC) was formed within each ward and presided over by the ward chairman. Secondly, project technicians and UGC members made detailed cost estimates and suggested how costs would be shared. Thirdly, the project and the UGC agreed upon implementation plan. Finally, the users implemented the activities. The project transported locally unavailable materials up to the road head, and users transported them to the sites. After the work was completed, the project paid its share to UGC as agreed in implementation plan (normally the cost of skilled labor). The local users contributed unskilled labor.
Maintenance, follow-up, and benefit sharing
Depending on the activities, different plans for maintenance and follow-up were developed. Conservation plantations were maintained by project-hired guards (heralu). Users themselves repaired and maintained water supply systems and dug wells (Kuwa). The project assisted the users in repairing conservation measures designed to control landslides and gullies. Users developed a benefit-sharing mechanism for collecting grass, branches, leaves and twigs from plantation areas by collecting a nominal charge for using them. The collected levy was used for social welfare works such as improving village resting places (chautara) along trails, foot trails, and schools.
Table 1: Summary of evolution of people's participation approach in four stages
PROJECT STAGE
PROJECT CYCLE
Resource Assessmen