<title>Inter-Regional project for participatory upland conservation and development </title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
CAP
Community Action Plan
DSC
Department of Soil Conservation
DSCO
District Soil Conservation Office
GDP
Gorkha Development Project
HMG
His Majesty's Government
ICIMOD
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
NGO
Non Governamental Organization
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PUCD
Participatory Upland Conservation and Development Project
RCUP
Resource Conservation and Utilization Project
UMN
United Mission to Nepal
VDC
Village Development Committee
<section>2</section>
Foreword
Participatory watershed management and development is the core issue of the "Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development", GCP/INT/542/ITA. The watershed wide Participatory Rural Appraisal and Planning exercise carried out in the Bhusunde Khola watershed between October 1995 and January 1996, was more than a milestone in the project.
For the first time large scale satisfactory use was made of truly participatory planning methods in the Nepal component of the project. The resulting 26 Community Action Plans were so elaborate and so demanding, that the whole project team has been working flat out during the rest of 1996 and into 1997 in the -participatory- implementation of planned activities.
Little time was left for further analysis and reporting of this most important event during the second phase of the project. Finally, with the level of field activities and other commitments somewhat decreasing in 1997 it has been possible to make a decent report on the 1995/96 PRA. The whole project team has contributed in one form or another in the PRA exercise, and its subsequent analysis and reporting.
However, most important actors of all were the more than 1000 villagers of the Bhusunde Khola watershed that have been directly involved in the PRAs, and who have on the whole been the most enthusiastic supporters of these planning methods. They have since undertaken the accomplishment of most of the more than 220 activities included in the 26 Community Action Plans, some on their own, some with support of the project, and some with support of other agencies or NGOs.
<section>3</section>
0. Summary
In the period of October 1995 - January 1996 the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, GCP/INT/542/ITA, carried out a Participatory Rural Appraisal and Planning exercise in 26 communities of the Bhusunde Khola watershed. This was done by trained staff of the project itself. The PRAs generally lasted about 4 days, and resulted in a large number of data generated, as well as 26 Community Action Plans.
This report presents the results of that PRA and planning exercise. It describes methods and tools used and organizational aspects. Data are presented on (a) population and demography, including ethnic composition, literacy rates and local food sufficiency; (b) farming systems and land use, including data on land use categories; (c) crops and agricultural production, cropping patterns, seasonality, trend in productivity, problems and opportunities; (d) livestock and animal husbandry, numbers of animals per household, trends in livestock population, fodder and feed preferences, problems and opportunities; (e) Forests and natural resources, including a summary of soil and water resources problem ares. An overview is presented of the 26 Community Action Plans, which includes more than 220 planned activities.
It is concluded that as an information gathering tool each individual PRA was not very useful, but that the total of 26 PRAs provides satisfactory information. However, the PRA was not meant to be an information gathering exercise, rather to set the stage for participatory planning of development activities. In this respect the PRA and planning exercise was most successful.
Some recommendations are presented indicating the value of the PRA tools used, especially resource mapping and seasonality diagrams, in participatory monitoring and evaluation of the Community Action Plans. It is also recommended to slightly modify the PRA, focussing on user groups to avoid undue dominance by high profile people in the communities.
<section>4</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
1.2 Objectives
1.1 Background
1.1.1 General
1.1.2 Evolution of the project's participatory development approach
1.1.3 1992/93 Initial participatory assessment and planning
1.1.4 1993/94 PRA and participatory planning
1.1.5 1995/96 PRA and participatory planning
1.1.1 General
The "Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development", GCP/INT/542/ITA (or PUCD project), aims at promoting people's participation in the conservation and development of upland catchments, in accordance with HMG's policies and priorities. The adaptation and application of participatory methods and the promotion of an integrated approach to watershed management are the central elements of the project. The project became operational in the second half of 1 992, and has gone through several participatory rural appraisal and participatory activity planning cycles.
The main project area is the Bhusunde Khola sub-watershed, ranging from 500 -1500 m in altitude, and located in the Middle Hills of Gorkha District. The Bhusunde Khola is a tributary of the Daraundi Khola, which flows into the Marshyangdi River, which joins the Trisuli River. The Bhusunde Khola watershed has a total area of 32 km^2, it covers 23 Wards of 4 Village Development Committees (VDCs) and has a population of approximately 12,000. There are no roads in the area and all transport is done on foot.
No recent or detailed maps exist or could be used, except for the 1962 maps prepared by the Surveyor Genera! of India, based on 1:80,000 air photographs taken in 1 957. Thus, planning and implementation of activities has been virtually carried out without any use of maps, air photos or comparative tools. The project has limited financial resources, which do not permit costly investments in more sophisticated Geographic Information Systems^ (1). Such, however, are normal conditions in large Darts of the country.
^1 A G/S database application covering Gorkha District had been prepared in 1995 by ICIMOD for the HMG/GTZ funded Gorkha Development Project (MENRIS Case Studies Series No. 3). However, -apparently- due to operational problems, the GDP project could not make the G/S database available to the PUCD project.
The three main categories of project activities are:
(i) Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) and participatory planning (the main subject of this report) and participatory monitoring and evaluation of planned activities;
(ii) Capacity building of user groups, which are the accepted community organizational units through which participatory field activities are implemented; and
(iii) Participatory implementation of field activities identified and requested by local communities through participatory planning methods.
1.1.2 Evolution of the project's participatory development approach
The participatory development approach advocated by the project document needed to be adjusted to the actual field situation and put to practice. This has been a process of trial and error, resulting in a gradual evolution and improvement of actual participatory methods employed. Many problems were encountered, including:
(i) The question of scale, or what should be the smallest territorial unit for participatory planning^ (2);
^2 Most projects assume that the ward (9 wards in a VDC) is the appropriate smallest unit for participatory planning purposes. Experience from the PUCD shows that the "natural village" or hamlet level is more appropriate. Usually 3-5 such hamlets make up a ward.
(ii) The timing, PRAs should be carried out during the slack season of farmers.
(iii) The question of duration, very short PRAs may not provide meaningful information, while very long ones make it hard or impossible for women, poor or otherwise disadvantaged groups to participate.
(iv) The discrepancy between villagers expectations (immediate benefits) and the need to reinforce local community organizations (user groups capacity building) before sustainable results can be achieved;
(v) The wide range of problems confronting villagers as compared to the actual mandate of the project (e.g. the need for education and health services) and the very modest financial means of the project;
(vi) How to involve disadvantaged groups in the decision making process (notably women and certain caste/ethnic groups); and
(vii) How to ensure consistency and continuity between the PRA itself, the participatory activity planning, and the participatory implementation of planned activities.
1.1.3 1992/93 Initial participatory assessment and planning
During field reconnaissance visits at the end of 1992 project staff met with villagers in each VDC area to obtain a list of local priorities for project activities, using the ward level as the basic territorial planning unit. In order to set activities for the first implementation year of the project, these lists were narrowed down to the 3-4 most urgent local priorities. After these visits, a more structured participatory rural appraisal (PRA) was conducted in two hamlets - but this was not related to the participatory planning of activities.
Further meetings were held with ward level villagers representatives in December 1992 to confirm identified and prioritized field activities and modalities for implementation in 1993, and a final session was held with VDC chairpersons and vice-chairpersons. Villagers were urged to form ward lever user groups to implement the agreed upon activities
Most of the selected priority activities were in one way or another directly related to physical works for soil and water conservation and for the rehabilitation of small collective infrastructures :gully and landslide control small scale hill irrigation trail improvement, water source protection/drinking water supply and conservation plantation. These are the usual Department of Soil Conservation activities, well known to the local population from previous experience with the RCUP^ (3) project.
^3 The Resource Conservation and Development Project (RCUP) covered a.o. the Daraunde Khola watershed, and emphasized infrastructure.
1.1.4 1993/94 PRA and participatory planning
During the months of November and December 1993 an NGO, sub-contracted by the project, undertook an extensive participatory appraisal and micro-planning exercise at the hamlet level in 40 different locations of the Bhusunde Khola watershed. Selected tools and techniques of PRA were used to facilitate discussion and gather information, identify problems and possible solutions (activities). However, these PRA and micro-planning exercises were, in fact, rather short and superficial.
The data generated by this exercise were regrouped from hamlet level to ward level by project management. Prioritized problems and related development activities were overwhelmingly construction works (water source protection, trail improvement, small scale hill irrigation), even in villages where people realized that their main problems were related to poverty and food deficits. The relative absence of productive and income generating activities from these workplans can be explained as follows:
(i) The counterpart institution, the Department of Soil Conservation (DSC), has a very technical profile, well known to the local population;
(ii) There is a real need for support and guidance in these technical areas, as no other technical assistance is locally available; and
(iii) The way in which user groups were organized and decisions were made (both male dominated).
Project staff responsible for the implementation of selected field activities had in most cases not taken part in the PRAs and planning exercises, and thus felt little affinity with or responsibility for these plans, which at the same time were more than they could handle.
Due to funding problems related to the extension of the project, most of the activities selected in 1993 could only be implemented in 1995.
1.1.5 1995/96 PRA and participatory planning
The second phase of the project started in September 1 994 with a legacy of unfulfilled expectations and commitments towards communities of the project area. This was the result of artificial group formation early in 1993, a not-so-good participatory planning exercise at the end of 1993, the long bridging period in 1994, and weak project management during the first phase.
New participatory appraisal and planning exercises could only be carried out once the commitments made during the 1 993 PRA were largely fulfilled. Moreover, the project decided to carry out PRA with its own staff, those who have daily contacts with the villagers and would be largely responsible for activity implementation afterwards. To do so, project staff first needed to be further trained in PRA methodology.
It was also decided that participatory appraisal and planning exercises should be carried out at the "natural village" level (e.g. hamlets or groups of small hamlets with 20-80 households), and should have a wider perspective to include a comprehensive appraisal of local resources, land use, farming systems, constraints and opportunities. Thus real communities at the settlement level were used as basic planning units instead of the artificial administrative units (the wards).
Between October 1995 and January 1996 new PRA and participatory activities planning exercises were carried out in 26 hamlets of the Bhusunde Khola watershed. A large part of the more than 200 activities thus identified and prioritized for implementation were in fact carried out in 1 996. At the end of 1 996 a series participatory evaluation and replanning exercises were organized (these will be reported upon in another report).
1.2 Objectives
1.2.1 Objectives of the 95/96 PRA and participatory planning
1.2.2 Objectives of this report
1.2.1 Objectives of the 95/96 PRA and participatory planning
The main objective of the Participatory Rural Appraisal carried out in the Bhusunde Khola watershed between October 1995 and January 1996 was to improve the understanding of the local communities of their own situation, living conditions and environment in general, and their local resources, land use, farming systems, constraints and opportunities in particular, in order to set the stage for a participatory planning of development activities that would fit into an integrated and participatory watershed management plan.
The main objective of the Participatory Planning carried out together with the PRA was to prepare detailed plans for upland conservation and development activities to be implemented by the local population with the support of the project, and which would form the core of an integrated and participatory watershed management plan.
The secondary objective of the PRA was to provide the project with data concerning population, natural resources, land use and farming systems, their constraints and opportunities, to be used as an information or data base for the integrated and participatory watershed management plan, and against which proposed and implemented activities and their impact could be assessed and evaluated.
Another objective of this PRA and Participatory Planning exercise was to test whether the innovative elements of this PRA as compared to earlier similar activities in the Bhusunde Khola watershed, notably the use of hamlets as smallest territorial planning units (as opposed to wards), and the use of trained project staff (as opposed to outsiders), would be more effective, especially during follow-up and implementation of identified activities.
It should, however, be noted that by definition a PRA will not result in exact measurable data.
1.2.2 Objectives of this report
The objectives of this report are to:
(i) Present the results of the Participatory Rural Appraisal and Planning exercise carried out in the Bhusunde Khola watershed between October 1 995 and January 1996, and provide a basis against which future trends and changes in the watershed can be compared.
(ii) Assess the quality and quantity of the PRA exercise; and
(iii) Assess the consistency of the activities planned with the results of the PRA.
(iv) Assess the value of the PRA tools used.
<section>5</section>
2. Methods, sites, organization and analysis
2.1 PRA methods and tools
2.2 Organizational aspects
2.3 Analysis and reporting
2.1 PRA methods and tools
2.1.1 PRA training
2.1.2 Common resource and user group inventory
2.1.3 PRA methods and tools used
2.1.4 Participatory planning methods and tools used
2.1.1 PRA training
When it was decided in mid-1995 to organize a new revised round of PRAs and Participatory Planning in selected sites of the Bhusunde Khola watershed, it was also agreed that it would be preferable to train project staff in PRA methods and techniques, and that trained project staff should be responsible for carrying out these PRAs. This was perceived to have the following advantages:
(i) Capacity building of the DSC, institutionalizing knowledge and skills essential in effective participatory working methods;
(ii) Increase the affinity of the project staff with the plans produced, and an expected improvement in commitment to implement these plans; and
(iii) Cost reduction as compared to PRAs carried out by sub-contracting NGOs.
A 7-day PRA training course was organized from 10-16 October 1995. The training course was held in the Bhusunde Khola watershed and was conducted under sub-contract by the NGO "New ERA". The 20 participants included 13 project staff (5 group promoters, 2 motivators, 5 mid-level technicians and 1 mid-level administrative support staff) as well as 7 representatives from other line agencies^ (4). Tools and techniques included in the training were:
^4 See also Field Document 2/96, "A training report on participatory rural appraisal (PRA) methodology (including socio-economic information of the Tutunga village of Chhoprak VDC, Gorkha District, Nepal)", prepared by New ERA.
(a) Time-line, Ethno-history and Seasonal Diagram for time related data;
(b) Mapping (social, enterprise, topography and hydrology) and Transects (historical, nalla and agro-ecological) for spatial data;
(c) Diagramming (pie, Venn and trend) for quantitative data;
(d) Preference or verbal ranking, matrix ranking and wealth ranking
(e) Use of secondary data;
(f) Semi-structured interview;
(g) Observation; and
(h) Triangulation and cross-checking for reliability.
The training was remarkably successful since it enabled the project staff to independently complete a large number of additional PRAs.
2.1.2 Common resource and user group inventory
Between September and December 1995 a systematic Common Resource and User Group Inventory was carried out in the whole Bhusunde Khola watershed by the National Expert Local Capacity Building, Mr. D.R. Chapa, assisted by Mr. Chalitra Joshi and the local Group Promoters. The objectives of this inventory were to:
(i) Identify all existing and potential user groups, their nature (e.g forest user group, women group), size, past and on-going activities, training received, and financial situation.
(ii) Identify all common resources, notably forest, water and pasture, that could benefit from management, conservation or development activities through existing or newly to be formed user groups.
The data provided by the inventory were extremely relevant for the capacity building of user groups: it identified many inactive groups, as well as promising newly formed groups (especially women groups). The resulting database, which is periodically updated, is primarily used by the National Expert Local Capacity Building and the Group Promoters.
The Common Resource and User Group Inventory was in many ways similar to, and could be part of reconnaissance visits. It was so relevant for the further PRA process that it should actually be seen as integral part of the participatory development itinerary:
(a) The inventory provided detailed field knowledge that enabled the project to identify and select appropriate sites (hamlets or groups of hamlets) of more or less homogeneous communities for PRA and participatory planning;
(b) The inventory helped to identify key-informants, as well as local social infra-structure (existing credit schemes, presence of line agencies, NGOs, etc.);
(c) During the actual PRAs the farmers enthusiasm grew when they noticed that the PRA teams already knew much about their village and its resources, and it also helped in the preparation and interpretation of the participatory maps.
(d) It facilitated relations with villagers, who interpreted the detailed knowledge of the PRA teams as a proof of genuine interest in improving the living conditions in their village.
2.1.3 PRA methods and tools used
A full fledged PRA can take a very substantial period of field work and analysis to complete. The scheduled duration and the actual PRA methods and tools used, depend on the objectives of the PRA exercise. In this case, the main objective was clearly to enhance the participatory planning process. Furthermore, it should be noted that in a number of sites this was not the first PRA exercise.
It was essential to involve all relevant parties in the PRA and planning process in each of the selected villages. Consequently, the size of the communities where PRAs were to be conducted was small, usually between 30 to 80 households, and the duration of the PRAs was limited, especially to allow women to fully take part in the exercise. Typically the PRA itself took about two full days, while a third day was devoted to data analysis and compilation for a feed-back presentation during the fourth day, which was further devoted to participatory activity planning.
The actual PRA methods and tools used and recorded in most of the PRA sites include:
1. Time Line, which provided information on ethno-history, and history of forest, cropping systems, livestock, and issues like major landslides.
2. Transects, generated agro-ecological data and provided good occasions for the identification of problems and the discussion of opportunities.
3. Mapping exercises included Resource and Social Maps. The resource maps were often quite detailed, and could be used later in impact evaluation and re-planning exercises.
4. Wealth ranking was usually based on food sufficiency of the individual households, it thus provided additional information on food security in the watershed.
5. Seasonality Diagram were used for rainfall, cropping patterns, fodder use and availability, food availability, busy farming days, milk production, animal diseases and expenditures. The most valuable data revolve around the cropping patterns and busy farm days, since these data were found to be essential in the detailed planning of activities implementation.
6. Pie Charts were used to illustrate population (gender and ethnic composition), literacy data, livestock herd composition, land use, cropping patterns (types of crop per land type, or per season, varieties of paddy, maize and wheat), forest types, fuelwood supply sources and sanitary habits.
7. Trend Diagrams were used for population, literacy rates, crop production (different crops), livestock numbers, forest area, erosion problems and attitudes towards community organizations.
8. Matrix Ranking was used for crop varieties and fodder trees.
2.1.4 Participatory planning methods and tools used
Before starting the actual participatory planning of activities, the results of the PRA generated data are presented to the community for verification and comments in a feedback or restitution meeting. This is also the starting point of the Village Planning Workshops, during which the following exercises were carried out, resulting in the formulation of a Community Action Plan:
1. Verbal ranking of problems and opportunities, during which a list of problems and opportunities is drawn up (ideally this list should closely reflect the results of the presentation of the PRA data);
2. Prioritization of problems and opportunities, which consists of a broad discussion and reshuffling of the listed problems and opportunities;
3. Listing of activities, based on the prioritized problem and opportunity list; and
4. Prioritization of activities, based on the listed activities and a broad discussion on actual possibilities to carry out such activities.
5. Delegation of responsibility, or WHO should do WHAT.
2.2 Organizational aspects
2.2.1 Site selection
2.2.2 Team formation
2.2.3 Venues and timing
2.2.1 Site selection
The following site selection criteria were utilized to decide where PRAs should take place within the Bhusunde Khola watershed.
(i) It had earlier been proposed that the project should concentrate its activities in a particular area or sub-watershed, in order do be more effective in this area and provide an attractive model for replication. For practical reasons (accessibility and distance from the project Base Camp facilities in Chorkate), it was decided in 1995 that the Wards No. 7, 8 and (parts of) 9 of Chhoprak VDC would be designated as project concentration area. Consequently, it was decided that this concentration area should be fully covered by PRAs (with the exception of point iii).
(ii) The rest of Chhoprak VDC, and the three other VDCs of the Bhusunde Khola watershed, Ampipal, Harmi and Khoplang, would also have to be fairly represented in the PRAs and planning of activities. This to fulfil the project mandate, to continue the participatory development partnership and development efforts, and to avoid political problems. However, it was agreed to minimize PRA sites in these areas as far as acceptable^ (5).
^5 In fact, the number of actual PRAs carried out was larger than intended because being left-out was not acceptable for several communities outside the concentration area.
(iii) Within the overall watershed area primary attention should be on the villages on the slopes and ridges, rather than those along the river in the valley.
Based on these criteria a number of sites were selected for PRA and planning. However, during the course of the PRA exercise a number of communities that had not been selected strongly urged the PRA field teams to also include their communities, which was sometimes difficult to refuse.
2.2.2 Team formation
The overall lead in the PRAs was taken by the National Expert Local Capacity Building, Mr. D.R. Chapa. It was decided to form relatively small PRA teams, each led -preferably- by one of the project mid-level technicians that participated in the October 1995 PRA training. These teams would than also consist of a (female) group promoter, equally trained in PRA, plus one or two other persons, either support staff, or interested and PRA-trained technicians from other line agencies.
The following persons took part in the PRA field work: D.R. Chapa (National Expert and PRA coordinator); M.L. Joshi, T.B. Shrestha, I.J. Thapa, H.R. Khanal (mid-level technicians/area facilitators); Ms. D. Lamsal, Ms. N. Bhattarai, Ms. K. Pokharel, Ms. S. Ghimire, Ms. I. Marahatta, Ms. S. Pokharel (group promoters/motivators); N. Maskey, Ch. Joshi, Ph. Pokharel, H.R. Pokharel, N. Hada (other support staff); as well as R.B. Kunwar from the District Agriculture Office and K.P. Bhattarai from the District Livestock Services.
2.2.3 Venues and timing
PRA and planning was carried out in 26 sites between October 1995 and January 1996 (see Table 1 and Figure 1).
The total number of project days (not staff days) spent was 97, and the average duration of the PRAs was 3.9 days per site.
2.3 Analysis and reporting
2.3.1 Analysis
2.3.2 Reporting
2.3.1 Analysis
These 26 PRAs provided an overwhelming amount of raw information. They also provided a list of more than 200 activities that were prioritized for implementation in the Community Action Plans - though some would later be rejected following feasibility and other criteria. High levels of expectations were raised in the watershed, and the limited project resources had to be fully mobilized to assist the local communities in the implementation of their Community Action Plans, and data analysis had to be postponed. Similarly analysis efforts were more focussed on the Community Action Plans and their feasibility than on the background data provided by the PRAs. A Community Action Plan computerized database (in Excell) was set up by Ms. H. Qwist-Hoffmann, Associate Professional Officer Watershed Management.
Table 1. 1995/96 Bhusunde Khola watershed Participatory Rural Appraisal and planning sites, dates, duration and teams involved.
Ward
Site
Dates
Days
Team
Ampipal
Ratdanda
I.J. Thapa
Simpani
T.B. Shrestha
Simpani Hatiya
T.B. Shrestha
Darmichaur
T.B. Shrestha
Chhoprak
Chitre
Ch. Joshi
Chiuribot
Thumki
Amarai
Ch. Joshi
T.B. Shrestha
T.B. Shrestha
Katarbari
T.B. Shrestha
Salbot
T.B. Shrestha
Faudargaon
I.J. Thapa
7^ (a)
Majhgaon
Bawaligaon
I.J. Thapa
D.R. Chapa
8^ (a)
Tutunga
Jaisithok
Firfire
Arubote/Mathure
I.J. Thapa
I.J. Thapa
D.R. Chapa
T.B. Shrestha
9^ (a)
Katubanse
M.L. Joshi
Harmi
Harmi Bhanjang
D.R. Chapa
Nawalpur
Ghimiregaon
D.R. Chapa
D.R. Chapa
Khoplang
Suntale
Falamkhani
T.B. Shrestha
Ch. Joshi
Belbas
Kolkate
Khurpajung
M.L. Joshi
M.L. Joshi
M.L. Joshi
a Project Concentration Area within the Bhusunde Khola watershed.
Figure 1. Bhusunde Khola watershed and the PRA locations
Initial efforts to analyze PRA data were made by Mr. D.R. Chapa and Mr. Ch. Joshi, but they had to abandon their efforts because of lack of time. Finally, the project management recognized that specific competent assistance would have to be sought to analyze the data generated in order to systematize and present the results of the PRAs. This was done during a five week period in January and February 1 997 by the National Consultant Mr. Ashok Poudyel, assisted by Ms. H. Qwist-Hoffmann and Mr. N. Maskey.
A large part of the work consisted of the screening of all available information for actually valid data. Subsequently all valid data were systematically grouped and analyzed. At the end of his rather short assignment, the National Consultant provided the first draft/rough outline of the re-grouped and analyzed PRA data.
2.3.2 Reporting
In April 1997 the CTA, Mr. F.M.J. Ohler and the APO, Ms. H. Qwist-Hoffmann, agreed to gather all existing and presentable information concerning the 1995/96 PRA and planning exercise in order to present the results in a Field Document that would focus on both the results of the PRA itself (i.e. detailed descriptions of the watershed), and of the participatory planning (i.e. the Community Action Plans).
This would then also permit to assess the quality and quantity of the PRA exercise, as well as of the consistency of the Community Action Plans with the results of the PRA.
The original PRA data, such as maps and diagrams, will be presented separately as an appendix to this report.
<section>6</section>
3. Results of the participatory rural appraisal
3.1 Population and demography
3.2 Farming systems and land use
3.3 Crops and agricultural production
3.4 Livestock and animal production
3.5 Forests and natural resources
3.6 Summary of soil and water resources problem areas
3.1 Population and demography
3.1.1 Population, community and household size
3.1.2 Ethnic and caste composition
3.1.3 Literacy
3.1.4 Socio-economic status and food sufficiency
3.1.5 Sources of income
3.1.6 Sanitary habits
3.1.1 Population, community and household size
The 26 PRA sites located within the Bhusunde Khola watershed and spread over 4 VDCs (Ampipal, Chhoprak, Harmi and Khoplang), did not actually cover the whole watershed (see para. 2.2.1). The total population of the Bhusunde Khola watershed has been estimated at 12,000 persons, but precise data are not available.
The total population of the villages and hamlets covered by the 26 PRAs was reported to be 8,851 persons, of which 4,554 (51 %) were male and 4,297 (49%) female (see Table 2). However, it should be noted that the actual number of persons and households in the 26 PRA communities may be more than the number reported. In Majghaon (Chhoprak #7), for instance, a significantly larger number of households was reported in a Participatory Evaluation and Replanning exercise that took place in October 1996.
The total number of households was 1,566 and the average family size 5.7 persons.
The size of the PRA communities^ (6) varied from 95 persons in Chiuribot (Chhoprak #2) to 620 in Ratdanda (Ampipal #5) with an average of 340.
^6 A PRA community consists of one ore more hamlets, fo