<title>A glimpse of local technology knowledge for comprehensive watershed management in China (GCP/RAS/161/NET)</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The Participatory Watershed Management Training in Asia (PWMTA) program GCP/RAS/161/NET recognizes the importance of local/indigenous technology knowledge and practices for watershed management in the Tropics and Himalayan region of Asia as paramount to their sustainable development process. New technologies and practices can be successful if they are well ingrained into the local/indigenous knowledge systems.
With this background, the PWMTA program commissioned action research studies in its member countries for documenting the Local/Indigenous Technology Knowledge (L/ITK) for Watershed Management (WM). This document is a result of this study in China. This is also an introduction to farmer's innovations in China. It is in reality a first effort ever made in this direction for watershed management even though many local/indigenous ideas can be found scattered in different sources. It is hoped that the countries will carry forward this work by further research as well as validation, by ingraining it into their development programs and include it in their education and training programs related to natural resources management in the upland watersheds.
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Professor (Mrs.) Wu Deyi of the IRTCES, Beijing for organizing this work. The compilers have also done this work in a short time. For this I extend my highest appreciation to the study team i.e. the compilers of this document. It is a path breaking work as it brings to the forefront a glimpse of the rich local knowledge base of the people in China. They have also captured the ideas very well in sketches. I also thank Mr. Ranjan Kumar Poudyal (PWMTA) for the lay out of this document and the PWMTA team for all their support.
I hope all concerned with the development of the upland watersheds as well as those related to training, education and research in natural resources management will take note of this work and carry it forward by making use of it in the development process as well as by further documenting more local/indigenous techniques available with the Chinese people. The document is also being made available to the Asian region as many of the ideas are also applicable to other countries in similar situations.
June., 1998
Prem N. Sharma
Regional Coordinator/Chief Technical Advisor
(PWMTA) and Sr. NRM/WM Advisor (FARM)
FAO (UN), Kathmandu, Nepal
<section>2</section>
Introduction
This document is an attempt at documenting Chinese farmers' innovations consisting of some ancient, some evolved over long time, some contemporary techniques perfected by the local people to the level found today and some adaptations of old ancient and recent techniques made by the farmers to suit their needs. Thus this presentation of indigenous technology knowledge (ITK) is termed here as local technology knowledge (LTK). This documentation can only be a fraction of what is available in China hence it is only a glimpse into enormous indigenous technology knowledge that exist in China for watershed management (WM). However, since it is the first attempt at documenting the techniques as related to the multi-disciplinary field of comprehensive watershed management in China, it is hoped that this will generate interest among the mainstream watershed management researchers. Thus we expect them to enrich this collection by further work. Also this documentation is only
preliminary and more details on many of the ideas may be needed before they can easily be transferred to other locations. We hope the interest generated will help further detailed study by national professionals and other concerned persons in China.
The participatory watershed Management Training in Asia (PWMTA) program of the FAO (UN) financed by the Netherlands, commissioned this study to its focal institution, the International Research and Training Center on Erosion and Sedimentation (IRTCES), Beijing, China. The IRTCES made a team of professionals from various parts of the country consisting of the compilers of this document for the study. After a review of the study by the PWMTA it was presented in the Regional Workshop of the PWMTA on ITK/WM held in China in Nov. 1997. After which the study was finalized and edited by the PWMTA to this present form.
The compilers of this study contacted various professionals in the field who helped in this documentation. Also county level soil and water conservation research and extension station staff scouted some of the ideas being practiced by the farmers and interviewed them to identify the techniques. Thus the methodology used was a combination of contacts with field professionals as well as filed scouting by the compilers. Some of the compilers have also been practicing some of the techniques detailed here e.g. the sluicing and siltation method of small dam construction is a well-accepted technique by now which evolved over ages. The engineers have tries to standardize it by now. The warping of floodwaters for soil conservation and soil fertility improvement is an adaptation of natural processes of low land formation by siltation. Similarly some of the ancient agronomic, cultural and animal husbandry practices are very prevalent in China today. All these have a potential of being
used or adapted to other countries also.
For the ease of presentation, the local WM technologies in this document are categorized as below:
· Peoples' Participation Strategies
· Water Harvesting
· Gully Control
· Soil and Water Conservation
· Orchard Management
· Crop Production Management
· Vegetable Farming Management
· Poultry for Income Generation
· Fish Raising for Income Generation
· Soil Fertility Improvement and Mulching
· Crop Processing and Storage
· Feed and Fodder
The presentation of the local techniques in this document follows the above categories of subject matters in the subsequent pages.
<section>3</section>
People's participation strategies:
An innovative approach to participatory watershed management
Several forms of cooperative efforts for small watershed management
An innovative approach to participatory watershed management^1
^1 Compiles by Mr. Guo Tingfu, Ministry of Water Resources, China.
This approach is used by farmers in eroded mountainous area. It is to attract farmers, their groups and institutions to participate in watershed management of large waste barren lands or gullies. Marginal farmers use their barren land and labor as stock shares to join in the management of the watershed. The rich farmers, groups and institutions invest their financial resources as shares to join. For instance, one share is Yuan 2, 000 (US$ 1= Y 8.25) which is worth 300 labor days one share. Both the financial resources and labor are used for watershed management. The economic benefits obtained through it are allocated according to quantity of shares held by a person. This approach provides employment opportunity for rural persons, promotes farmers' participation in watershed management on a cost/benefit basis and attracts investment for watershed management.
Several forms of cooperative efforts for small watershed management^2
^2 Compiled by Sun Boyuan, Department of Water Resource and Soil Conservation, Xinzhou Prefecture, Shanxi Province)
Cooperative efforts headed by a household
Cooperative efforts between a scientific unit and a production unit
Cooperative efforts between a collective am households
Cooperative efforts headed by a household
It is headed by one household who works in cooperation with several households. Each household provides labor input. The township and village administration provide materials. These inputs are transform into stocks. For instance, 1000 Yuan (approx. US$ 12.10) is equivalent to a stock which also equivalent to 00 labor days. The benefits generated from the small watershed produce are distributed according to the amount of stocks held by family.
Cooperative efforts between a scientific unit and a production unit
Scientific Watershed Management Ltd Co. are established which set up national stock collective stock and individual stocks. National stocks are partly used for investment in watershed management, and partly for scientific research purposes. The collective stock is converted into inputs as materials and labor. Individual stock is converted into individual inputs such as labor and machines.
Cooperative efforts between a collective am households
In order to concentrate on small watershed management, the village committee will distribute a certain area of waste land to each individual household to manage. The village collective will input seedlings and provide subsidy for land preparation while each household provides labor input. Individual households will be responsible for management and maintenance of the land. The economic benefits will be shared by the village collective and its households on a 50% basis.
<section>4</section>
Water harvesting:
Check dams built by the sluicing siltation method
Check dams built by the sluicing siltation method^3
^3 Refer: Chinese National Committee on Large Dams (edt.), 1979. Dam construction by the Chinese people.
History and development of sluicing-siltation dams
Advantages of sluicing-siltation dams
Construction technique
Layout of the borrow areas
Sluicing-siltation operation and division into mud ponds
Construction of levees
Soil loosening and mud mixing
Control of mud concentration
Draining embankment water
History and development of sluicing-siltation dams
Embankment construction by sluicing-siltation method was developed after Chinese liberation in 1949 by the Chinese laboring people for building dams. This is for storing water, for warping, and for soil and water conservation in the basin of middle reaches of the Yellow River. These are severely eroded areas. Since the founding of New China, soil conservation has been carried out by the masses on a large scale. Thousands of gullies and ravines were checked by building check dams by people's labor on farm lands for stable yields. As a consequence of this, both the flood water and silt pouring into the Yellow River have reduced. In the process of check dam construction, the people developed a new method of constructing dams, i.e. sluicing-siltation method, which makes full use of local favorable topographic conditions and natural materials such as sand and loess. In fact, it is a further development of the ancient Chinese experience of diverting water to sluice soil for the
purpose of forming farmland and building levees. Such type of dams has the advantages of simple construction, less labor, high efficiency, low cost and good quality.
According to statistical data, since 1970 a total of more than 6, 000 check dams and storage dams higher than 15 m have been built by sluicing-siltation method in the northern parts of both Shaanxi and Shanci provinces. The soil materials suitable for applying this method can vary from sand to light, medium and heavy silt loam as well as gravelly clay.
The popularization of building dams by sluicing-siltation method has promoted the development of agricultural production and water conservation in the region. It has also played as active role in the control of soil erosion and harnessing the Yellow River.
Advantages of sluicing-siltation dams
The method of building earth dams by sluicing-siltation method has higher labor efficiency as compared with the rolled-fill method. It has greatly reduced the amount of work in loading, hauling, unloading and compaction of soil materials. This it leads to 3-6 fold increase in the efficiency of labor. In the sand blown areas of northern Shaanxi, still higher efficiency was achieved as the water for sluicing the soil materials could be diverted by gravity flow. In Zizhou County, a 36 m high Dianshi Earth Dam of 49 ha-m volume was completed in 5 months by a small number of local laborers.
The quality of this type of dam is good. Sluicing-siltation earth dam is built of high concentration slurry, which consolidates to become a homogeneous dam with the escape of excess water from the embankment. After completion, the dry density of the embankment can quickly attain the value as required in the design, and is generally over 1.5 t/m^3 as per a field study.
The cost is low which includes the cost of labor, pumping water, power consumption, soil loosening by blasting, management and so on. The costs are 60 % cheaper than that of a rolled-fill dam.
Construction technique
Preparation works
Acquisition of water source and storing of water by building cofferdam
Selection of the pumps
Treatment of foundation and abutments
Preparation works:
The location of the dam is decided based on near to possible water source, topography and geological conditions. The preparation of the construction work mainly involves the acquisition of water source, storing of water by building cofferdam, selection of pump units, stripping of foundation and abutments etc.
Acquisition of water source and storing of water by building cofferdam:
To guarantee the supply of water for construction use source of water with adequate supply is needed. If it is possible to get water from a reservoir, or a canal, or a spring upstream of the dam site and also at a high location, diversion of water by gravity flow is preferable to the use of pumps. If water diversion by gravity flow is not possible or the base flow in the river does not provide the necessary quantity, it would be necessary to build a cofferdam for storing water. The amount of water required may be taken as the volume of the embankment. Based on the needed storage, the height of the cofferdam can be fixed. In general, the cofferdam for storing water may be incorporated with the upstream levee of the embankment used as a check dam or a storage dam.
Selection of the pumps:
This involves mainly the selection of the suction head and the capacity of the pumps as well as their corresponding power equipment. The suction head of pump depends on the anticipated height of the dam, the elevation of the borrow area and its distance from the dam, and should generally exceed the design dam height by 20-30 m so as to ensure a sufficient gradient of the mud-mixing ditches and mud-conveyance canals. In case that the pumps available do not satisfy the requirement of the suction head, several lift pump stages are needed. The pump capacity is decided upon in accordance with the construction schedule and the daily volume of earthwork. However, a discharge of at least 30 t/hour has to be provided for efficient work. Separate units are to be installed on both banks if the slurry is sluiced from both banks
Treatment of foundation and abutments:
The treatment requirements of foundation and abutments of a sluicing-siltation earth dam, apart from those in common with the rolled-fill earth dam, differ accordingly to the construction features, purposes of the dam, and height of the dam. The popular practice for check dams below 20 m height is to clear only the top soil from the foundation and abutments to a depth of 0.1-0.3 m. If the abutment is too ^- steep, it should also be flattened suitably. For storage dams and higher check dams, be it a rock foundation or a pervious over burden layer of sand and gravel, one or two cutoff trenches should be excavated in the foundation upstream of the dam axis, and then backfilled by the sluicing-siltation method. This is to prevent erosion at the interface or to prevent serious leakage or piping.
In northern Shaanxi and western Shanci, most of the sluicing-siltation earth dams were built on thin alluvia of pervious sand and gravel, which serve as natural drainage blankets and facilitate consolidation of the embankments to achieve stability quickly. The rivers there carry large amount of sediments, which are mainly composed of fine silt loam. After one or two floods, the sediments deposited behind the dam would naturally form a thick blanket for controlling seepage flow. Therefore, check dams for warping or small storage dams in the area of serious soil erosion do not need any treatment of the foundation so long as the foundation is stable and pervious.
Layout of the borrow areas
Choice of the borrow areas
Arrangement of the mud ditches
Choice of the borrow areas:
The borrow areas are classified according to the purposes i.e. whether the soils serve for sluicing-siltation of the embankment or for placing the levees. When supplying the soils for placing the levees, the borrow areas are to be located on places with gentle slope, and preferably on both upstream and downstream of the dam for shortening the hauling distances.
The borrow areas used for sluicing-siltation should be as near as possible to the dam, generally over 20 m higher than the design height of the dam so that the natural gradient might be used to mix the slurry uniformly. When the condition permits, the borrow area should be chosen in combination with the spillway excavation to reduce the volume of earthwork.
Arrangement of the mud ditches:
The functions of the mud ditches are to first mix the slurry and then convey it to the embankment where it is to be deposited. Therefore, the ditches are divided into two sections: those for preparing the slurry at the borrow area are referred to as mud-mixing ditches and those for conveyance ditches are called canals.
Popular experience shows that the mud-conveyance canals should be narrow, deep, steep and long so as to increase the sluicing effect of the water and also the capacity of carrying the soils. When water is delivered from a 3" - 4" pump, the ditch may have a depth of 1 m and a bottom width of 0.5 m. The flowing slurry may easily be stumbled in a shallow ditch and may spill over it. The mud-mixing ditches should also be deep and narrow, with a length of 70-130 m and a gradient of 15-20 %. The alignment of the mud ditches may be changed with the locations of the borrow areas and the siltation ponds as well as with the topography and gradient of the ground.
The exit section of a mud-conveyance ditch should be kept parallel to the side levees and at a certain distance from them, lest the side levee might be damaged by the slurry flow. If the slurry pond is wide, two or more exits from the mud-conveyance ditch are used alternately to prevent the concentration of thin slurry at one place.
Sluicing-siltation operation and division into mud ponds
Sluicing-siltation operation
Sluicing-siltation from one bank
Sluicing-siltation from two banks
Intermittent sluicing-siltation
Continuous sluicing-siltation
Division of construction surface into mud siltation ponds
One mud pond on the entire construction surface
Two or more mud ponds
Sluicing-siltation operation:
Sluicing-siltation operation may proceed from one bank or from both banks of a gully (or rivulet or river) according to the locations of the borrow areas. The operation may also be intermittent or continuous according to the sluicing requirement.
Sluicing-siltation from one bank
Sluicing-siltation from one bank: this applies in the case where the borrow areas are all located on one side of the river/gully on which dam is to be built. With this type of operation, the mud-conveyance ditches usually extend a long length and the gradient of the mud surface on the embankment will be great, causing the water to accumulate at the farther end of the embankment. The water should be drained away on time for facilitating the consolidation and stability of the dam.
Sluicing-siltation from two banks
Sluicing-siltation from two banks: in this case borrowing, mixing and conveying of soil materials proceeds at both banks, enabling the slurry to flow into the embankment from two opposite directions. The two fan-shaped slurry surfaces will overlap each other. This may avoid the escaped water to accumulate at one place for a long time to the advantage of the embankment stability. Such kind of sluicing operation should be used wherever the locations of borrow areas and the pumping equipment permit. If the mud siltation pond (a section of the dam dyke) is too wide, the exit section of mud-conveyance ditch should be shifted from place to place to prevent the escaped water from collecting at one place and to prevent the gradient of the mud surface from varying.
Intermittent sluicing-siltation
Intermittent sluicing-siltation: This means that the sluicing-siltation operation will stop when the mud deposited on the embankment has reached a certain thickness (say 0.5-1.0 m). The work of sluicing-siltation for the next layer will not resume until the moisture content in the mud is reduced through infiltration and evaporation and the mud surface is hard enough to be trodden upon by men (in other words, the moisture content has been reduced to liquid limit or below it). The time interval between the successive sluicing-siltation operation is called the intermittent period. It depends on the soil properties, air temperature, layer thickness for one sluicing-siltation operation, drainage condition and others, and may take at least 1-3 days or at most 10 days. This kind of operation is usually applied for low dams or for the dams being constructed to a height for flood retention. Successive roving operations of sluicing-siltation at multiple mud ponds also fall within the
category of intermittent sluicing-siltation (sketch below).
Continuous sluicing-siltation
Continuous sluicing-siltation: This refers to the method of sluicing-siltation at daytime but suspended at night. The method is often used to ensure the dam safety during flood season in those cases where there is a need to hastily raise the dam height for flood retention due to both a large volume of embankment and watershed area.. For the purpose of ensuring the safe construction of the dam, the daily rate of heightening the dam by sluicing-siltation should be uniform over the construction surface of the embankment and not too fast. According to the statistical data of completed dams in northern Shaanxi and western Shanci, the rate is controlled within a certain limit depending on the soil types as shown in Table 1. If the rate of construction is high, to ensure the dam stability a wide side levee is necessary which may render a large amount of labor to be uneconomical. The 34 m, high Moshigou Dam with a 47 ha m silt volume was completed in only 5 months with a daily rate
of sluicing-siltation height of 0.23 m/day averaged over the entire construction period. Soil testing of samples from deep bore holes one year after the end of construction revealed that the embankment water content had decrease from 39% at the initial stage to 22-26%, and the dry density increased from 1.35 t/m^3 to 1.53-1.66 t/m^3. The embankment is good in quality and has been in performing normally under reservoir operation.
Table 1. Permissible rate of construction (height/day)
Soil type
Permissible rate of sluicing-siltation (m/day)
Daily rate
Averaged over the construction period
Maximum daily rate averaged over 10 days
Sandy Loam
Light silt loam
Medium silt loam
Division of construction surface into mud siltation ponds
The construction conditions, construction schedule, the size of construction surface and the intermittent period determine the number of mud siltation ponds.
One mud pond on the entire construction surface
One mud pond on the entire construction surface: This is usually applied to low dams. Only two side levees are needed to be built, one on upstream and the other on downstream The sluicing-siltation operation is simple and labor saving.
Two or more mud ponds
Two or more mud ponds: When the construction surface of the dam is wide, it is often necessary to arrange two or more mud ponds by building one intermediate levee or more parallel to the dam axis. The sluicing-siltation operation is carried out in turn on these mud ponds. If the water level behind the dam rises rapidly or it is necessary to retard the flood temporarily, the upstream mud pond can be raised by continual sluicing-siltation operation so as to first form a small cross section. At the same time, the sluicing-siltation is done at the other mud ponds in order to raise the embankment surface like a ladder. Near the top of the dam, the embankment surface is changed to having only one mud pond. It is necessary to reduce the mud ponds where ever possible to reduce costs and increase efficiency.
Construction of levees
Methods
Width of side levee
There are two kinds of levees. The function of the upstream and downstream side levees is to retain the slurry and help in the stability of the embankment slope during the construction stage. Therefore, the width, and construction quality, and the stability of the dam.
Methods:
By roller-fill method
By compacting with spades
By filling loose soil
By sluicing siltation
Levees are of trapezoidal cross section and are placed layer by layer. The outer slope of the side levees is combined with the embankment outer slope. The inner slope is 1:
1 or at an angle of repose. The intermediate levees generally have a slope at an angle of repose. During construction the outer slope of the side levee can be steeper than the embankment outer slope with the toe of the side levee placed on the embankment slope line. It is then trimmed after the end of sluicing-siltation operation. The building of the levee should be kept higher than the slurry surface preferably not greater than 1 m. The upper side levee should overlie the lower one by a width greater than two-thirds of its bottom width.
By roller-fill method
By roller-fill method: This method can ensure good construction quality of the levee It is mainly used in the building of a storage dam or a large check dam by continual sluicing-siltation operation. During compaction, the layer thickness is about 0.3 m and the dry density is controlled at greater than 1.5 t/m^3
The top width of the levee should be kept more or less constant, being neither too great at one time nor too small at the other so as to prevent the occurrence of defects.
By compacting with spades
By compacting with spades: This method avoids the hauling and compaction of soil materials borrowed from the bank. The deposited soil in the mud pond after consolidation is directly dug and placed on the levee and then compacted by beating with the spades. The levee build by this way has a steep slope and small width. This method has ease of digging in pervious soils such as sand and sandy loam. The mud should not be dug close to the levee but 1 to 2 m away only.
By filling loose soil
By filling loose soil: The levee is built of loose soil hauled onto the dam by machine or by manual labor. The loose soil is compacted by the hauling vehicle movement. Such method is simple and needs less labor, but the levee is of poor quality. The intermediate levees or the side levees of small check dams are built in this way.
By sluicing siltation
By sluicing siltation: The side levees can be built by sluicing-siltation method. The mud pond is arranged on the side levee and generally sandy soils are used. This method has the advantage of decreasing the labor cost of hauling soils and omitting the compaction procedure. However it is not applicable in cohesive soils.
Width of side levee:
The upstream and downstream side levees are the component parts of the embankment slopes. In the course of building a dam of light to medium silt loam by continual sluicing siltation, the embankment with a certain depth and range of 'fluid-like' slurry zone needs the support of side levees for maintaining the its stability. Hence, the side levee is required to have a suitable width and good quality construction. The statistical data show that the earthwork of the levees constitutes generally 20 percent of the total volume of the entire dam. The width of the side levee depends on the dam height, soil type, concentration of the slurry, rate of sluicing-siltation operation, the volume of 'fluid-like' slurry, and topographical and geological conditions. Generally speaking, the side levee can be narrower in case of gentle embankment slope, pervious sandy soils, high concentration slurry, narrow valley and slow rate of construction, and vice versa. Higher dams of different soils,
the top width of a side levee can be calculated by the following empirical formula:
b = 0.005 (n+ a) (1+ v) Hp
in which
b = top width of side levee (m);
n = gradient contained in 1:n;
v = the rate of construction (m/day);
H = the design height of the dam (m);
a = empirical coefficient;
p = clay content of the soil material (%).
Soil loosening and mud mixing
In the course of mud mixing, it is necessary to loosen the soil in time and to dump it into the mud-mixing ditches with spades so as to ensure the slurry to have an adequate concentration. Soil loosening may be done by manual excavation, blasting, bulldozers, water jets and other methods. The number of laborers needed for taking care of soil loosening and mud mixing depends on the condition of borrow areas, usually 1 person for every 2,000 liters of water pumped are needed along the mud mixing ditches. Sufficient loose soils should be dumped continually into the ditches as water flows along. The ditches are cut deep into which the soil is dumped. At the outlet of the mud-conveyance ditch, special persons are needed to measure and control the concentration of the slurry.
Control of mud concentration
The mud concentration will affect the labor efficiency and construction quality of a sluicing-siltation earth dam. A high concentration of slurry means a high labor efficiency and low cost. Slurry of low concentration will not only result in high cost and low labor efficiency but also cause a high pore water pressure and a large zone of 'fluid-like' slurry in the embankment slope. On the contrary, if the slurry is too high in consistency its flowability is poor, and the gradient of the mud surface on the embankment may be so great as to affect the construction of the levee. A suitable concentration of slurry can be identified as in table 2.
Table 2. Identifying the mud concentration of light to medium silt loam
Color of slurry
Corresponding moisture content %
Corresponding soil volume transported by per unit volume of water (M^3/m^3=T)
Concentration of slurry
Light Yellow
Low
Dark Yellow
Suitable
Blackish
High
where
T = soil volume transported by per unit volume of water (m^3/m^3);
rn = density of slurry (t/m^3)
G = specific gravity of the soil particles,
G=2.71 for medium silt loam;
G=2.7 for light silt loam;
G=2.69 for sandy loam.
rd = Average dry density of the soils in the borrow area (t/m^3);
w = Average moisture content of the soils in the borrow area (in decimal figures);
rw = Density of water (t/m^3)
According to measured resulted of some sluicing- siltation dams made by the testing and researching group of sluicing-siltation earth dam in Shaanxi and Shanci, a suitable concentration of slurry prepared from sandy loam, and light to medium silt loam should have a moisture content of 37-41%, and a corresponding soil discharge T of 2.32-2.6 as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. measured mud concentration of some sluicing-siltation dams
Name of dams
Soil material classification
Clay
content%
Mud concentration (average value)
wet density m t/m^3
Water content
W
Soil volume transported by per unit volume of water T m^3/m^3
Taoerzui
Light silt loam
Shangliu-jiachuan
Ditto
Dianshi
Ditto
Dongfeng
Medium silt loam
In order to ensure a suitable concentration of the slurry during construction, it is necessary to take regular samples for measurement from the exit section of the mud conveyance ditch. If undesirable value is detected, the persons in charge of the mud mixing must be notified immediately and must increase the concentration of the slurry.
Draining embankment wate
Dewatering embankment surfaces
Laying dry soils on the slurry surface
Using filters
Special internal drainage facilities
After the slurry flows onto the construction surface of the embankment, the water moisture will escape through natural evaporation and seepage. In addition to this, some effective measures are necessary to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of the embankment slurry with an objective of promoting the stability of the embankment.
Dewatering embankment surfaces:
After the slurry enters the mud ponds on the embankment, a part of the free water will be squeezed out by the weight of the soil grains and will accumulate at the low places in the slurry surface. It can be dewatered away from the dam by using siphon or small pump.
Buried pipes may also be adopted i.e. st