<title>Inter-Regional project for participatory upland conservation and development (Field Document 6/97) - NEPAL - A framework for a participatory economic evaluation of improved goat production by women groups in the Bhusunde Khola watershed</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
During the field work we received invaluable assistance from Mr. D.R. Chapa (National Expert in Local Capacity Building) without whose assistance the setting up of this framework would not have been possible. Mr. B.R. Dhungana (Assistant District Soil Conservation Officer), and Ms. Durgha Lamsal, Group Promoter and former member of the 'Mahila Chetna Samaj' Women Group in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed, also gave very valuable assistance. Furthermore, we also feel grateful to Mr. B.K. Rimal (National Project Director and District Soil Conservation Officer) for his support and advice.
1. Ms. Lise Andreasen. Associate Professional Officer, Agroforestry and Urban Forestry. Forest Resources Division, FAO. Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome. Italy.
2. Ms. Helle Qwist-Hoffmann. Associate Professional Officer, Watershed Management. GCP/INT/542/ITA, "Interregional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development". c/o FAOR Katmandu, Nepal.
<section>2</section>
1. Project background
The Nepal component of the "Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development", GCP/INT/542/ITA carries out pilot activities in the Bhusunde Khola watershed in Gorkha District in the Middle Hills of Nepal.
The development objective of the project is improved management of upland catchments through people's participation in all stages of the development process. The Department of Soil Conservation is the counterpart agency responsible for project implementation.
Major field activities of the project include:
Participatory planning - from planning and implementation to monitoring and evaluation, and re-planning of activities.
Conservation activities - gully control and landslide treatment, support to nursery establishment, conservation plantation, tree distribution (slightly subsidised by the project), and support to handing over of forests to the communities;
Small scale infrastructures - water source protection, trail improvement, and small scale hill irrigation;
Farming systems improvement - mainly training in technical subjects like compost making, livestock development, etc., but also distribution of partly subsidised fruit trees, fodder trees, grasses and leguminous cover crops;
Income-generating activities - livestock development, improved fruit trees and commercial vegetable farming are popular income-generating activities, especially among women's groups;
Training - in all aspects related to the above subjects, to natural resources management, and to local capacity building.
Development of tools and techniques - test of techniques like PRAs, participatory monitoring and evaluation, etc for participatory natural resources management.
The implementation of activities are through user groups. At the moment (March 1997) the project works with about 70 user groups, of which 35 are women's groups. By working in groups rather than as individuals the farmers are able to better cooperate and make best use of their skills and resources. They exchange views and ideas to choose best available options. Working together in a group also has social values like giving the women freedom to talk and be away from the house. Groups have more bargaining power than an individual. Most groups in the Bhusunde Khola have a saving scheme as part of their constitution giving them the freedom to start up new activities and take up loans without collaterals.
Goats play a very important role in the farming system in the Bhusunde Khola watershed. They are kept for security (savings), cash income from sales, and for social and cultural functions. The Bhusunde Khola is a food deficit area (only 20% of the farmers are food self-sufficient), and the earnings from selling goats can be used to buy grains in food deficit periods. (It is said that one family is able to buy enough grains to feed the family by selling four large goats per year).
Another important aspect is the social prestige that the goats gives. Especially the women feel that the improved goat production has given them acceptance and higher recognition in the community.
But why economic analysis?
In 1995 two women's groups requested genetically improved Jamunapari bucks; three groups are on a 'waiting list' to purchase an improved buck; two groups have just got new bucks.
With the increasing scarcity of land and manpower (due to seasonal migration and a higher percentage of children attending school) proper planning become more crucial. The improved goat keeping is one of the activities that comes up most often (especially among the women's groups) in the PRAs conducted in the area, and as the experience in the area with the improved bucks and how to exploit the growth potential of the crossbred offspring is limited, there is a felt need in the project to investigate the economic aspects of this popular activity.
Given our findings and the interest by the farmers in improved goat production we would expect the farmers to have an interest in participating in an economic analysis as it would be focused on their potentials and possibilities. As the farmers furthermore through their saving schemes are somewhat accustomed to evaluating monetary values, a participatory economic analysis or evaluation should be possible to a certain extent.
We are, however, fully aware of the problems in trying to use economic analyses in a subsistence economy - as for example when trying to put monetary value to factors that do not have easily assigned economic values (like time and fodder).
<section>3</section>
2. Objective and rationale
The objective of the study is to set up a framework for the participatory economic analysis of genetically improved goat production. The rationale for this is to provide a tool for farmer groups in their decision-making process concerning the goat production, and as part of this to get a tool to evaluate the use of resources in the system, in particular fodder trees and labour.
The framework is designed to be used in workshops with user groups, interested or already involved in using genetically improved bucks in their goat production.
<section>4</section>
3. Method
The framework has been set up mainly based on information collected via informal interviews, supplemented with information available in the project. The case (around which the framework is set up) is based on interviews with the 'Mahila Chetna Samaj' Women's Group of Tutunga village, Choprak VDC, ward # 8). Additional interviews were made with farmers who use local bucks in their goat production, as well as with farmers from other groups who paid for the service of the improved buck belonging to 'Mahila Chetna Samaj'.
Factors in improved goat production were identified and validation of costs and benefits was discussed. A framework for partial budget analysis was set up as a model to organise and discuss the impact of these factors in participatory workshops.
Discounting is not regarded in the economic analysis, for the following reasons:
1. the values of the identified factors are to a high degree guesstimates
2. to keep it simple
3. the relatively short time span of the goat keeping activity
<section>5</section>
4. The project area
The Bhusunde Khola watershed covers a densely populated area of 3,200 ha, with an estimated population of about 12,000 people. Households are clustered in small hamlets, widely scattered with upland fields, forests and grazing land in between. Most households are subsistence farmers. The dominant ethnic groups are the high caste Brahmins and Chhetris.
The topography of the Bhusunde Khola watershed is steep, with approximately 70% of the area having slopes steeper than 30%. The altitude is between 500 and 1,700 m. Annual rainfall is about 1,900 mm.
The farming system:
Nearly all households are concerned with subsistence agriculture, but only about 20% of the fanners are food self-sufficient; the rest is suffering from 3 to 9 months of food deficits. The average landholding per family is less than 1 ha, with less than 0.2 ha arable land per person.
The farming system is a fairly integrated cropping system. The major crops are paddy, maize, mustard, upland rice, wheat, millet, potatoes, and soya beans (mainly grown on the edges of the paddy fields). Trees are grown on the borders and terrace risers. The preferred fruit trees are oranges, mango, guava, jack fruit and pomelo. Pineapple, banana and papaya are widely cultivated close to the house. Most farmers have their own kitchengarden, covering the daily needs for vegetables like cauliflower, Chinese radish, onion, garlic, gourds, pumpkins, and coriander. In areas with adequate water supply some user groups (primarily women's groups) have started commercial vegetable production, mainly in the dry season, where they have some labour surplus.
Animal husbandry plays an important role in the farming system. The average number of livestock per household is about eight (Mori, 1995). During the last few decades the overall number of livestock has been decreasing and the trend has been towards stall feeding, mainly due to scarcity of grazing areas, and the higher number of children (traditionally the herders of the livestock) attending school. An average family has a pair of oxen (for ploughing), a cow (for religious reasons), one or two buffaloes (for meat, milk and ghee (a kind of butter)), and two to four goats (for savings, and cash-in-hand from sale of meat). Most households also keep chicken (for meat and cash), while pigs (for meat and cash) are raised only by the Kumal and Baram castes (Singh, 1996).
<section>6</section>
5. Goat production in the project area
Goat production is traditionally the women' responsibility and the goats are often their property. The negotiations for price and the actual selling is done by the man in the house, but the decision concerning whether to sell or not, as well as how to use the income from the goats is mainly taken by the women.
Fodder and water collection and the preparation of kudho (a mix of maize, kitchen waste and rice husk) is women' work. However, the men do assist in lopping branches from taller trees.
As far as resources allow, the goats are fed morning and evening with kudho all year round. From April through November, the busiest period in the agricultural year, the goats are stallfed, mainly with tree fodder as cut grass is prioritised for the buffaloes for their milk production. From December through March, the middle of the dry season, controlled grazing is practised often with a combination of cutting tree fodder in the field (and in forest patches, if available).
Table 1. Feeding practice and feed sources over the year (m = morning, d = daytime, e = evening)
Paus Magh-Falghun Chaitra-Baisak Jesd-Asaad Shraavan-Bhaadra Aashivan-Khardik Maarg
Dec -Jan
Feb - March
April - May
June - July
Aug - Sept
Oct - Nov
stall feeding + controlled grazing
stall feeding + controlled grazing
stall feeding
stall feeding
stall feeding
stall feeding
kudho (m+e),
fodder trees, grasses and herbs (d)
kudho (m+e),
fodder trees, grasses and herbs (d)
kudho (m+e)
fodder trees (d)
kudho (m+e)
fodder trees, corn residues (d)
kudho (m+e)
fodder trees (d)
kudho (m+e)
fodder trees (d)
The goats get from 1 to 3 offspring, 2 in most cases, 3 is more rare. Most farmers prefer 1 or 2 offspring as prospects of 3 surviving kids is low. Kidding is usually once a year during December through March. The kidding interval can be shorter, down to 8 months, depending on the health and feeding of the does. As the pregnancy period is 5 months the most busy time for the buck is around September.
Young bucks (approx. 6 months) are slaughtered for religious purposes. 'Peak slaughtering seasons' are the traditional Dasain Festival in October and the smaller but still very important Chaitra Dasain in April. Male goats meant for meat production are castrated as 3-4 months old. The wether (kashi) is usually kept to the age of two years and sold or slaughtered, or sold at an earlier age to others for meat production. Female kids are kept either for breeding or for meat.
The goats are sold on-farm, cash in hand. Information on where there is a goat or meat for sale is easily spread by word of mouth. When to sell depends on the financial situation of the household. If the kid looks healthy, it is generally considered to be more profitable to keep it for meat production for a longer period than to sell it early, unless there is an acute need for cash. In this way the goats also serve as a reserve of capital. The meat is popular and is eaten with the skin. There is no surplus production of goat milk. What is produced is fed to the kids and there is no tradition for the use of goat milk for human consumption.
Goat droppings are collected and used as manure in the fields. The goat manure is highly valued, but it is said that the effect is mainly seen the year after it is applied to the field.
Main health problems of the goats were mentioned to be intestinal worms, mouth problems (possibly 'sore mouth' or contagious ecthyma) and dysentery. Worms can be treated with tablets every 6th month and the mouth problem and dysentery is usually treated with local/herbal medicine. Veterinary service is limited in the area, and in most cases not affordable for the farmers.
<section>7</section>
6. The role of trees in goat production
Trees on private land provide the major part of the green fodder given to the goats.
Trees are widespread over the farmland with different densities. On khet land (levelled terraces irrigated at least part of the year), the density of trees is low (about 6 trees/ha), on bari land (sloping terraces without irrigation), the density of trees varies from 168 trees/ha close to the house down to 92 trees/ha far from the house (Mori, 1995). The average agricultural holding is estimated to about 1 ha (0.98 ha/household in Mori (1995)). Depending on the proportion of bari and khet land the average household should, in theory, have more than 100 trees, although not all are suitable for fodder.
Some areas of marginal land, kharbari, has a relatively high tree density (252 trees/ha), but the extent of kharbari land is limited. In parts of the watershed there are small patches of forest. Some of these areas have been, or are in the process of being handed over as community forests. The use of the forest products in these areas is restricted according to the forest management plans for the respective areas.
Estimates given during the interviews indicated that 10-15 trees were needed for one goat (up to 25 trees for a buffalo) to provide fodder for a year. At the end of the dry season most trees that can be used for fodder are heavily lopped and most often only the stem and larger leafless branches remain.
The most popular fodder tree species in the project area are Tanki (Bauhinia purpurea), Badahar (Artocarpus lakoocha), Khanayao (Ficus semicordata), Kutmero (Litsea monopetala), Gaayo (Bridelia retusa), Ghidari (Pieris formosa), Bakaaino (Melia azedarach) and Chilaune (Schima wallichii).
CASE - Mahila Chetna Samaj (Women's Awareness Society)
Mahila Chetna Samaj is located in Tutunga village in the South-eastern part of the Bhusunde Khola watershed. It is a women' group with several activities, one of them the purchase of a genetically improved Jamunapari buck for the use in the goat production of the group members.
The improved buck was requested and arrived in Tutunga in June 1995.
The project assisted the group with organising the purchase and provided the transport. The prize of the buck was 600 NRs. The group members paid only 4 NRs each as the project, in this particular case, subsidised the prize with about 75%. (This practise is now changed to be in accordance with the District Livestock Office's policy of subsidising only the transport).
The buck was kept and taken care of by one member (the Secretary of the group). Payment for a service of the buck was made to the 'buck-keeper' group members could pay with fodder, while non-members had to pay 10 NRs.
The buck was kept for 18 months and then sold as meat for 2,400 NRs.
As members felt the group was too big, it split up into two groups and shared the' 2,400 NRs. The Mahila Chetna Samaj group has set aside 1,000 NRs for purchasing a new buck, while the new group, Janchetna, has decided to pay for the use of the buck purchased by Mahila Chetna Samaj.
The secretary kept a record of the services provided by the buck in the period from July 1995 to January 1996. In this period 62 services was recorded of which 16 was provided to non-group members' goats. Only one service was not successful. The major part resulted in two offspring, the rest in one. Unfortunately the record has not been kept for the total period of 18 months.
The benefits of using an improved buck were reported to be a higher price for kids already sold, and that the offspring still being kept were bigger than the local of the same age, thereby raising expectations for a higher sales price.
At first, no changes in the goat keeping practise were mentioned during the interviews. However, later discussions brought the following observations concerning differences between offspring from the improved buck and offspring from local bucks:
· improved offspring need higher feed intake to perform a high growth rate (15 20% was mentioned);
· improved offspring need more caretaking than local goats;
· improved offspring need higher 'living standard' to perform well (e.g. better, cleaner and drier sheds);
· there are indications that the improved offspring are more susceptible to diseases.
Most farmers regenerate trees on their land from wildlings. Rates from 7-10 seedlings/wildlings planted per year (with a survival rate of 4-5) seems to be common practice. The newly planted seedlings/wildlings are usually protected with a kind of tree-guard and thorny branches. The tree planting is usually carried out by the men in the household.
<section>8</section>
7. Economic analysis of improved goat production
Inputs and outputs of goat production in general, and the improved goat production in particular were identified by the farmers during the interviews. These factors will be used in illustrating the framework for economic analysis.
Figure 1. The inputs and outputs of goat production in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed
Sporadic data concerning the costs and benefits related to these inputs and outputs were also discussed during the farm interviews. For most inputs and outputs there is no market price valid for the area and if a 'real' economic analysis of the goat production was to be made at this stage, estimates and best guesses would have to be made. Below is a list of the inputs and outputs as discussed with the farmers. As can be seen from the list, this material is not adequate for validation of the various factors important in the goat production, and would need further investigation. Inputs and outputs include both non-marketed and non-monetary values in addition to market inputs and outputs.
INPUTS
Type of input
Estimated value
Labour
If the farmers were in a more commercial farming system anticipated market prices could have been put to labour, whereas for the subsistence farmers in Bhusunde Khola we have to use opportunity costs to represent the values that the farmers place on labour. Reliable estimates of opportunity costs are not readily available.
The minimum government wage is 65 NRs/day, but this is unlikely to be paid for unskilled women' labour. A few women work now and then for the nursery at the base camp and get paid 40-45 NRs/day, depending on how hard the work is. This could be an expression for the market price of women' labour in the area.
Tree fodder and grasses
Labour for collection. A big 'bundle or a dhoko (basket) per goat were given as rough estimate. This could take from 10 minutes up to an hour to collect, depending on the distance the women would have to walk.
The interviewed farmers had 5-6 bigger animals and 2-6 goats. Their estimation of time spent for fodder collection varied from 1 hour during the dry season (mainly free grazing) to 2-4 hours in the rainy season. There is no tradition for buying fodder (hence, no market price), but if the trees were not lopped they might have an alternative use as firewood or timber which should be considered if a value was to be estimated.
Grazing/herding
Labour for herding. Goats from 3-4 households often graze together under the control of one herder.
Water
Labour input for collecting water is minor as the goats do not consume large amounts (especially compared to cattle and buffaloes).
Improved sheds
Labour
Local materials
De-worming tablets
10-12 NRs every 6 months
Local medicine
Labour for collection of herbs and preparation of the medicine.
Buck service
10 NRs per service for non-members
OUTPUTS
Type of outputs
Estimated value
Cash
Cash
300 NRs/dahrni of meat (1 dahrni = 2.5 kg)
Price estimates for
6 months old kid: 1,500 NRs
9 months old kid: 2,000 NRs
12 months old kid: 3,000 NRs
Besides income, the on-farm availability of meat might have an effect on the family's nutritional status.
Manure
Goat droppings are highly valued as manure. In trying to estimate the value, the cost of chemical fertilisers that equals the nitrogen value of the goat manure could be used. A rough estimate of the amount of manure produced by 1 goat/year was given as 3 muri (a special basket), 50-100 kg.
Food security
Socio-economic factor of high importance for decision-making and should be considered in an economic analysis on household level
Savings
- do -
Social prestige for the women
- do -
Partial budget analysis
As a means to establish the basis for planning changes, or for evaluating the consequences of already made changes in farm practices that affect only part of the farm, partial budget analysis can be a useful tool. The idea is to set up a budget including only factors contributing to changes in the activity under consideration. The activity in question is evaluated by the changes in extra costs, costs saved, revenue foregone, and extra revenue, as well as by evaluating the non-quantifiable often socio-economic benefits or losses. Partial budgeting is most often used to evaluate the effects of relatively small changes in farming practices. It only shows the extra expenses and the extra revenue resulting from the change. It is a relatively easy procedure, although it requires validated estimates of inputs and outputs (losses and gains) of the activity being considered.
In the Mahila Chetna Samaj case, as well as other groups involved in goat production and organised in the same way, partial budget analysis can be carried out on two levels: 1) at the group level for the purchase of the improved buck, and 2) at the household level for the investment in improved goat production.
1) Analysis at group level for the purchase of the improved buck:
The group' purchase of an improved buck can be regarded as an activity of the group separated from the goat production of the individual women. A partial budget for this activity will make it possible for the group to compare the benefits and costs. If a partial budget is set up for other possible activities, comparisons can give indications on what will be most interesting for the group to develop according to the objectives of the group.
The group kept the last buck for 18 months, but the present expectations are one year. The estimated values in the budget should be for the same timespan.
Table 2. An example on how to set up the partial budget for a group purchase of an improved buck, and suggestions for which factors to include in the evaluation. All values are supposed to cover the period the buck is expected to be kept.
LOSSES (comparative additional losses)
GAINS (comparative additional gains)
Extra costs
Costs saved
· purchase of buck
? NRs
· possible factors?
? NRs
· transport, if paid by group
? NRs
· kudho?
? NRs
· tree fodder?
? NRs
· special treatment during adjustment phase and possibly later?
? NRs
Revenue forgone
Extra revenue
· alternative use of fodder trees needed for extra fodder, e.g. for fuelwood or timber?
? NRs
· income from selling buck after 1 year
? NRs
· income from selling maize used for extra fodder (kudho)?
? NRs
· payment for mating services, cash
? NRs
· Alternative use of the money invested in the improved buck?
? NRs
· payment for mating services, fodder
? NRs
Total losses
xxxx NRs
Total gains
yyyy NRs
Extra profit = total additional gains - total additional losses
Other considerations:
· Possibility of increased outcome from improved goat production
· Prestige for the women in the group
· Veterinary services
· Risks related to serious illness/death of buck; low 'service level' of the buck
Extra costs
Extra expenses or costs that occur in relation to the planned (or already made) change. In this case it would be the cost of investment in the improved buck plus the extra expenses to extra fodder and caretaking, compared to using local bucks.
Revenue foregone
Any revenue which would (or could) be received under the present farming practice, but which would not be received under the changed practice. In this case it would be the income
'lost' (not received) from the alternative use of the fodder and/or the 'extra profit' from enterprises that money invested in the buck could have been used for (e.g. commercial vegetable production).
Costs saved
Costs saved as a consequence of the changes, i.e. costs that are avoided as a consequence of the change.
Extra revenue
Any revenue which is received as a result of the change in the farming practice. In this case it is profit from mating services and from selling the buck.
2) Analysis at household level for the use of an improved buck:
Table 3. An example on how to set up a partial budget for the production of improved goats. The factors included under the different headings are suggestions derived from the case (using the service of an improved buck paid for either with fodder or cash). All values are supposed to cover the full period the goats are expected to be kept until selling/slaughtering.
LOSSES (comparative additional losses)
GAINS (comparative additional gains)
Extra costs
Costs saved
· payment for buck service?
? NRs
· possible factors?
? NRs
· extra kudho?
? NRs
· extra labour for caretaking?
? NRs
· extra tree fodder?
? NRs
· improvement of shed?
? NRs
Revenue forgone
Extra revenue
· alternative use of fodder trees needed for extra fodder, e.g. for fuelwood or timber?
? NRs
· difference in price when selling the offspring
? NRs
· income from selling maize used for extra fodder?
? NRs
Total losses
xxxx NRs
Total gains
yyyy NRs
Extra profit = total additional gains - total additional losses
Other considerations:
· Improved food security
· Prestige for the women
· Veterinary services
· Fodder situation
If 'total gains' are greater than 'total losses', the budget obviously indicates that the proposed change is profitable. In a situation where 'total losses' exceeds 'total gains' and the 'extra profit' becomes negative the farmer might still be in favour of the new activity or practice due to the importance of the so-called 'other considerations'. For example, if the group activity 'purchase of improved buck' shows a negative result the expectations of increased outcome from goat production at the household level might be important enough to keep the interest in the 'purchase of improved buck' group activity. (For further reading on partial budgeting, refer to Dillon and Hardaker, 1993).
The difficult task in this exercise is to get good estimates of the technical and financial values used in the calculations. The framework described in the following section is an attempt to set up a process with maximum farmer involvement where optimal estimation of these factors is an important part.
<section>9</section>
8. The framework for a participatory economic evaluation process
In the previous section it is discussed which factors (costs and benefits) and which values (e.g., for labour and fodder) are necessary for economic analysis or evaluation in the case of improved goat production. The participatory approach to the economic evaluation is crucial because:
· This should be the farmers' analysis - for the benefit of the farmers, so their involvement from the start is necessary to secure that the focus of the analysis is kept on the important issues,
· validation of inputs and outputs as well as giving importance to socio-economic factors can only be done by the farmers.
The participatory process divided into four phases is scheduled below.
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Phase IV
Preparation stage
Participatory workshop
Observation stage
Participatory workshop
Information collection:
Group discussions on:
Farmers record (observe) at the household level:
Analysis and discussions:
· target group(s),
· inputs/outputs
· the amount of inputs and outputs in the system (fodder, labour, manure, meat).
The findings from the observations at household level should be discussed; simple calculations could be set up and the economy of improved goat production be discussed
· inputs & outputs
· the yearly variation in activity and input/output relations (seasonal fodder supply, labour constraints)
To get the seasonal variations in the system this could be done both during the rainy season and during the dry season
Based on the economic evaluation other subjects could be discussed:
· constraints
· changes in input/output and management practice with improved offspring
· possible improvements in management practices
· benefits
· values of the inputs and outputs
· the importance of fodder trees
· the interrelations of the activity within the farming system
· the importance of non-quantifiable factors (e.g. labour, socio-economic values)
· farmers' goals (expectations) for the goat production
· individual goals for the activity
Planning of the future process of analysis
Actors:
Actors:
Actors:
Actors:
Field staff - with inputs from individual farmers and/or the User Group(s)
The User Group(s) facilitated by field staff
Individual farmers
The User Group(s) facilitated by field staff
Phase I
The activities during the first phase is to identify an initial base of information on the goat production in the farming system, as well as information on farmer' goals and expectations to the use of improved bucks. During this initial field survey a rough identification of most important inputs and outputs of the goat production, and the changes in practice under improved goat production is made, as well as investigations on the importance of social values.
The field interviews carried out in relation to this report and the case study described earlier is a part of this phase.
The information collected in the field on the inputs/outputs makes it possible to plan the next activities in the process and to evaluate the feasibility in analysing the goat production as an activity separate from the rest of the farming system. Based on the information collected as well as the information already available in the project, outlines for the participatory workshop can be set up.
Phase II
A participatory workshop with the user groups involved in improved goat production should be organized with the purpose of initiating the economic evaluation process.
Inputs/outputs
The first step is to further develop and verify the rough identification of inputs and outputs and to discuss if/how the improved goat production have changed their management practices, changes in the amount of inputs needed, and gains in output.
The major constraints in goat production should be discussed. Problems related to certain periods of the year should be identified. It might be useful to list the activities in an 'animal calendar' (possibly with listings of animal diseases, required labour inputs, needed and available fodder resources).
Costs/benefits
The next step is to start validating the inputs and outputs. Some socio-economic values can hardly be given a monetary value, but their importance should still be discussed and noted as they might be most important in the decision-making.
When validating inputs and outputs two aspects are to be considered:
· the unit prize (e.g. what is the cost of labour - one hour or one day)
· the number of units (e.g. how much labour, hours or days, is spent on an activity