<title>National Forestry Action Plan. Antigua and Barbuda. Main Report. CARICOM/FAO/ODA. Tropical Forests Action Programme</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
1. This report presents the findings and recommendations of a Country Mission to Antigua & Barbuda which was conducted 13 October to 23 November, 1991. The mission was a fifth in a series being undertaken for the Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) in nine countries of the eastern Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
2. In Antigua and Barbuda, the mission was supported by the German Institute for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), ODA-UK and FAO in recruiting a multi-disciplinary team of eight international consultants covering a range of specialities (Appendix I).
3. The aims and objectives of the mission were to identify the principal causes of deforestation and to facilitate preparation of a 20-year forestry development plan which would ensure that:
i) appropriate land use policies are put in place to protect and conserve the national forest estate;
ii) all existing natural forests are managed in perpetuity on a sustained yield basis in accordance with sound environmental management techniques;
iii) optimal use is made of reforestation and agroforestry techniques to provide environmental protection where required on both State and private lands and to assist in the rural development process;
iv) high priority is given to the identification and legal protection of special biological interest, through the establishment of legally constituted Nature Reserves;
v) primacy of forest conservation, sustained yield management and protection of the environment are the overwhelming responsibility of the forest manager in seeking to optimize the utilization of products from the forest;
vi) provision is made for the protection of wildlife and for forest recreation facilities in the form of legally constituted National Parks.
4. The exercise was carried out with the close collaboration and active participation of national counterparts (Appendix I) from relevant public agencies and representatives of the private sector and NGOs. Working papers were prepared for circulation and for use as reference documents. These papers were used by the author in synthesising the main report in which the situation of Antigua and Barbuda was analyzed according to the five TFAP priority areas (see regional overview document). Based on these analyses, and group discussions of the major issues during the mission, strategies and action programmes were developed to attract technical assistance and investment with the aim of optimising the contribution which forestry and tree cover can make to sustainable social and economic development of the country.
5. The report, therefore, represents a National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP) for Antigua and Barbuda. The NFAP recognises the limitations of the country's economy but stresses the long-term benefits of environmental management and development. The Government endorsed the proposals before they were presented to the public for discussion at a National Round Table held in June, 1991. The active and meaningful feedback generated allowed the draft NFAP document to be strengthened and made available to the international community for consideration of technical and financial support. It is hoped that this International Round Table will be convened towards the latter half of 1993.
6. Reference should also be made to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA, July 1993.
Forestry development initiatives at the regional/subregional level - regional project proposals 01-05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of the European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest research - special report as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map 1. General map of the East Caribbean region showing the location of Antigua and Barbuda
Source: Country Environmental Profiles. CCA/IRF/USAID
<section>2</section>
2. Background Information on Antigua and Barbuda
2.1 Natural Regions and Ecosystems
2.1 Natural Regions and Ecosystems
7. Antigua and Barbuda is located between latitude 17°0' and 17°45' N and longitude 62^040' and 62°54' W (Map 1), and has a total land area of 440 km^ 2 (Antigua 280 km^2, Barbuda 160 km^2) and population of 65,200 (Antigua 64,000, Barbuda 1,200).
8. The climate is tropical-maritime, with a mean annual temperature of 26°C, varying from 16.7 to 28.3°C. Average annual precipitation is 1100 mm, but variable throughout the year; the islands are susceptible to severe droughts (as well as earthquakes and hurricanes). The main rainy season is from October to November.
9. The geology of Antigua consists of a hilly limestone zone to the east, a central plain of marl and clay overlying volcanic material, and volcanic mountains in the southwest rising to 410 m above sea level at Boggy Peak (Map 2). The topography is mainly gently undulating with slopes of 11 - 20 degrees. Shallow soils overly volcanic material and the limestone, over most of the island. Barbuda, which lies 32 miles north west of Antigua, is a low-lying coral limestone island, no higher than 60 m in the east, but with a large coastal lagoon enclosed by a long sand spit in the west.
10. Like most of the Caribbean Islands, Antigua was completely wooded when "discovered", but following European settlement it was almost totally cleared to make way for cultivation of sugar cane and cotton. With sugar as the dominant crop for over 300 years, Antigua & Barbuda's natural landscape was undergoing irreversible changes which created negative pressures on wildlife habitat and watershed areas. The demise of the sugar industry in the 1970's led to the abandonment of sugar cane plantations. Presently, Barbuda is affected by the overgrazing of animals which have continually removed valuable vegetation protecting watersheds.
11. As described by the Wildlife/National Parks consultant, the ecosystems of Antigua and Barbuda range from evergreen woodlands, xerophytic woodlands, scrublands, grasslands to mangrove forests, herbaceous swamps, saltponds, sandy beaches, rocky shores, coastal lagoons, sea grass beds, coral reefs, coral reef outcrops and oceanic islands and rocks. Ecosystem variety is enhanced by the presence of caves in the north-eastern limestone area and by natural seasonal drainage channels, streams, potholes and ponds. Barbuda's giant coastal lagoon is unique to the Region and together with its extensive tidal flats, sand bars, underwater sand dunes, salt ponds, cliffs, caves and "highlands", all providing special habitats for wildlife. Wildlife species associated with these natural ecosystems have developed physical, behavioural and physiological adaptations.
Map 2. Location Map for Antigua
Map 3. Location Map for Barbuda
<section>3</section>
3. Review of the Forestry Sector
3.1 Role of Forestry and Trees in the National Economy
3.2 Relevant Development Policies
3.3 Legislation
3.4 Administration
3.5 Constraints Affecting the Subsector's Development
12. With the decline in agriculture, the area of land under tree cover has increased over the years, and various reports estimate that there are 9,254 ha of woodland (33% of Antigua's land area) and 10,000 ha of scrub growth (36% of the land area). Table 1 below classifies the woodland areas of Antigua.
Table 1. Woodland Composition for Antigua
WOODLAND
AREA
(hectares)
WOODED AREA
(percentage)
Moist Forest
Dry Woodland
Cactus Scrub
Mangroves
TOTAL
Table 2. Woodland Distribution for Barbuda.
CATEGORY
AREA
(hectares)
LAND AREA
(percentage)
Wooded Areas
Mangrove Swamp
Scrub & Rough Grazing
13. The species composition and structure of the vegetation has been described (Beard, 1949) and although all the forests are of secondary growth, they contain a number of valuable timber species, including mahogany (Swietenia mahagoni) and white cedar (Tabebuia pallida). On the present sites, however, they are unlikely to produce quality timber, as most of the forested lands are only suitable for conservation purposes.
3.1 Role of Forestry and Trees in the National Economy
14. As a small open market, forestry and related activities can play only a supplementary role in the Antigua and Barbuda economy which is primarily driven by the tourism industry, in the wake of the steady decline of agriculture.
15. Between 1977 and 1990, the country experienced strong economic growth, supporting one of the highest per capita standards of living among the OECS countries in the Eastern Caribbean. During this period, real GDP increased from EC $158.8 millions to EC $355.9 millions, an average growth rate of 6.2% per annum. However, the Government has been running a fiscal deficit for a number of years, having financed its capital investment programme through loans, a significant portion of which are denominated in foreign currencies. The Government has therefore announced austerity measures which include a freeze on public sector spending, more effective revenue collection and divestment of assets.
16. Nevertheless, tourism continues to grow, contributing an estimated 60% to the economy. However, it has placed considerable demands on the local infrastructure, particularly water and sewage, and crowded out alternative investment opportunities, while severely stressing the use of the natural environment for construction of additional resort facilities. The Forest Economics consultant has pointed out that changes in the market place can be affected by changes in societal values and a variety of products in the developed countries have suffered because they were determined as being "environmentally unfriendly". The tourist industry is dependent on visitors from the metropolitan countries where this discrimination is particularly rife. In these circumstances, it would be prudent for the Government to ensure that natural resources which enhance the tourism plant are well protected and, at the same time, properly utilised.
17. In this respect, the GOAB needs to adopt an enlightened approach to the planning, development and use of land and to ensure that such a policy is strictly observed. Under such a policy, forestry's role should be recognised as being essential to the protection and conservation of critical resources, such as water, and complementary to developing the tourism product, as well as the quality of life of the people of Antigua and Barbuda.
18. Other benefits which can accrue from forestry in Antigua and Barbuda include:
i) rural employment opportunities;
ii) shelter from the desiccating effects of the prevailing winds;
iii) land stabilisation and soil conservation/amelioration;
iv) production of fence posts, forage for livestock, fuelwood, fruits, nuts and other products;
v) protection of natural habitats and wildlife for recreation, scientific research and tourism.
19. Despite the reputed benefits of the tourism industry, the Government should concentrate its attention on all opportunities for economic growth and optimal use of natural resources. In tandem with other national strategies, the role of forestry and trees needs to be heightened to become an integral contributor in maintaining living standards on a sustained basis.
3.2 Relevant Development Policies
20. In pursuing the development of the tourist sector, the GOAB appears to have neglected agriculture and the need to maintain stability in all sectors. Indeed, there seems to have been an absence of clear Government policies to guide the society's growth and improvement. However, it is pleasing to report that within the last two years a Ministry of Planning has been established in Antigua & Barbuda with the responsibility for developing a National Development Plan.
21. This new Ministry has initiated an integrated planning process which will take some time to fill the existing void. Such planning will take account of the country's present economic circumstances, the nature of its physical resources, its human resource capabilities and requirements in order to determine fundamental national strategies on which future growth can rely. In the short-term, the austerity measures announced must be equitably implemented as soon as possible, along with appropriate measures to ensure cohesion among the various sectors. The proposed NFAP recognizes these needs, and its multi-disciplinary approach is recommended for adoption by the Government in planning for the country's future.
3.3 Legislation
22. Antigua and Barbuda's forest legislation (The Forestry Act, Cap. 99) dates back to 1941 and provides for, inter alia, the establishment of reserves, exploitation permits, clearing and afforestation on private lands, etc. The Forest Regulations deal with permits, control of fires, cattle trespass and survey and demarcation of Forest Reserve boundaries. Unfortunately, the Act and Regulations are no longer enforced, and uncontrolled exploitation (mainly wattle for fish and lobster traps) has been practised. However, the forest cover is still relatively intact, but species diversity has been impaired.
23. The Legislation consultant has discussed related legislation and described various deficiencies existing in the enactments supporting resource and environmental management. Related legislation includes:
the Land Development and Control Act (1977) for physical development planning;
the Fisheries Act (1983) for protection of mangroves and habitats of fauna and flora;
the National Parks Act (1984) to protect and develop ecological resources;
Antigua Agricultural Development Corporation Act (1978) to stimulate agriculture (including forestry) and undertake commercial management.
24. The deficiencies identified underscore the need for new legislation in the forestry and water resources areas, together with amendments to other legislation, especially the National Parks Act, as well as the need for regulations to provide guidance for environmental managers. Amendment to the National Parks Act should include consolidation of existing laws relating to coastal zone management and declaration of protected areas, viz. Beach Protection Act (1957), Beach Control Act (1959), Marine Areas (Preservation and Enhancement) Act (1972), Public Parks Ordinance and the Botanic Gardens Ordinance.
25. New and amended legislation should provide for: structured integrated environmental planning and control; statutorily determined time-frames for completion and approval of national and sectoral plans; and adequate financial and legal incentives for sound agroforestry development in the country. This latter element is required to facilitate agricultural credit and loan facilities to encourage farmers. The consultant also advocates umbrella environmental legislation as is found in the Bahamas, Jamaica and St. Kitts and Nevis, and which is actively being considered in Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago. Such legislation should empower the Historical, Conservation and Environmental Commission as a statutory body with the necessary functions in this regard.
26. Many of the statutes cover the same areas, while many issues are not covered by any existing legislation. As in other CARICOM countries, this situation has arisen because legal development has tended to deal with single issues, due to perceived necessities or pressing concerns. This patchwork of fragmented and uncoordinated legislation is not rooted in any central theme and has contributed to confusion among agencies, non-enforcement of regulations and a dilution of responsibility. It is hoped that the GOAB will be committed to halting environmental degradation and to improving the quality of life for its citizens as well as the quality of enjoyment for its visitors. It should therefore move urgently towards rationalization of environmental legislation to ensure adequate provisions for protection and development of forests, natural habitats and wildlife in the interest of conservation of the environment and biological diversity.
3.4 Administration
27. Forestry falls under the portfolio of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing and is staffed by a professional officer, two sub-professionals, four forest rangers, a nursery technician and a trainee. This is notable growth for the country which has never had the benefit of such capacity, even in colonial days.
28. The GOAB now needs to structure this team into a proper Forestry Division by providing it with clear functions and responsibilities and with adequate facilities to perform these duties effectively. This will require the promulgation of an official forest policy which, until now, has been notably lacking.
3.5 Constraints Affecting the Subsector's Development
29. As emphasized in many reports during the past decade, the main constraint is the lack of a coherent land use policy to guide the allocation of land for suitable uses and to provide security of tenure for those in dire need of adequate land space. Consequently, there has been no survey nor gazetting of forest reserves for fifty years since the Forestry Act and hence, there is no forest estate in Antigua and Barbuda. The absence of a land use policy has prevented the development of afforestation schemes and will be a serious hindrance to promoting agroforestry in the country, if not addressed urgently. At the same time, there is no forest policy nor the financial means to support one. However, the Government has moved steadily to provide trained personnel, although it has taken many years.
30. A potential constraint to the implementation of the NFAP could be the profusion of overlapping jurisdictions caused by the existing enactments. However, the dialogue initiated by the Historical, Conservation and Environmental Commission and the apparent coordinated support engendered by the TFAP suggest that suitable rationalization of these overlaps can be achieved.
<section>4</section>
4. Overview of Priority Areas
4.1 Forestry in Land Use
4.2 Forest Based Industrial Development
4.3 Fuelwood and Energy
4.4 Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
4.5 Institutions
4.1 Forestry in Land Use
4.1.1 Land Use Distribution
4.1.2 Watershed Management
4.1.3 Agroforestry
4.1.4 Forest Management and Silviculture
4.1.1 Land Use Distribution
31. Present land use distribution is difficult to quantify reliably, as various estimates differ. The Land Use/Watershed Management consultant has summarized previous percentage estimates as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Antigua & Barbuda Land Use Distribution.
CATEGORY
ANTIGUA LAND AREA
BARBUDA LAND AREA
Woodland
Mangrove Swamp
Scrub/Rough Grazing
Improved Pasture
Agriculture Crops
Settlements
Tourism
Airfields
Reservoirs
32. Rural land use activities include beekeeping, livestock, small cropping, large specialty farms and part-time farms. The main crops are pineapples, cotton, onions, pawpaw, coconuts and flowers. There is considerable opportunity to increase local production of many tropical fruits and to reduce imports and outflows of foreign exchange. This strategy can be integrated with a livestock improvement programme to reduce imports of meats. The feed for livestock would be enhanced by fodder and crop residues, while the animal litter would enrich the soils and improve their productivity.
33. Numerous reports on land use have pointed to the need for watershed rehabilitation to enhance the ground water storage, reduce wind desiccation, increase fodder and fencing material. NGOs have become active in advocating tree planting for food production and amenity of the countryside, employing women and community groups as well as school children. In this regard, the Pan American Development Foundation and the Environmental Awareness Group have embarked on a small scale agroforestry project, working with about twelve communities to establish fruit orchards, live fencing and woodlots.
34. In Antigua the Government owns sixty percent of the land, some of which is currently rented to small farmers on a year-to-year basis. This system is practically feudalistic and offers no stability to the farmers who need to feel that they have a stake in their nation. It should be replaced with longer term leases and also by a system of freehold through a land settlement scheme based on economically sized parcels. Indeed, GOAB should consider divesting its farms and stations to the highest bidder, or to staff and workers in part settlement for voluntary redundancy. This would relieve pressure on the Recurrent Budget, while allowing inflows of cash to support necessary investments or loan repayments.
4.1.2 Watershed Management
35. Antigua and Barbuda depends mainly on surface runoff for its water needs: domestic, industrial, irrigation and recreational. Existing ground water resources are extremely limited, and reportedly are threatened by excessive use, as well as potential contamination from salt intrusion, chemical pollutants and inadequate sewage and waste disposal facilities. While efforts are in train to cope with this problems, attention needs to be given to measures that will reduce siltation of reservoirs and maintain the land in a conducive condition for optimal percolation and soil water retention.
36. There is very little data on surface runoff and infiltration, but over the years, the change in vegetation has obviously affected the volume of runoff and the transport of sediment into the reservoirs and ponds. Additional water sources include wells, the desalinization of sea water and cisterns. Total demand is 3 - 4 mgd (million gallons per day) of which actual consumption was 2.42 mgd in 1987. Delivery capacity is 2.2 - 3.8 mgd, there being considerable loss from broken pipes. Future demand is estimated at 5.1 mgd in the year 2000 and approximately 8.0 mgd in 2020. A proper water plan is needed particularly in view of the concentration on tourism and the increasing visits of cruise ships which combined, can take away from Antigua approximately 500,000 to 750,000 gallons of water per month.
37. While interest in watershed areas is primarily focused on water quality and quantity for storage sites, this may shift with increasing demand for food, to include crop production along with systems to minimize erosion and pollution. Roaming livestock have compacted the hillside lands and have browsed on cultivations and gardens.
38. As a possible solution for such a problem, it is recommended that agroforestry (multi-cropping) systems be used (eg. plant leucaena in contour hedges with cultivated grasses). Also, the regular illicit burning of rough grazing and woodland causes the spread of citronella grass and creates a greater problem for land rehabilitation. Before embarking on any watershed programme, a detailed plan of the area should be developed, including the location of agroforestry treatments, conservation measures, subdivision of farm holdings, protection of runoff and drainage channels.
4.1.3 Agroforestry
39. Within the framework of integrated land use planning and watershed management, the production of agricultural crops in combination with trees is an excellent conservation practice which offers the opportunity for sustained use of land to maximize returns, while protecting soil and water resources. In Antigua, agroforestry is not new, having been practised historically on large and small holdings. However, there is room for intelligent modifications to be applied according to local situations, and the approach is being proposed as a means of increasing land utilization and farm output, particularly fruits and livestock, primarily for the local market. In addition, meaningful proposals have been made for solving the problem of uncontrolled grazing, while providing forage, fencing, shelter and pasturage for livestock.
4.1.4 Forest Management and Silviculture
40. The present forest cover of Antigua is secondary forest, which has developed following the decline of the sugar industry. The most important species are Spanish oak (Inga laurina), silk cotton (Ceiba pentandra), mahogany, turpentine (Bursera simaruba), white cedar, and logwood (Haematoxylon campechianum). The mangrove forests consist of Rhizophora mangle. Avicennia nitida and Laguncularia racemosa. The dry scrub forests are dominated by Acacia spp. and Prosopis chilensis which were introduced and have become naturalized. Other introduced species include casuarina, neem (Azadirachta indica), tamarind (Tamarindus indica), leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala) and woman's tongue (Albizzia lebbeck).
41. It is not expected that the secondary forest will contain many trees of marketable size, and indeed there is no sawmilling capacity on the island. However, on the few plots of planted trees (neem, casuarina, leucaena, mahogany and white cedar), the growth has been promising, and annual measurement of selected stems on each site can be made by the Division's staff on a systematic basis. The data derived will assist in future determinations of species suitability and potential performance, should a large reforestation programme be adopted.
42. The Forestry Division can now be assigned responsibility for the management of Antigua's forest estate (when demarcated and gazetted) and for implementing a forestry programme based on the recommendations of previous studies and the NFAP. Existing forest cover and scrubland should be assessed in terms of the opportunity to conserve biodiversity or, where possible because of soil depth, to be reforested for the production of commercial timber and other products. This will entail air photo interpretation ground-truthing as a normal Divisional function, and preparation of maps and working plans. Forest rangers should be deployed in the field on regular patrols against illicit extraction, cattle trespass, clearing, fires, etc.
4.2 Forest Based Industrial Development
43. There is no industrial forestry activity apart from small scale charcoal production (largely for tourist and domestic recreation pursuits), extraction of wattle for fish and lobster traps, and some use of mahogany and white cedar for boat construction and fence posts. Estimates are that 1135 tonnes/year of charcoal and 4000 fence posts/year are produced, but there are no supporting data. The wood related manufacturing sector is also small, but again there are no records. Some opportunity may exist for handicraft material for carving, but technical training would be required to enhance growth in this area, particularly to utilize the limbs pruned from urban mahogany trees, some of which are dying or so badly mutilated that they should be felled and replaced. In addition, there is potential for non-wood products of agroforestry such as fruits and nuts, fodder and water.
44. Neem has been quite successful in Antigua and Barbuda and is widespread, mainly along road-sides or fence lines. It seems to have withstood the effects of hurricane Hugo in 1989, and attention should be given to determining the utilization prospects for this valuable fast-growing species. It is being planted elsewhere in the world and produces a wide range of products. These include the extract from the seed kernel and seed coat to yield neem oil, which is used as a lubricant, insect repellant and insecticide and in the manufacture of soaps and cosmetics. The seedcake residue is a valuable organic manure and cattle feed, while the root exudate has medicinal properties; the bark yields an industrial gum and the leaves are used as a green manure. The timber is also useful for lumber and fuelwood. Antigua and Barbuda has an excellent opportunity to investigate the industrial potential of this tree which could attract investment to the country.
4.3 Fuelwood and Energy
45. In spite of the relatively high per capita income levels in Antigua and Barbuda, there is still some consumption of charcoal. Unfortunately, no reliable records exist to indicate the levels of production and consumption. Charcoal burning does not presently constitute a threat to forest resources as suitable material is already available from pastures in the form of Acacia. This tree is a pest which threatens the health of cattle, as the thorns cause severe skin lesions, exposing the animals to the risk of disease. The GOAB is obviously aware of the continuing world energy crisis, and a case could therefore be made for encouraging the use of alternate sources of energy to save foreign exchange and to utilize natural products generated in the course of development initiatives such as agroforestry and watershed rehabilitation.
4.4 Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
46. In spite of its small size, the island possesses considerable wildlife and ecosystem diversity, much of which could enhance the growth of tourism but, more importantly, could awaken society's consciousness and pride in its natural environment. The Country Environmental Profile has recommended specific elements to be included in a system of national parks and protected areas, and these should be expanded to include coastal zones and forested areas.
47. Negative development pressure on the coastal zone can compromise the future ability of the country to sustain long-term socio-economic growth. All development proposals should be carefully reassessed to avoid adverse environmental impact. In the meantime, interim action can be taken to stimulate financing of resource management through collection of fees by local guides and monitoring of visitor levels and impact. Resource inventories are proposed under the NFAP projects.
4.5 Institutions
48. The main institutions concerned with forestry and environmental management include the Forestry and Fisheries Divisions, the Development Control Authority (DCA), the National Parks Authority (NPA) and NGOs, primarily the Environmental Awareness Group (EAG). Under the present tight fiscal policies, the public agencies are restricted in their ability to execute programmes. There are no funds available to undertake work programmes in forestry or agroforestry, to maintain monitoring of fisheries and fishermen, nor to expand the capability of the NPA.
49. The NGOs led by the EAG, are particularly knowledgeable and committed, and though lacking in resources, they are quite resourceful. They have played a significant role in raising environmental consciousness, although their confrontational approach has been met with official suspicion. However, they are now widely accepted in official circles that recognize the desirability of closer collaboration. This has led to the appointment of the Historical, Conservation and Environmental Commission (HCEC), aimed at improved dialogue and coordination within the public sector. However, the general institutional situation of the public sector is weak in implementing capacity and performance, and the NGOs are still skeptical that the Government will change its ways.
50. The NPA is backed by strong legislation which provides for inter-sectoral linkages to consult and cooperate with agencies having similar aims and objectives. It also has the power to delegate its functions and this could be done through the Barbuda Council, Forestry and Fisheries Divisions, the EAG and other NGOs.
51. The Barbuda Council was established by the Barbuda Local Government Act (No. 15, 1976), to manage Barbuda's government affairs. The Council consists of 9 members who elect a chairman and secretary from among them. Proposals for capital and special expenditure are required to be submitted to the Ministry of Home Affairs (Central Government) who forward them to the Ministry of Finance. The Council has powers to make bye-laws for development on the Island.
52. The conservation and development of forest resources can only be implemented by capable resource management institutions, properly staffed and financed, and provided with the necessary authority for efficient execution of their responsibilities. Unfortunately, the lead agencies in Antigua and Barbuda do not seem to be adequately equipped at present, and will require considerable strengthening to improve their management capacity.
53. With the recent return of the country's first professional forester, the Government now possesses the nucleus of trained forestry personnel. The Forestry Division can now be empowered with the following responsibilities and functions:
a) protection of the forest estate, wildlife sanctuaries and protected areas;
b) afforestation and forest management in watershed areas;
c) cooperation with private and Government agencies on urban forestry programmes (including the Botanical Gardens), forestry education and