<title>ADCP/REP/79/10 - Aquaculture Development in China. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Aquaculture development in </title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to China (2 May-1 June 1978), wish to express their appreciation to the Government of the People's Republic of China, to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and to the United Nations Development Programme for the opportunity to participate in the tour.
The members of the group are most grateful to their Chinese hosts for the admirable arrangements made for the tour, their friendliness and warm hospitality and above all the many opportunities provided to learn something of the tremendous advances made by the country after its liberation.
Special thanks from the group are due to officials of the Bureau of Foreign Affairs of the Ministry of Agriculture in Beijing, and especially to Mr. Li Yungkai, Director of the Bureau, and to Mr. Chang Shihjang, Deputy Director of the Bureau, who accompanied the group on their travels within the country and provided invaluable help in different ways. Despite the difficulties posed by the technical terms often used in discussions, the interpreters, Mrs. Shao Chingfen, Mr. Chian Nanfang, Miss Jen Hung, and Mr. Huang Yuyi, did an excellent job and the group is most appreciative of their assistance. The group also wishes to express its appreciation to the staff at the Chinese Embassy in Rome and particularly Mr. Chin Fengchu, China's Permanent Representative to FAO, for their kind assistance in the preparation of the tour.
All the members of the group contributed in some measure to the preparation of this report. Mr. V.O. Sagua, Director of the Kainji Lake Research Institute in New Bussa, Nigeria, spent several days in Rome after the tour and helped the Group Leader in compiling and analysing the information collected. Special thanks are due to him for his assistance.
TABLE OF CONVERSION FACTORS
1 mu = 0.066 ha (1/15 ha) = 0.165 acres
1 jin = 1 catty = ½ kg = 1.1 pounds
1 li = 0.576 km = ½ km = approx. 1/3 mile
1 Yuan = US$ 0.63
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The Study Tour on Aquaculture (including some aspects of freshwater fisheries) held from 2 May-1 June 1978 in China was the fourth of a series organized by FAO and the Government of the People's Republic of China. It was the first of the study tours in 1978 and was financed by UNDP as an inter-regional project (INT/77/017). In 1976, a professional study mission consisting of four FAO staff members visited China to study freshwater aquaculture and, among other things, recommended the organization of "study tours of inland fishery administrators and planners to provide them with new or different perspectives on their own problems".
Aquaculture being one of the areas in which China has made notable progress, there is widespread interest in studying the organization and practices followed and in determining their applicability in other countries. This study was therefore organized to provide directors of fisheries or senior fishery officials at the policy-making level from selected developing countries, with the opportunity to observe aquaculture development in China, the strategy of development, policy and programme planning mechanism, priorities and implementation. It was also intended to give the participants an opportunity to study the underlying principles of fisheries and aquaculture development, its relationship with overall agriculture development and integrated rural development, and the organizational aspects of fisheries development as a whole. The Government of China has been running a series of short-term training courses for technicians from selected countries, sponsored by the FAO
Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) and UNDP in the Guangdong Provincial Research Institute of Aquatic Products in Guangzhou. The study group was to be given the opportunity to visit this training centre to determine its suitability for training of technicians from the participating countries in different aspects of fish culture.
The study group arrived in Beijing on 30 April 1978 in two batches; one batch of 13 from Teheran and the other of five from Tokyo. The list of participants is given in Appendix 1. Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, FAO, acted as the leader of the group. Mr. Chang Shihjang, Deputy Director, International Division, Bureau of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, together with a team of interpreters, accompanied the study group during its travels in the country.
FAO had indicated in advance the main activities that the group would like to see. The host Government proposed an itinerary which included most of the items suggested. As additions were impractical owing to shortage of time or travel and accommodation problems, the proposed itinerary was followed with only minor alterations (see Appendix 2). Although the group cannot claim to have studied representative production units, the itinerary appears to have covered a fairly representative number of communes, production brigades and institutions of the advanced type that had distinguished themselves in their fields of endeavour. They clearly showed what is capable of being achieved under conditions existing in China and made it possible to evaluate the possibilities of applying Chinese experience in participating countries. The group's itinerary included visits in the provinces of Jiangsu, Guangdong, Hunan and Hubei and the municipalities of Beijing and Shanghai. State fish farms;
fish farms operated by communes, production brigades and production teams; hatcheries; integrated production of fish, crops and livestock; fish culture in lakes, reservoirs and rivers; fish culture and hydrobiological research; fishery education, training and extension services; fishing; fish transportation, processing and marketing, were the major activities studied by the group. Even though it was not possible to visit any of the coastal aquaculture sites, the group was briefed on the techniques adopted and was shown a film that described the operations in some detail.
Fig. 1 Map of China. The names of places visited by the study group are boxed
In all the places visited, the senior local official(s) concerned gave a general briefing, tracing the progress made in aquaculture since the liberation of China and the steady increases in production obtained since then. This was generally followed by long question and answer sessions through which the group was able to gather a fair amount of quantitative information. It was not possible to obtain many published or unpublished reports on specific projects and so the main source of information, on which this report is based, consists of the briefs and data provided during discussions. Since very often such information was given from memory (although only after sometimes prolonged discussions between the local officials), they should largely be considered only as quantitative approximations. They are, however, clearly indicative of the trends and general directions. Even though the interpreters assigned to the group were extremely helpful and efficient, the interpretation of
technical discussions, particularly of quantitative data, presented very considerable problems. In spite of these problems, and the size of the group, which tended to make most discussions somewhat formal, the observations and conclusions contained in this report are considered generally correct and valid. After each major visit, the group met to compare notes and discuss findings. Efforts were made to reconcile differences in understanding, particularly figures, by repeated enquiries from different sources.
In most institutions and places visited, the hosts invariably expressed their interest in learning from other advanced countries and asked the group to give their views and suggestions for improvement of their activities. Where the time permitted and the hosts seemed anxious to have the information, the leader and some of the members of the group described related activities in other countries and indicated possible adoption of improved practices under Chinese conditions. Provision of useful relevant literature for this purpose was promised. (The group leader has since furnished literature on a number of subjects.)
<section>3</section>
2. BACKGROUND TO CHINESE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
The long tradition behind Chinese aquaculture is too well known to be mentioned, but what is probably not so widely known is that many of the revolutionary changes that have taken place since China's liberation have contributed substantially to accelerated efforts for increasing production through fish farming. It has developed as an integral part of the overall farming system which, in the words of Chairman Mao, is the foundation for the development of modern China. The country has some 300 million mu of freshwater area, of which at least 100 million mu are suitable for fish farming. About 20 million mu of this is now under some form of cultivation; obviously, there are vast areas still available for expansion of freshwater aquaculture. It is not only ponds that are used for fish farming; larger bodies of water such as natural lakes, reservoirs, canals and small rivers and their tributaries are also used for fish cultivation. Collective ownership has made the management of
such large water areas for fish farming feasible. Coastal aquaculture is still rather undeveloped, but oyster and sea-weed farming have been introduced are expanding fairly rapidly. Apparently there is great scope for accelerated production in this sector as well, but the major emphasis appears to be on the expansion and intensification of freshwater aquaculture.
Out of about 200 economically important species of fish occurring in China, it is reported that the following 25 (including introduced species) are cultured in ponds:
Silver carp
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Big head carp
Aristichthys nobilis
Grass carp
Ctenopharyngodon idella
Black carp
Mylopharyngodon piceus
Mud carp
Cirrhina molitorella
Common carp
Cyprinus carpio
Crucian carp
Carassius auratus
Wuchan fish
Megalobrama amblycephala
Black bream
Megalobrama terminalis
White Amur bream
Parabrama pekinensis
Freshwater Yellowtail
Xenocypris argentea
Small scale
Plagiognathops microlepis
Tilapia
Tilapia mossambica
Tilapia
Tilapia nilotica
Mandarin fish ^1^/
Siniperca chautsi
Spotted Mandarin fish^1^/
Siniperca scherzeri
Snakehead^1^/
Ophiocephalus argus
Grey mullet^1^/
Mugil cephalus
Red-eyed mullet^1^/
Mugil soiny
Chinese sturgeon
Acipenser sinensis
Japanese eel
Anguilla japonica
Loach
Misgurnus anguillicandatus
Rainbow trout
Salmo gairdneri
Round snout
Distoechodon tumirostris
Red eye
Squalibarbus curriculus
1^/ Cultured only on a very limited scale
National statistics of aquaculture production were not available but local production figures from some of the areas visited were obtained. From these and other relevant information, it would appear that the earlier FAO estimate of a total production of 2.5 million t, including production from ponds, lakes, reservoirs, rivers and coastal areas, is valid.^2^/ It was reported that over 20 thousand million fry of freshwater fishes are produced and distributed in the country. On a country-wide basis, production is reported to be 50-60 jin/mu in open waters and 250-300 jin/mu in ponds.
2^/ This was confirmed by further enquiries during a later visit to China by the group leader in 1979
Fish culture is undoubtedly more developed in areas with controlled irrigation and rural electrification. Free or cheap sources of water and electricity have contributed to improvements and some amount of mechanization of farming operations. Roughly half of the country appears to have such favourable conditions. Climate has also influenced the development of aquaculture and accounts for some of the regional differences, in the extent of fish culture operations. The southern part of the country, which has a warm climate, allows a year-round growth of fish conducive to high productivity. In the northern part, the growing season is restricted to only 4-5 months; whereas in the rest of the country, which has a temperate climate, the growing period is 7-8 months. Consequently, there appears to be a greater concentration of fish farming in the southern part of the country and in the major river basins and coastal areas.
In discussing the background to Chinese aquaculture development, it is important to take into account the sources of motivation for leaders and workers in production units. Adherence to political ideology and Communist Party directives plays a decisive role in the organization and implementation of aquaculture. Chairman Mao's instruction to: "take grain as the key link and ensure all-round development of agriculture, industry, animal husbandry, forestry, sideline occupations and fisheries" has undoubtedly given great impetus to the traditional practice of integrated crop, livestock and fish productions The directive to achieve the targets of production set to meet the country's requirements through a series of provincial, county, commune, production brigade and production team plans, both of long-term and short-term nature, is readily followed. There is obviously considerable discussion at different levels; and there is participation by the people concerned in deciding on
the ways and means by which these targets are to be achieved. But the need to produce the country's requirements of foodstuffs through self-reliance is fully accepted and economic options do not figure too prominently in the discussions. Chairman Hua's exhortation that the suburban area should become a base for supplying food to the urban area, has spurred intensive farming operations in suburban communes and production brigades in different parts of the country. The resolution of the Fifth National Congress that the country should achieve comprehensive modernization of agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology by the end of the century, has given rise to an eagerness to mechanize farm operations, and to learn from other advanced countries. Adoption of three "localizations", "hatch locally, stock locally and catch locally", has characterized the development of fish farming.
Slogans are very widely used to motivate the masses. "Wherever there is water, there should be fish", "Freshwater fishery is the sideline of agriculture", "In fisheries, do stocking and catching in rotation", "Lay stress on culture and simultaneous development of culture and capture" and "Learn from Dazhai" are some of the slogans commonly used in campaigns for aquaculture development.
<section>4</section>
3. PLANNING, ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF AQUACULTURE
3.1 Organization and management
3.2 Planning
3.1 Organization and management
As stated earlier, development of fish farming in the country has benefited from the socialist policies of the Government and the collectivization of agriculture and allied industries. There is very close linking of fish culture with agriculture and animal husbandry as will be discussed in a later section.
Aquaculture production in China is largely carried out through state farms or communes and its constituent production brigades and production teams. The organization of communes in China has been fairly well documented and is described in detail in the report of the FAO Study Mission on Agriculture and the People's Communes.^1^/ The production team is the basic agricultural production (of which aquaculture is a part) unit. In a good many areas, it is also the basic accounting unit, although there is now a tendency to have larger accounting units, such as the production brigades and even communes. The identity of households as social units and to some extent even as economic units, is now maintained, with limited ownership rights. Even though they may own and cultivate private land on a small scale, the ownership of most of the cultivable land and of implements and machinery rests with the communes or their subsidiary units. The production brigades have major planning and
administrative roles and are headed by revolutionary committees with adequate political representation in their management. The commune is both an economic collective and a basic unit of political power in rural China. It administers all activities within the commune area, including agriculture, industry, commerce, education, social welfare and security affairs, merging government administration with commune management. The standard of living and income of commune members are dependent on the success of their operations and the profits made by the commune by collective endeavour and wise management.
^1^/ FAO (1977): Learning from China - A Report on Agriculture and the Chinese People's Communes: 112 p.
Generally the communes undertake activities that neither the production brigades nor the production teams can undertake. In respect of aquaculture, pond fish culture can largely be carried out by production brigades and teams, but farming of lakes and reservoirs or river systems is often done by the commune and sometimes jointly by two or more communes. The commune serves as the link between production brigades and teams on the one hand, and the county and provincial administration on the other.
Besides the production units, production brigades and communes concerned with agricultural and fisheries production, there may be supply and marketing cooperatives at the commune level. They distribute consumer goods and act as purchasing agents for the state wholesale organization.
Most counties and provinces have Bureaux of Aquatic Products, which have the major role of providing technical advice to, and maintaining liaison with, production units.
The majority of counties have established state farms, which may specialize in some form of culture, as in the case of the Nanhai County Hatchery and Farm, which produces fry and fingerlings for distribution. Unlike those in the communes, production brigades and production teams, the workers in a state farm are paid employees and their incomes are not affected by the profits made by the farm. The state farms appear to be important as a support to aquaculture activities of communes and production brigades. As in the case of the Paitan Lake Fish Breeding Farm in the Hengyang County of Hubei Province, they may take an active role in extension of techniques, some types of research, supply of fry and finger-lings and short-term training of personnel. They seem to assume a leadership role in the introduction of new technologies and ideas.
Fish marketing is handled by the state through its purchasing centres, which buy the harvest at prices fixed by the state and generally transport the fish alive. The communes arrange for their supply to households within their limits.
Most of China's fish farming is done through communes, or their subsidiary units. Some of them have fish as the main crop (or 'link' to use campaign vocabulary), whereas the others have grain or livestock as the mainstay. Whether on a small or large scale, aquaculture appears to be practised wherever facilities are available and fish is an acceptable form of food.
Many of the communes have established small-scale industries, some of them producing tools required for fish farming or fishing. With the growing interest in mechanization of fish culture, an increasing number of communes are taking to the manufacture of fish-culture equipment. The group saw at least two that were manufacturing aerators and some others manufacturing different types of water pumps and a type of slush pump for building dikes.
3.2 Planning
As self-reliance, "planning from below", and peoples' participation in decision-making are believed to be some of the major factors responsible for the success of Chinese aqua-culture, the study group paid special attention to these aspects. The fisheries or aqua-culture development plan for the country forms a part of the agriculture plan, even though very recently a separate State Bureau of Aquatic Products^1^/ has been established in the Ministry of Agriculture, under the charge of a Vice-Minister.
^1^/ There is now (June 1979) a separate General Administration of Aquatic Products which is directly responsible to the State Council
The whole planning process is somewhat complex and it may not be correct to describe it as entirely "planning from below" or as "centralized planning". The fisheries or aqua-culture part of the agricultural plan, like other parts of it, appears to be worked out by a series of negotiations. The central authorities formulate a national plan for production and distribution. They then establish quotas for each province. The province, in turn, sets quotas for the counties and the counties, in their turn, determine targets for the communes. The communes consult production brigades and teams. The targets concern not only production, but also collection of tax, and purchase of produce. The targets are set on the basis of detailed information on past performance, production potential, etc. The detailed production plans are prepared at the production team, production brigade and commune levels, in which considerable discussion and participation of workers may be involved, The plan
then moves upward from the production team, production brigade and commune level to the county, province and state level. At each point, integration of individual plans, including some negotiation and adjustments, may be done. If there are disagreements, individual plans may be sent back to the originators and a further round of discussions and adjustments may ensue. All these discussions and adjustments are obviously made within the framework of guidelines provided by the state, which has effective control on production by virtue of its role in allocations of inputs and in marketing. The participation of Party members in revolutionary committees ensures that deviations from the state policies do not occur. Even though the state has thus a very substantial role in production planning, the production units have autonomy in working out the details of the plan and have to agree to any changes that may be made in it. The study group was not able to ascertain exactly how long the
finalization of a five-year and annual plan takes, but was told that decisions were generally made in very short periods of time, which indicates that disagreements are not too common.
In line with the policy of self-reliance, which has been a guiding principle of rural development in China, the communes are expected to rely largely on their own financial resources. They are expected to produce enough food for their own use, besides selling a fixed quota to the state for distribution in other areas or to be kept in reserve.
<section>5</section>
4. FINANCING AND CREDIT
All communes and production brigades are expected to rely largely on their own financial resources for all development activities, wherever possible, even the costs of major construction work. However, state assistance can be sought and obtained when required because of natural disasters or when the magnitude of the investment is far in excess of the production unit's means. The study group was told, in many production brigades and communes, that financing was not a constraint to aquaculture development and that they were able to obtain funds for any worthwhile project without much bureaucratic red tape.
The People's Bank of China, operating at the central, provincial, county and commune levels, as well as city, district and township levels, provides the main banking system and it is closely linked to local credit cooperatives which function under the policy guidance of the Bank. The People's Bank undertakes commercial transactions, including the acceptance of deposits, grant of loans and clearance of payments, besides helping production units to set up new enterprises.
The main source of funds for credit cooperatives is the accumulated savings of production brigades, teams and individuals. As mentioned earlier, communes may also obtain state loans when "public accumulation funds", development funds, or reserve funds, are not sufficient and major investments are required. Even though credit cooperatives accept deposits from individuals, they do not extend loans to individuals. The latter have to obtain credit, if needed from production teams or brigades. Loans are generally granted for one year to supplement working capital, but these can be extended if found necessary and justified. When costly equipment has to be purchased or major construction work has to be carried out, the loans may be extended up to five years. Interest on loans vary: industrial loans are charged 0.42 percent/month; production or business extension loans, 0.36 percent/month; and loans for replacement of facilities, 0.18 percent/month. The rate of interest paid on
savings deposits is 0.18 percent/month on current accounts and when a personal loan is obtained, the same rate of interest is charged. A higher rate of interest, 0.27 percent/ month, may be paid on one year fixed-term deposits.
From the information that the study group could gather, it would appear that the system of financing and credit for aquaculture production works smoothly and it has achieved the main purpose of eradicating the middleman and usurer. As will be discussed in a later section, aquaculture has proved to be a major source of "accumulation funds" and the study group was told that in some communes, the income from fish farming provided a good part of the money needed for the purchase of agricultural equipment (October People's Commune - Hubei Province).
The system of agricultural taxation applies also to aquaculture, but tax on fish farming is reported to be less.
In the Ho Li People's Commune in the suburban area of Wuxi, the tax paid to the state is 1.34 percent of the total income of the Commune, of which the rest is distributed as follows:
8.98 percent
set aside as development fund;
5.02 percent
public welfare fund;
0.42 percent
reserve fund as insurance against national disasters, wars, etc.;
84.24 percent
distributed among the workers on the basis of work points.
<section>6</section>
5. FISH CULTURE PRACTICES
5.1 Artificial propagation
5.2 Rearing of fry and fingerlings
5.3 Rearing of fish to marketable size in ponds
5.4 Fish diseases and their control
5.5 Design of fish farms and its significance in management
5.6 Economics of pond culture
Although the basic fish-culture technology of China is largely based on traditional practices, a number of new innovations and improvements have been adopted. A major breakthrough in modern times is the artificial propagation of the major cultivated species of carp by the administration of hormones in 1958. Although this technique was also independently developed in India at about the same time, it is only in China that it has been possible to bring it down to the farm level on a country-wide basis and make it a common farm practice. Traditional Chinese fish culture was based on larvae and fry collected from the rivers. Hydro-electric and flood control projects implemented after liberation resulted in a drastic reduction in the availability of fry in rivers and hatchery production became a necessity. This, and effective extension work through the "three-in-one" (farmer-technician-party cadre) combination appears to have helped in the farm-level application of artificial
propagation.
5.1 Artificial propagation
The method of induced breeding and hatchery and larval rearing techniques adopted in China has been described in the report of the FAO Fisheries (Aquaculture) Mission to China (FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 168). The study group observed some variations and improvements in the technique. The strong point of the Chinese method of induced breeding would appear to be the selection and rearing of brood fish, which do not receive the same amount of attention in other countries. In general, female silver carp and mud carp over three years old, four-year-old big head and five-year-old grass carp, are selected for breeding. Males can be about one year younger than the females. They are reared in special brood ponds, stocked at low densities of 100-150 kg/mu. They are fed at the rate of about 1-2 percent of the total body weight with wheat shoots, grain, corn or meal cake. Water quality is maintained in the ponds by periodic changes of water, at the beginning once or twice a
month, but increasing to three to four times a month about a month or two before spawning. Spawned fish receive special care and are reared separately. The group saw brood fish that had been used for breeding for over 12 years. Normally five- to fifteen-year-old fish are used for breeding. It was reported that fish which have been bred a few times are more responsive to hormone administration and can be bred even by the administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) only, except for mud carp for which it is generally ineffective and for grass carp for which it is only feebly effective. The most commonly used pituitary extract is of the common carp, but the silver carp, big head and grass carp pituitaries are also used. The HCG used is the product marketed as "gonadotropin for animals".
Fig. 2 Injection of HCG to spawn a seven-year-old brood fish
A new development in induced breeding in China is the use of the LH-RH analogue as an ovulating agent. In combination with a small dose of pituitary extract, it has been found to be very effective on all species of carp, the dose required being 1-10 mg/kg of body weight, depending on the species. Its use is still not very common in China, but the group observed the breeding of all the species of Chinese carp by the administration of ampouled LRH-A and common carp pituitary extract. It was reported that the same fish can be bred twice, or, if weather conditions are favourable, even three times during a season, at intervals of 20-30 days.
The spawning and hatchery system is simple and fairly easy to maintain, but it has the disadvantage that the monitoring of fertilization, hatching, and dead and diseased eggs, is difficult. This may account for the low rate of fertilization (60-80 percent) and hatching (40-70 percent) reported from some of the centres. It will be useful to make a comparative study of this system of breeding and larval rearing with other commonly used hatchery systems and with a system based on the Chinese design but built above ground level with fibreglass or similar material which will facilitate close monitoring.
Fig. 3 Spawning and hatching pools in the Nanhai County Fish Hatchery, Guangdong Province
Fig. 4 Cloth tank with eggs for hatching in a hatching pool, Note the circulation of water in the tank
Fig. 5 Hatching pool in the Gaungdong Provincial Research Institute. Note the sprinkler arrangement to maintain water circulation and temperature
Fig. 6 A simpler type of hatchery used in Shi Yeh Brigade in Hubei Province
The estimated production of fry in China is over 20 thousand million.^1/ Although there are some large state-owned hatcheries like the Nanhai County Fish Hatchery (in Guangdong Province) and Paitan Lake Hatchery (in Hubei Province) with a capacity of over 600 million fry per year, most of the seed production is done in individual communes and production brigades. The large central hatcheries like the one in Nanhai transport hatchlings by train or truck to different parts of the country in plastic bags filled with oxygen. Five or six-day-old larvae are sold from the Nanhai Hatchery at Yuan 3 per 10 000 and 2-3 cm fry at Yuan 19 per 10 000, plus transport charges. A critical study of the cost-efficiency of centralized hatchery operations as against farm-level seed production, has not yet been made, even though the opinion has been expressed that the former is much more economical and efficient.
^1/ Although most of it is produced in hatcheries, it was learnt during a later visit by the group leader, that some quantities are collected from the rivers. Brood fish raised from larvae or fry collected from the rivers help to reduce the genetic effects of in-breeding
Fig. 7 Fry raised in rearing tanks at Nanhai County Fish Hatchery being removed for counting and transport
5.2 Rearing of fry and fingerlings
Monoculture is usually practised for rearing fry to fingerlings. The fry are left in the hatchery tanks for three to five days before being transported to nursery ponds of 2-3 mu. The ponds are 