<section>i</section>
Chapter 17 Artificial Feeding in Intensive Fish Culture
I. Csengeri
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. TABLES AND DIAGRAM USED FOR INTRODUCTION OF LECTURE
3. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
An intensive fish culture unit, with its inputs and outputs, can be regarded as a system being supplied with fish - the stocking material - with feed and water and producing fish - the final product - and waste water. Among these inputs and outputs, stocking and harvesting are not discontinued, while feed and water and waste water are continuously supplied to or removed from the system. Such systems are efficient in producing fish when the characteristics of the water and feed, as well as other inputs, are well suited to the biological requirements of the fish. In planning and operating such systems, biological requirements need the greatest attention, although, at the planning stage, economic evaluation of feed sources and that of the final product could be of equal importance.
A short introduction will be given to the following subjects in this review paper; nutritional habit
- environmental effects on the metabolism
- nutritional energetics
- requirement of fish for specific nutrients
- nutritional diseases
- test diets and their application
- evaluation of feedstuffs
- formulation of fish feeds
- nutritional aspects of feed preparation
- feed quality testing
- biotechnological aspects of feeding regimes
2. TABLES AND DIAGRAM USED FOR INTRODUCTION OF LECTURE
Table 1 A classification of fish according to their feeding habit
particulate feeders
Mode of feeding
filter feeders
(parasitic fish)
carnivorous fish
Food quality
omnivorous fish
herbivorous fish
continuous feeders
Periodicity of feeding
discontinuous periodic feeders
discontinuous aperiodic feeders
Photoperiod preference
fish feeding in dark
fish feeding in daylight
Table 2 Temperature Optimum of some Fish Species for Growth
Species
Optimum (°C)
Reference
Oncorhynchus tshawygscha
Banks, et al., 1971
O. nerka
Brett, et al., 1969
O. keta
Kepshire, 1971
Salvelinus fontinalis
Baldwin, 1956
Salmo gairdneri
Hokanson, et al., 1977
S. trutta
Elliott, 1975
Ictalurus punctatus
West, 1965
Perca fluviatilis
Hokanson, et al., 1977
Stizostedion lucioperca
Hokanson, et al., 1977
Micropterus salmoides
Nelson, 1974
Pleuronectes platessa
Ursin, 1963
Table 3 Utilization of Feed Energy
Table 4 Protein and Amino Acid Requirements of Some Fish Species
Species
Rainbow trout
Chinook salmon
Common carp
Japanese eel
Channel catfish
Protein required (g/kg feed)
Amino acids
Requirement (as percentage of protein)
Arginine
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine^1^/
Phenylalanine^2^/
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
^1^/ In the absence of cystine
^2^/ In the absence of tyrosine
Table 5 Vitamin Requirements for Growth of some Salmonids^1^/
Vitamin (mg/kg dry diet)
Rainbow trout
Brook trout
Brown trout
Atlantic salmon
Chinook salmon
Coho salmon
Thiamine
Riboflavin
Pyridoxine
Pantothenate
Niacin
Folacin
Cyanocobalamin
myo-Inositol
Choline
Biotin
Ascorbate
Vitamin A^2^/
2 000- 2 500 I.U.
Vitamin E-
Vitamin K
^1^/ Fish fed at reference temperature with diets at about protein requirement
^2^/ Requirement directly affected by amount and type of unsaturated fat fed
* Denotes a requirement, the level of which has not been established
(Adapted from: J.E. Halver. In Fish Nutrition, 1972, 39 p; NAS/NRC, 1973;1977)
Table 6 Vitamin Deficiency Symptoms in Fish
Vitamin
Deficiency Symptoms
Thiamine
convulsions, neuritis, poor appetite
Riboflavin
cataracts, anaemia, dark colouration, photophobia, poor appetite
Niacin
swollen gills, intestinal lesions, poor coordination, flexing of opercles
Pantothenic acid
clubbed gills, anaemia, gill exudate, sluggish behaviour, prostration
Pyridoxine
anaemia, hyperirritability, erratic swimming
Cobalamin
anaemia, fragmented and immature erythrocytes
Folic acid
anaemia, fragility of caudal fin, lethargy, pale gills, dark colouration
Biotin
anorexia, pale gills, high glycogen in liver, colonic lesions
Ascorbic acid
spinal deformities, anaemia, lethargy, prostration, eye lesions
Inositol
anorexia, poor feed efficiency, skin lesions
Choline
haemorrhages, fatty livers, colonic lesions, poor feed efficiency
Vitamin A
cataracts, photophobia, anaemia, poor vision
Vitamin D
lethargy, increased lipid content of liver and muscle
Vitamin K
haemorrhages, pale gills, increased pro-thrombin time
Vitamin E
anaemia, exudative diathesis, dermal depigmentation
Table 7 Test Diet H440 Western Fish Nutrition Laboratory
Ingredient
Parts
Vitamin-free casein (g)
White dextrin (g)
Gelatin (g)
Premix No. 1 (vitamin) (g)
Premix No. 4 (oil) (g)
Premix No. 5 (mineral) (g)
Total
Water (ml)
PREMIX NO. 1 (VITAMIN)
a-Cellulose (g)
Choline chloride (g)
Inositol (g)
Ascorbic acid (g)
Niacin (g)
Ca-pantothenate (g)
Riboflavin (g)
Menadione (g)
Pyridoxine HCl (g)
Thiamine HCl (g)
Folic acid (g)
Biotin (g)
Premix No. 2 (ml)
PREMIX NO. 2
Vitamin B[12]
10 mg/500 ml water
PREMIX NO. 4 (OIL)
Corn oil (Mazola brand)
Cod liver oil
dl-a -tocopherol acetate
PREMIX NO. 5 (MINERAL) (g)
Salt mixture No. 2
AlCl.[3] · 6H[2]0
KI
CuCl
MnSO[4] · H[2]0
CoCl · 6H[2]O
ZnS0[4] · 7H[2]0
SALT MIXTURE NO. 2 (g)
Calcium biphosphate
Calcium lactate
Ferric citrate
Magnesium sulphate
Potassium phosphate (dibasic)
Sodium biphosphate
Sodium chloride
Total
Mixing instructions:
Premix No. 1 -
Blend all ingredients in shell blender and store in refrigerator.
Premix No. 5 -
Blend all ingredients in ball mill.
Diet H440 -
1. Put water and gelatin in mixing bowl from an electric kitchen mixer.
2. Heat on a double boiler unit until gelatin dissolves, using small stirrer for circulation.
3. Remove from heat, add dextrin and minerals, place in mixer, and stir until mixture is lukewarm.
4. Add casein and oils; continue stirring until cool.
5. Add vitamins, blend well, pour into container, and store in refrigerator.
Another method -
1. Blend all dry ingredients with oils for 5 minutes.
2. Add 75°C water; stir until cool (room temperature).
3. Pour into Teflon-coated pan and place in refrigerator to gel.
4. Store in plastic bags in refrigerator or freezer.
Figure 1. Effect of ration level on feed efficiencies
DIFFERENT FORMULATIONS FOR MEASURING FEED EFFICIENCY AND GROWTH RATE
Apparent digestibility:
for the whole diet
for one nutrient
where
I = feed intake
x[i,d] = concentration of ingredients in diet
F = faeces
x[i,f] = concentration of ingredients in diet
I[N] = nutrient intake
x[N,d] = concentration of nutrient in diet
F[N] = nutrient in faeces
x[N,f] = concentration of nutrient in faeces
where
B = final body protein
B[0] = initial body protein
I = protein intake
Growth efficiency
where
G = growth in kJ/day
I = food ration in kJ/day
M = maintenance ration in kJ/day
Growth rates (m, a, g)
where W[0] = the initial, W[t] = the final weight, t = time of feeding
3. REFERENCES
Andrews, J.W. and R.P. Stickney, 1972, Interactions of feeding rates and environmental temperature on growth, food conversion and body composition of channel catfish. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 101:94-9
Baldwin N.S. 1956, Food consumption and growth of brrok trout at different temperatures. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 86:
Banks, J.L., L.G. Fowler and J.W. Elliott, 1971, Effects of rearing temperature on growth, body form and hematology of fall chinook salmon fingerlings. Prog. Fish-Cult., 33:20-6
Braaten, B.R., 1979, Bioenergetics - a review on methodology. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fish. Hamb., (14/l5) Vol.2 :461-504
Brett, J.R., J.E. Shelbourn and C.T. Shoop, 1969, Growth rate and body composition of fingerling sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka, in relation to temperature and ration size. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 26 (10):2363-94
Brett, J.R. and T.D.D. Groves, 1979, Physiological energetics In Fish physiology, Vol. 8. Bioenergetics and growth, edited by W.S. Hoar, D.J. Randall and J.R. Brett. New York, Academic Press, 279-352
DeLong, D.C., J.E. Halver and E.T. Mertz, 1958, Nutrition of salmonid fishes. 6. Protein requirements of chinook salmon at two water temperatures. J. Nutr., 65:589-99
Elliott, J.M., 1975, The growth rate of brown trout, Salmo trutta L. fed on maximum rations. J. Anim. Ecol., 44:805-21
Fischer, Z., 1979, Selected problems of fish bioenergetics. Schr. Bundesforschungsanat. Fisch. Hamb., (14/l5) Vol. 1:17-44
Garling, D.L. and R.P. Wilson, 1976, Optimum dietary protein energy ratio for channel catfish fingerlings (Ictalurus punctatus). J. Nutr., 106:1368-75
Harder, W., 1975, Anatomy of fishes. Stuttgard, Schweizerbartische Verlagsbuckhandlung (Nägele und Obermuller), Part 1:612 p.. Part 2:132 p.
Hokanson, K.E.F., 1977, Temperature requirements of some percids and adaptations to the seasonal temperature cycle. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34(10):1524-50
Hokanson, K.E.F., C.F. Kleiner and T.W. Thorslund, 1977, Effects of constant temperatures and dial temperature fluctuations on specific growth and mortality rates and yield of juvenile rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34(5):
Halver, J.E., 1972, The vitamins. In Fish nutrition, edited by J.E. Halver. New York, Academic Press, pp. 29-103
Halver, J.E., 1980, The vitamins. In Fish feed technology. Rome, FAO/UNDP, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, ADCP/REP/80/l1:65-108
Kepshire, B.M. Jr., 1971, Growth of pink, chum and fall chinook salmon in heated seawater. Proc. Annu. NW. Fish-Cult. Conf., 22:25-6
Mertz, E.T., 1972, The protein and amino acid needs. Jn Fish nutrition, edited by J.E. Halver, New York, Academic Press, pp. 106-143
Nelson, D.J., 1974, Temperature effects on growth of largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides). Oak Ridge, Tennessee, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Environmental Science Division
NRC/NAS 1973, (National Research Council/National Academy of Science), Nutrient requirements of trout, salmon and catfish. Nutrient requirements of domestic animals Bull. Natl. Res. Counc., Wash., (11):57 p.
NRC/NAS 1977, Nutrient requirements of domestic animals, water fishes. Nutrient requirements of domestic animals. Bull. Natl. Res. Counc., Wash., (12):58 p.
Nose, T. and S. Aral, 1972, Optimal level of protein in purified diet for eel, Anguilla japonica. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Res. Lab. Tokyo, (13):41-50
Ogino, C., 1980, Requirements of carp and rainbow trout for essential amino acids. Bull. Japan. Soc. Sci. Fish., 46:171-4
Ogino, C. and K. Saito, 1970, Protein nutrition in fish. 1. The utilization of dietary protein by young carp. Bull. Japan. Soc. Sci. Fish. 36:250-4
Satia, B.P., 1974, Quantitative protein requirements of rainbow trout. Prog. Fish-Cult., 36: 80-5
Smith, R.R., 1980, Nutritional bioenergetics. In Fish feed technology. Rome, FAO/UNDP, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, ADCP/REP/80/l1:21-7
Ursin, E., 1963, On the incorporation of temperature in the von Bertalanffy growth expression. Medd. Dan. Fisk.-og Havunders.. C4):1-16
Wilson, R.P. Poe and E.H. Robinson, 1980, Leucine, isoleucine, valine and histidine requirements of fingerling channel catfish. J. Nutr., 110:627-3J
Wilson, R.P. et al., 1978, Trytophan and threonine requirements of fingerling channel catfish. J. Nutr. 108:1595-9
Zeitoun, I.H. et al.. 1976, Quantifying nutrient requirements of fish. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33^ - (1): 167-72
<section>j</section>
Chapter 18 Fish Feed Production, Storage and Transportation
F. Majoros
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. CEREALS
3. TYPES OF DRIERS AND SOME DRYING TECHNOLOGIES
4. STORAGE OF FEEDS
5. MACHINERY FOR PREPARATION OF COMPOUND FEED
6. IMPORTANT POINTS IN THE PREPARATION OF MEALY MATERIALS
7. TYPES OF MILL CONSTRUCTION
8. AUXILIARY PARTS OF THE FEED MILL
9. MACHINERY FOR TRANSPORTATION
10. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
Fish feed - particularly in extensive pond fish culturing practices - is of plant origin, of which cereal grains form 60-100 percent.
2. CEREALS
2.1 Cereal Harvesting and Treatment
2.2 Moisture Content of Cereals
2.3 Storage of Cereals
2.4 Chemical Treatment
2.1 Cereal Harvesting and Treatment
In modern agriculture cereals are harvested mostly with combine harvesters, which reap, thresh and clean the grain. However, during the harvesting of cereals such as maize the grain often has a high moisture content which requires further treatment and conservation, so as to store it without any loss.
The most frequent treatment is drying, during which a physical change takes place, i.e., the decrease of moisture content, and biochemical processes occurring within the cells of the grains.
2.2 Moisture Content of Cereals
For optimal Storage the moisture content of cereals should not exceed 12-13%. A significant respiration starts above 15% moisture content, which impairs the quality of the grains (due to biochemical processes). The deterioration can be as high as 20-30%.
Respiration is markedly influenced by temperature. The higher the temperature the more intensive respiration becomes, and the greater the carbon dioxide generated.
This is illustrated as follows:
Cereal Moisture Content
Aerial Temperature
(°C)
Carbon dioxide generated
(mg/h)
If the humidity of air reaches or exceeds 74%, the maize starts to develop mould. An ideal condition of storing is a moisture content under 14% and a relative humidity of air under 70%.
To approach this ideal condition, the following should be noted:
(i) Only dry cereals should be harvested, if possible.
(ii) The following temperature limits should be considered when using hot-air drying:
- feed wheat
82°C
- bread wheat
65°C
- malting barley, seed grain
43-48°C
Air at ambient temperature may also be used for drying.
(iii) Chemical conservation is applied.
2.3 Storage of Cereals
2.3.1 Vacuum storage
2.3.2 Storage with ventilation
2.3.3 Cold storage
2.3.1 Vacuum storage
During vacuum storage microbiological processes are inhibited, even at a moisture content of 17-22%. However, certain anaerobic bacteria and yeasts are still able to survive and multiply under these conditions. This method of storage is generally employed in silo systems.
2.3.2 Storage with ventilation
Air is pumped through air tubes into the heap of cereal which results in water and heat loss, and as a result temperature decreases.
2.3.3 Cold storage
Storage time can be lengthened, in this way drying can be replaced.
2.4 Chemical Treatment
2.4.1 The freshly harvested grains are treated and conserved with propionic and formic acid and then hermetically covered. pH value is 2-3, which inhibits any microbiological process.
2.4.2 The cereals can be conserved after preliminary drying. A 80% dry matter content can be reached with good specific energy utilization.
If any material with 20% moisture content is conserved with organic acids, we can save energy and obtain a relatively 'dry' good feed.
3. TYPES OF DRIERS AND SOME DRYING TECHNOLOGIES
Convection drying is carried out with hot-air ventilation. If the ventilated air contains some smoke or gases it may impart an off-flavour to the grain.
There are driers where the heat is transmitted from incandescent wires, hot tubes or from the hot walls of the drier.
In contact driers the cereal is placed on the heated floor.
Cereals can be dried with heat generated directly into the material via an electric current, electric field, induced whirling current or chemical reaction.
Driers can be designed for periodic or continuous operation, according to their requirements.
4. STORAGE OF FEEDS
Bulk feed cereals, leguminous crops, coarse meals or green plant meals can be stored.
These feeds can be stored in buildings and barns or in the open air, covered with canvas or plastic foil. Apart from manual collection, a shovelling machine or screw feeder can be used. The latter is of a higher capacity, being 40-60 t/h.
Bulk raw materials or ready-made feed can be stored in silo systems made of concrete or insulated metal plate. Polyurethane foam is inserted between two metal plates, or a prefabricated 'sandwich' panel is used.
Blowing ventilators are used for the ventilation of modern storing silos, which- not only cools the stored material but also decrease the moisture content.
Cereals can be stored at 20°C for 2-3 weeks; 15°C for 4-5 weeks; and at 10°C for 10 weeks without any deterioration in quality.
The bottom of these silos can he flat, or of conical form. Emptying of smaller, 20-80 m^3 silos with conic bottoms is achieved by gravitation, while for larger silos by using built-in pulleys.
Other equipment which may be necessary for the storage of cereals include: loading hoppers, conveyor belts, trucks or dump trucks, and dumpers.
5. MACHINERY FOR PREPARATION OF COMPOUND FEED
Compound feeds are complete animal nutriments which contain different basic animal or plant materials, mineral and synthetic ingredients.
Preparation of compound feeds starts with the treatment of materials:
(i) Cleaning of grain - sifters are used only if the harvest is not modern or the corn contains some impurities of other origin.
(ii) Extracted meals - oil-seed cases are very often utilized.
In these processes the cakes or pellets are crushed with cogged-wheels, or spiky iron cones.
The material is then conveyed on to a sifter which saves energy since the grinding of the tiny parts is unnecessary.
(iii) There are several ways of preparing mealy materials:
- the material is conveyed into the silo by pneumatic pipes;
- a precompound material can also be prepared from mealy substances, e.g., bran and fish meal is mixed 1:1, resulting in a less greasy and more easy to grind material;
- the mealy substance can be poured directly into the mixer (mostly premixes, concentrates or complementary feed).
6. IMPORTANT POINTS IN THE PREPARATION OF MEALY MATERIALS
In the loading hopper there should be a protective screen of 20 × 20 mm mesh size which is necessary not only to avoid accidents but also to prevent paper, string, rubber, etc., from getting into the system.
Next to the hopper a magnet should be built in. Iron pieces mixed into the substance can cause serious problems and loss in time and production.
From the hopper the material is conveyed to a control sifter. The control sifter can be flat, which is more durable, or cylindrical, which needs smaller space, but damage is more frequent.
The materials from the sifter are transported to the storage silo by a pneumatic conveying system.
The coarse particles are usually ground again or collected separately and used. One of the most important machines used in compound feed preparation is the mill.
The mixing homogeneity, the possibility to granulate, and the quality and digestibility are largely influenced by the size of the substances.
Grinding can be performed:
(i) with two solid surfaces
(ii) by pumping the material onto a solid surface
(iii) by whirling without any solid surface.
7. TYPES OF MILL CONSTRUCTION
7.1 Types of Feed Mixing Apparatus
7.2 Preparation of Pellets
7.3 Types of Driers
Stone mills - the most ancient type of mill, needing constant maintenance and a lot of space. Their importance is decreasing.
Roller mills - originally used by the mill industry. They produce a lot of coarse, but little fine meal. They are not used in preparing compound food.
Combined mills - they are used mostly in Western Europe. They subject the substance to a pressing effect.
Plate grinders - they are used mostly in the U.S.A. The substance proceeds in a zig-zag way to the centre of the plates, being crushed in the process.
Pinned grinders - here the substance bumps into rotating pins - use not widespread.
Beating cross grinders - are similar to hammer mills, but the hitting parts are stable. The advantage is that the parts can be replaced easily. In the filling tube there is a magnet.
Swing - hammer mill - is the most widespread in the feed mill industry. It is very simple, the hammers being fixed on a rotor, and screens fixed. It is very practical as the parts can be easily replaced. Driving is with a V-shaped belt or with shaft coupling. Hammers can be easily changed and the mill can be connected to a pneumatic grain transporting system.
The generally used mesh size of the screen is 3.1-5.5 mm. In fish feed milling it is 1-1.5 mm.
Based on tests in grinding three types of substance, the following is known:
- grains - easy to grind
- resilient material - mostly their peel is difficult to grind, e.g., lupine
- greasy, smearing substances, e.g., fish meal, cannot be ground at all in themselves.
Pre-smashed, ground and sifted substances are conveyed to individual storing silos prior to formulae mixing. Mixing is very important, since even the smallest amount of a compound feed should reflect the proportions of the formula. Accurate measuring of the components has an equally great role.
Measurements can be periodic or continuous, and controlled manually or automatically.
The most modern is the punch-card system controlled machinery, furnished with a safety instrument, which immediately stops the operation if the automatic scale makes a mistake, or if the manual portioning (e.g., in the cases of premix or medicated pellets) does not comply with the designated formula.
From the storing silos the material is transported via conic pulleys with different speed rates.
These parts are also essential for accurate measurements. In the meantime the mixing of components starts in the balance tank.
Requirements:
(i) the balance tank should be easy to empty, and provided with a vibrator or automated closing valve
(ii) measurements should be accurate
(iii) the programme should be easily adjustable
The preweighed materials enter into the mixing tank through a flapping valve. The homogeneity of mixing depends on:
grain size
measurements
type of grinder
duration of mixing
7.1 Types of Feed Mixing Apparatus
Diffuse mixers - are mixing drums where the vessel rotates and the centrifugal forces are used for mixing. These are generally continuous mixers. In their improved versions baffles are mounted on the shaft.
Gravitation mixers - are used in the mill industry and in air-current vertical mixers. The most widely used mechanical mixers are:
- Vertical mixers: made up of a tank and a vertically located pulley within. The pulley can be stable or mobile.
- Horizontal mixers: mixing is performed with the mixing parts. They can be paddle or belt pulley types or a combination of the two.
These counter-current mixers work with an accuracy of 1:100 000. The 'Lödige' type mixers should be mentioned here, where even mixing is ensured by plough-iron elements and rotating knives.
These types are suitable for mixing liquids, meat-paste, oils, grease, and are an ideal mixer in fish feed preparation.
Fluidizing mixers - besides the effect of air-current and floating, the grains are also affected mechanically.
During mixing not only dry components are used, but liquids, e.g., fat and molasses. These are to improve the energy content, taste and durability of the pellet. They are generally stored in heatable, insulated tanks with a double wall. The heating is solved with a spiral pipeline with steam or hot water. Duration of mixing is 3-5 minutes.
7.2 Preparation of Pellets
The most important feature of the pellet is durability, crushing strength and water-resistance.
The following factors ensure the stability of a grain:
- solid adhesive medium, e.g., powdered milk, sugar, or carbamide, developed by steaming or heating of starch
- connection of interface strengths of liquid between the grains
- adhesion - capillary suction effect between two grains.
There is a buffer tank between the pelleting machine and the mixer. From here the feed goes into the conditioning block of the mill by gravitation.
This conditioning block works as a continuous mixer suitable for feeding both liquids or steam. The quantity of steam or liquid material is controlled manually. The most frequent pelleting method is "thread pelleting", where the material is pressed through a die. In modern mills the presser-rollers are stable and the die revolves; the gap between them being adjustable. Pelleting machines with high (10-25 t/h) capacity have three rollers. To change the dies within these types of mills is difficult and their life-time is short. The mill is prevented from overloading by a shear pin.
At the adjusted length, the pellet is cut by knives. The warm, wet and soft pellet from the mill should be dried and cooled. In the cooling system, the air stream alters the steam pressure, and results in water withdrawal and cooling of the pellet. The cooling process should last until the temperature of the pellet and its surroundings is the same.
7.3 Types of Driers
Vertical:
their capacity is high and they need relatively small space.
Horizontal:
the advantage of these driers is that the belt moves and not the grain, which does not crumble. If the pellet layer on the belt is 15-20 cm thick, it needs 16-20 min to dry. A 4-6 cm thick layer of pellets generally needs 5 min to dry. These are then sifted to select the broken pellets, which go back to the pellet press. The intact pellets are packed in sacks or shared in silos.
If fry feed is manufactured, and the pellet emerging from a 3-4-5 mm die is still too large and has to be crumbled with rollers and then sifted to the appropriate size range.
8. AUXILIARY PARTS OF THE FEED MILL
- rotating portioning chambers which are to prevent the accumulation of material -they generally have six blades;
- portioning screws - with adjustable speed and lead;
- dust separators;
- dust sucking devices are to prevent losses from crumbling.
9. MACHINERY FOR TRANSPORTATION
- gravitation runways;
- scraping conveyor;
- bucket conveyor;
- pneumatic conveyors with sucking, pressing or combined types.
The pneumatic transportation is influenced by the specific weight of the material, the size of the grains and by the flotation speed limit of the material.
10. REFERENCES
ADCP 1980, (Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme), Fish feed technology. Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/REP/80/l1:395 p.
Csávás, I., F. Majoros and L. Váradi, 1979, Technology of pellet feed manufacturing for warm-water fishes in the experimental fish feed mill of the Fish Culture Research Institute, Szarvas, Hungary. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch., Hamb., (14/l5), Vol. 2 :75-86
Horn, A., 1976, Állattenyésztés. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Horváth, Z. and N. Boien, 1972, Takarmányártalmak hiánybetegségek. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Tomay, T.,1973, Gabonaipari kézikönyv. Technológiai gépek és berendezések. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Tomay, T.,1973, Keveréktakarmánygyártás. Budapest, Müszaki Könyvkiadó
<section>k</section>
Chapter 19 Mechanized Feeding in Aquaculture
L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. FISH FEED STORAGE FACILITIES
3. FEED TRANSPORTING EQUIPMENT
4. FEED DISTRIBUTORS
5. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
Equipment that is connected with fish feeding can be divided into three major groups, as follows:
- feed storage facilities
- feed transporting equipment
- feed distributors
2. FISH FEED STORAGE FACILITIES
In fish-feed storage the same facilities can be applied that are widely used in animal husbandry.
In large fish farms and in integrated farms there can be a central or primary feed store and individual secondary storage facilities at the fish ponds.
The primary store is usually a building in the centre of the farm, while the secondary storage facilities are silos with a capacity of 5-20 m^3.
These silos can be filled by mechanical bucket elevators (Figure 1) or pneumatically (Figure 2). The feed can be discharged into the feeding boats or into other feed distributors through a discharge pipe by gravity (Figure 1) or by a discharging screw (Figure 2). The application of this latter type is limited as the discharging screw needs an electric energy supply.
The storing of different feed grains in silos is trouble-free and convenient, however the storage of coarse-meal type feed materials tends to make them arch which can make discharge difficult.
When a feed storage silo is decided to be installed on a fish farm, adequate foundation should be designed and accessibility ensured.
3. FEED TRANSPORTING EQUIPMENT
Feed transport is a complex operation that forms a link between feed production, preparation, storage and distribution. Those facilities and equipment therefore, that are connected with feed transport have to be designed carefully. Within the fish farm different transporting methods can be taken into account as follows:
- waterway
- paved road
- railway
- cableway
- earth road
- combination of the above
For feed transport, all vehicles, and loading and unloading equipment can be used that are available on agricultural farms. The most common feed transporting vehicles are different types of trucks.
The trucks have to meet certain requirements, as follows:
- ability to move on rough and wet surfaces (taking into account fish pond conditions)
- tipping platform
- power take-off for driving different adaptors (loading, unloading, etc.)
- ability to tow a trailer
For feed transport special vehicles have been developed with a large-size container and feed discharging device that can be mechanical (Figure 3) or pneumatic (Figure 4).
Figure 1. Feed storage silo in fish farm (USSR)
Figure 2. Type Hungaria 20 fibreglass feed storage silo with unloading screw (Hungary)
Figure 3. Type ESZK 10 feed transporting truck with mechanical loading screw (USSR)
Figure 4. Type IFA W-50 L/SM-1 special feed transporting truck with 9 tons carrying capacity (GDR)
Figure 5. Tractor pulled feed transporting and filling cart
Figure 6. Feed pick-up and loading devices
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (a) MORITZ demand feeder (GDR)
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (b) UKA-25 demand feeder (USSR)
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (c) EWOS demand feeder (Sweden)
Figure 8. Submerged plate type demand feeder
Feed transporting trailers pulled by multi-purpose tractors are also common on fish farms.
A special tractor-pulled feed transporting trailer can be seen in Figure 5.
For loading the feed transporting vehicles, different loaders can be applied. Two major types of loader are shown in Figure 6.
4. FEED DISTRIBUTORS
4.1 Stationary Feeding Equipment
4.2 Mobile Feeding Equipment
Feed distributors are specially designed feeding equipment. Whilst for feed storing and transport, normal agricultural equipment can be used, for fish-feed distribution, specially designed feeding equipment is needed. There are two major ways in which fish feeding technology, and thus equipment, differ from those generally used in animal husbandry.
- the feed has to be placed in water
- very small-size feed is used.
At present there are many different types of feeding equipment being used world-wide. The feeders can be divided into groups according to the fish species farmed, e.g. special feeders have been developed for eel; age of the fish (different types of feeders are needed for fry, fingerlings and market fish); type of feed (dry and wet feed dispensers). However, these types are based on a few basic principles. Fish feeders can be divided into two major groups, as follows:
- Stationary feeding equipment
- without supplied energy; demand feeders
- with supplied energy; automatic feeders (electric, pneumatic, hydraulic)
- Mobile feeding equipment
- feeding carts
- feeding boats
4.1 Stationary Feeding Equipment
4.1.1 Demand feeders
4.1.2 Automatic feeders
4.1.1 Demand feeders
Demand feeders are controlled by the fish themselves according to their appetite. These feeders are easy to install and operate. The level of the feed in the container is a good indication of the condition of the fish.
Demand feeders can be divided into two main groups, namely bait-rod or pendulum-type feeders and submerged plate-type feeders.
Different pendulum-type feeders are shown in Figure 7. These feeders are not suitable for young fish since they are not able to operate them. The outlet size of these feeders should be adjusted carefully, otherwise uncontrolled pouring of feed can be caused by the spontaneous touching of the fish.
The submerged plate-type demand feeders are controlled not by the contact of the fish, but the removal of all feed from the plate (Figure 8). This type of feeder can be operated by small fish as well; however, their operation is more troublesome, and are not as popular as the pendulum-type feeders.
4.1.2 Automatic feeders
Automatic feeders can be classified according t