<title>ADCP/REP/81/15 - Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III</title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the major tasks of the newly established Regional Lead Centre for Integrated Fish Culture of the Asian Network of Aquaculture Centres is research on fish-livestock-crop farming. The analysis and rationalization of existing practices, investigation for a scientific understanding of traditional practices in China and experimental studies to evolve optimum levels of integration for high production, efficient utilization of resources and maximum benefit to farmers, are considered to be of great importance in the expansion of this type of farming. In order to render them suitable for adoption in other countries, the systems of integration as practised in China will have to be modified in respect of species of fish, crops and livestock to be raised, and the nature of operations adjusted to the motivation for integration. The research programme of the Lead Centre will therefore be directed to:
(i) the collection and critical analysis of experience in integrated fish culture in China and elsewhere;
(ii) collection of data on the availability of various forms of farm wastes and by-products suitable for use in the ponds of an integrated farm; and
(iii) experimental and observational research for the purpose of developing different models of integration suited to different agro-climatic and socio-economic conditions.
A task force consisting of the following members met in Wuxi to prepare an outline research programme for the Centre:
Madam Yang Xian-zhang
(China)
Prof. Lu Gui
(China)
Mr. Shan Jian
(China)
Mr. Hu Bao-tong
(China)
Mr, Yang Hua-zhu
(China)
Dr. G. Schroeder
(U.S.A.)
Dr. H. Buck
(U.S.A.)
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
(FAO)
Mr. Chen Foo Yan
(FAO)
Besides discussing the practices and problems of integrated farming with Chinese officials, scientists and extension workers, the task force also visited some typical integrated farms and consulted the farmers to ascertain their views on the role of scientific research in improving the efficiency of current practices.
In formulating the outline programme of research, the task force adopted a time frame of seven years (as in the case of all the other Lead Centres of the Asian Network), consisting of a two-year start-up period followed by a five-year period of concentrated research. Based on a review of the results achieved by the end of that period, a further programme of research will have to be outlined.
The task force has attempted only to outline the major studies to be carried out, the problems to be solved, and the research approaches to be followed. The detailed designs of experiments and observations are expected to be prepared by the research teams of the Centre with the help of consultants as required. Assistance of external consultants may be necessary to initiate some of the investigations, and at a later stage to evaluate the results or solve unexpected technical problems faced in the investigations.
The Centre has the necessary laboratory facilities and some of the specialized equipment for research will be provided through the FAO/UNDP Regional Project for the establishment of a Regional Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia. A farm of its own is being developed for experimental work, but it is expected that in the interim and even later the two large integrated fish farms in its neighbourhood (Ho Le Commune and Li Yuan Commune) can also be used for observational and experimental work through appropriate arrangements with the Communes/ Production Brigades concerned.
Initially the research staff of the Centre will consist of scientists of the Yangtze River Freshwater Fisheries Research Institute, who have been transferred to Wuxi. They cover the following areas of expertise:
- aquaculture
- limnology
- algology
- ichthyology
- genetics
- chemistry
- fish capture
As one of the major areas of research in the Centre will relate to pond dynamics and particularly mineralization of organic wastes, including the role of microbes and their effects on fish growth and health, it is essential to strengthen the staff with a micro-biologist, a fish physiologist and a biochemist.
<section>2</section>
2. BACKGROUND
Integration of fish culture with livestock and crop farming is an ancient practice in China. The concept of an 'all-round development of agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and other side-line occupations' widely adopted in modern China has resulted in different patterns of integration throughout the country. This is probably the most impressive aspect of Chinese aquaculture and of considerable value to other countries, particularly developing countries interested in integrated rural development.
The major species used in integrated fish farming in China are herbivores and omnivores, especially carps and tilapias. In some countries, experimental work is now underway to determine the possible use of the freshwater prawn Macrobrachium rosenbergii, but this is still in an early stage of development. In most cases the farmers in the region use a polyculture system. In China up to nine species are used, but elsewhere much fewer species and even monoculture of omnivorous tilapia is common. Even though it is generally believed that a polyculture system is more efficient in ponds receiving heavy organic manuring, it has yet to be established that the large number of species used are necessary or essential to maintain a balanced pond environment and to achieve the desired fish yield. The problems of raising enough fry and fingerlirigs of a large number of species, and indeed the consumer acceptance of some of them, may limit the development of this type of farming in some
countries.
In China the animal commonly raised in association with fish ponds is the pig. The manure of pig is considered as important a product as the meat. Pigsties are often built on pond dikes to facilitate the application of manure, either directly or after fermentation. One pig is estimated to give about 3 500 kg of manure slurry. Empirical ratios of the number of pigs to be raised to pond area as adopted in China range from 15 to 45 pigs per ha, but the optimum ratios in relation to the capacity of the pond to mineralize the manure, under different temperature conditions have yet to be determined.
Other animals raised on integrated farms are ducks, cattle, sheep and chicken. It is estimated that 20 000 ducks produce 1 000 tons of manure per year and a cow 50 kg daily. It is reported that a Huzhou sheep produces enough manure each year to supply all the nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium needed for 1 mu^1 of mulberry. This in turn not only feeds silkworms in the season but provides enough autumn leaves to feed a sheep all winter. Silkworms hatching from each sheet of eggs can produce 200 kg of excreta, sufficient to feed 25 kg of fish. In some of the Chinese farms all these animals are raised in accordance with the policy of diversified production. However, the economic efficiency of raising different animals and their role in integration may differ. Specific information in this regard will be necessary in making selection of animals for farming in other countries.
1 mu = 0.066 ha (1/15 ha) = 0.165 acres
The dikes and adjacent land in integrated farms are often used for growing fodder. The fodder is fed to the grass carp, but it is known that a part of the fodder is excreted undigested or partly digested and this also serves as manure for fertilizing the pond water. It is believed that 1 kg grass carp can produce sufficient manure to raise 0.5 kg of silver carp and bighead. Grass left unconsumed by fish will also become manure. Besides grass, pond dikes and farmland are often used in China for growing vegetables, corn, bananas, rice, wheat and mulberry. Wastes from all these plants are used as feed or fertilizer. The mixture of water and fertilizer that runs off from mulberry plots into ponds acts as efficient fertilizers for promoting growth of plankton. Corn, rice, and wheat are considered as the main supplementary feeds for fish. Generally the bran and broken grains are used to feed fish and livestock. Mulberry leaves are used for silkworm production, but a considerable
amount of wastes (up to 18 000 kg of wastes per ha) can be obtained for use as fertilizer or feed in ponds. Silkworm pupae are used as a direct supplementary feed. Fruit trees and vegetables appear to make marginal contributions to the food and fertilizer resources of ponds.
The main contribution that fish ponds make to the productivity of integrated farms in China is in the form of silt or pond deposits, which are generally removed every year and used as fertilizer for land crops. The droppings of fish may enrich the silt. About 75 000 kg of silt may be obtained per year from a ha of pond, and silt is considered to be a high quality fertilizer. According to one estimate silt from 1 mu of pond can be used as a base fertilizer for 2 mu of rice fields. In pond manuring experiments elsewhere, not much deposit of silt has been observed when manuring is done on a daily basis. The rate of deposit of silt under different manuring practices, its composition and the effect of its partial or total removal from the pond bottom, have yet to be evaluated.
Heavy manuring, dense stocking with several species, multiple stocking and harvesting together with supplemental feeding, have produced phenomenal yields of up to 22 tons/ha under Chinese conditions. A large volume of empirical knowledge has accumulated on the practices involved. However, a clearer knowledge of the pond dynamics has to be obtained, including a definition of the pathways which convert relatively crude organic inputs into fish. The relative nutrient values of animal and plant wastes have also to be determined. The composition of manures may depend on the food that the animals eat. The role of microbes in the mineralization of wastes and their subsequent effects on the production and composition of plankton and other benthic organisms, are not clearly known. The relative importance of these organisms, including the bacteria as direct fish food, is also not clearly known. The role of the pond bottom, especially in the 2 to 3 m deep ponds in China, needs to be
studied with special reference to the soil-water interface in order to rationalize manuring practices. In other countries shallower ponds are generally used. It may be that in deeper ponds photosynthesis will be limited to the upper layer which in turn may affect overall productivity. Comparative studies will be necessary to establish optimum depth and size of ponds and water management methods for efficient utilization of wastes.
The use of aerators is fairly widespread in China. The role of different types of aerators in deep and in shallow, waste-laden and densely stocked ponds needs to be studied, to determine their economic efficiencies.
The frequency and methods of manuring adopted in China differ in many respects from those of other countries. Although washings from pigsties, cow sheds and chicken pens used to be applied directly into ponds, the present practice in most areas is to ferment them for 10 to 15 days before application. Manuring is generally done only at such intervals (10 to 15 days) and the quantity applied can generally be controlled. The efficiency of this method compared to the general practice of direct daily application of fresh manure needs to be verified. Presently, about 225 000 kg of manure slurry is applied to a hectare of pond, containing about 11 250 kg of fish. In Wuxi area, the general practice is to apply 60 percent of the estimated total manure required from January to May, when the water temperature ranges from 5°C to 25°C, and the remaining 40 percent in the period of June to September at a water temperature range of 20 C to 30°C. Multiple harvesting and stocking are
practised during the later part of the growing period (June to September). The rationale behind this practice has to be investigated in order to determine the optimum quantities of different manures to be applied in the most suitable form and the best method of application at different temperatures, oxygen concentrations and BOD. Many farmers report that despite all improvements, including the use of aerators, production through manuring alone reaches a plateau after a certain stage, and further increases are possible only through feeding. This would indicate the need for formulating and preparing suitable supplementary feeds, preferably based on ingredients produced on the farm.
While discussing with farmers and commune officials, one is struck by the amount of data that have accumulated. Even though they may be rather empirical, it would appear that they may prove adequate for a preliminary modelling exercise which could be refined or modified when experimental data become available. Such models may help in making general recommendations on the nature and extent of integration that can be adopted under different agro-climatic and socio-economic conditions. Intensive fish farming is often associated with risks of disease, resulting in large-scale mortality. However, from local interviews it is reported that there are no observed differences in the occurrence of diseases between integrated and non-integrated fish farms. It will be most useful to verify this and to determine whether the use of animal and plant wastes cause any public health hazards through the transmission of pathogenic organisms.
A major objective of integrated fish culture is to reduce operating costs and maximize the farmer's income. The newly established integrated fish farm of Ho Le Commune in Wuxi clearly shows how overall production and income can be progressively increased. In five years, after its establishment in 1975, the farm has increased its fish production almost nine times and the production of pigs, chicken, ducks, eggs and milk, three to five times. (The farm, with a total area of 77 ha has 67 ha of fish ponds, 1 650 pigs, 20 000 ducks, 100 cows and 8 000 chickens.). The total income in 1980 was Yuan 2.6 million^1, out of which Yuan 950 000 was obtained by sale of fish. Production is planned in such a way as to reflect a balance between the output of fish and other products. The average income of an ordinary farmer was Yuan 1 000 per head per year and of the managerial staff, Yuan 1 600, which is much above the average income in this area.
The productivity of manpower is reported to be greatly enhanced through integrated farming. In Wuxi area One man can look after 2 640 m^2 to 3 300 m^2 of fish ponds and produce 1 500 to 2 000 kg of fish, whereas On a non-integrated farm one man can manage only 990 m^2 of fish pond and produce about 750 kg of fish.
Economic data of the type indicated above together with detailed cost and earnings data will be needed to determine the benefits Of different types of integrated farming.
<section>3</section>
3. RESEARCH NEEDS
Based on information collected in the field as summarized above, the task force identified major research requirements for establishing a better scientific understanding of the various physico-chemical and biological processes which interact with fish in waste-laden ponds in integrated farms. Research into fish yield in relation to these processes as well as to stocking density and stocking ratios is therefore necessary. The economics of production of various crops, and the economic relationships in an integrated farm with fish as the main produce, have also to be incorporated into the research programme and evaluated under different patterns of integration. The understanding of such inter-relationship is of primary importance if the technology of integrated fish farming is to be adopted in other areas having different environmental and socio-economic conditions.
1 U.S.$ 1 = Yuan 1.55
As manure is the major factor controlling fish production in an integrated fish farm, research effort will be concentrated on its utilization and management, using fish yield and economic benefit as its functions. Waste in the form of manure from sideline occupations, e.g., silk processing, will not be included in the proposed research programme since it is not expected to play a major contributory role in promoting fish production in integrated farms to be developed elsewhere. Similarly, research into the use of sewage from such farms for fish production is also omitted for the same reason.
Based on these criteria, the following priority areas of research are proposed:
(i) Comparative studies on the effects of fresh and fermented animal manure on fish yield.
(ii) Comparative studies on the effects of different livestock feeds on the nature and efficiency of manure for fish production.
(iii) Comparative studies on the performance of different livestock manures in relation to fish production.
(iv) Relationship between organic and chemical composition of animal manure and fish yield.
(v) Establishment of a standard procedure for manure application including frequency, rate, and method of application for increased fish production.
(vi) Comparative studies on the effects of fresh and composted green manure on fish yield.
(vii) Comparative studies on the effects of different types of green manure on fish production.
(viii) Studies on the relative values of green manure and animal manure on fish production.
(ix) Comparative studies on the performance of treated and untreated straw on fish growth.
(x) Water quality and pond dynamics studies for establishing an upper limit of manure quantum which could be 'safely' added to fish ponds under different environmental conditions.
(xi) Studies on the effects of manuring on fish health and sanitation.
(xii) Studies on the physico-chemical and biological effects of silt on fish and crop production.
(xiii) Studies on stocking densities and stocking ratios of fish in manured ponds.
(xiv) Studies on the relationship between size and depth of manured ponds and fish yield.
(xv) Development of supplementary fish diets from agriculture wastes of integrated farms.
(xvi) Comparative studies on the economics of dual and multiple integration of crops, aimed at establishing models for various integrated farming systems.
(xvii) Observational studies of various systems of integrated farming as practised in China for initial planning of models.
<section>4</section>
4. RESEARCH PROBLEMS
4.1 Organic waste inputs
4.2 Fish species for culture
4.3 Water quality
4.4 Pond dynamics
4.5 Role of pond silt
4.6 Pond design
4.7 Fish disease and mortality
4.8 Fish as carriers of pathogens
4.9 Supplemental feeds
4.10 Economic modelling
The problems of research on integrated fish culture cover different disciplines concerned with crop, livestock and fish production. Obviously the Wuxi Centre cannot undertake research on all aspects. As indicated earlier the focus of studies has to be on fish culture. Since the main contributions of crop and livestock farming to fish culture are fish food and fertilizer and contribution of fish ponds to the rest of the farm is pond silt as fertilizer for crops and fodder plants, attention has to be directed toward the role of various farm products and wastes and the inter-relation between crops, livestock and fish. The Centre has to keep close liaison with relevant institutions doing research on crops and livestock and utilize the results of their studies as appropriate for both the design of experiments and interpretation of results.
4.1 Organic waste inputs
4.1.1. Animal manure
4.1.2 Green manure
4.1.3 High fibre content substrates
4.1.1. Animal manure
(i) Comparative studies of the use of fresh and stored-fermented manure
There exist among fish farmers of different countries conflicting opinions as to the economic and other benefits of storing manure prior to its application to the pond. Fresh manure contains a complement of chemical and organic components with fermentation, inherent in storage, partly deletes. This loss is due to the natural inevitable production of biogas during storage. Whether or not the biogas (the main energy constituent is methane, CH[4]) produced during anaerobic storage and fermentation of manure is utilized, there is, during this storage-fermentation: (1) an inherent decrease of carbon; (2) an increase in ash; and (3) quite probably a loss of some volatile nitrogen compounds in the residual sludge and supernatant relative to the fresh manure. These three factors may result in lower fish yields per unit of available manure. However, benefits may accrue with fermentation. Biogas is produced; the fibres of the original manure may be partly digested and thus made more
available for natural food production in the pond.
By selecting a given polyculture of fish capable of utilizing the range of natural foods believed to be abundant in manured ponds, a given moderately high stocking density, and a given type or source of manure, the production of fish in ponds receiving fresh manure and manure stored for specified periods (e.g., 15 days) will be compared. Relative yields of fish for these manuring systems will be measured. In conjunction with this, the potential value of biogas which might be obtained by fermentation will be considered in relation to the costs and labour involved in fermentation and biogas production. These data will permit an overall economic evaluation of the effectiveness and desirability of using fresh and stored manure for fish production.
The actual experiments can be performed at the Wuxi Lead Centre. Ponds of equal area and depth of approximately 400 m^2, provide an adequate indication of what can be expected in larger commercial ponds. The smaller experimental ponds permit concurrent replications of selected pond treatments with considerably less investment in space and labour than would be required in larger ponds.
During these and other experiments, the full range of studies of pond dynamics, water quality, fish survival, fish disease, organic and chemical composition of the manure, etc., as discussed in later sections, will be conducted as an integral part of the programme. This multidisciplinary approach maximizes the range of data obtainable from each experiment, thus reducing cost and effort for achieving the overall goals of the Lead Centre. The interdisciplinary approach demands of scientists and technicians the utmost cooperation and consideration of each others' efforts.
(ii) Fish yield as a function of the type of manure
It may often be possible to grow a variety of animals on an integrated farm. However, the market demand and price for specific animals differs greatly from region to region. The effectiveness of various manures as substrates for growth of natural fish foods, and hence contribution to fish yield is likely not the same for all animals. The farmer on an integrated farm must select the combination of animals and fish that will give him the optimum total return on his efforts. Thus he must know what combined production of land animals and fish he can expect for a given feed input to the land animal.
To gain the necessary data to formulate this integrated animal-fish yield model, experiments in ponds will be conducted using a standardized polyculture suitable for manured ponds, with moderately high fish stocking density. Manures from pigs, cows, ducks and chickens will be used. If the number of available ponds permits, the animal manures will be tested concurrently with replications. If enough ponds are not available, the studies will be sequential with care taken to consider climatic differences during test periods. Fish and animal production will be correlated for each type of combination with total inputs of animal feed, labour and land utilization by ponds and pens. Manure production rate for each type of animal will also be measured.
As stated above, interdisciplinary studies will be conducted during all pond experiments. Each pond should yield data on a wide variety of aspects (pond dynamics, fish disease etc.), all of which benefit from this integrated experimental approach.
(iii) Fish yield as a function of land animal feed
The quality of a manure reflects, to some extent, the quality of the feed supplied to the animal. Since fish yield will be dependent upon the inputs to the pond, the combined fish-animal yield varies with changes in the land animal's diet. The type of feeds used differ very considerably among the climatic and economic environments of the countries served by the Wuxi Lead Centre.
To better understand the effect of feed on manure quality and potential fish production, the above described experiments using pig, cow, duck and chicken manures will be repeated using typical, animal feeds available to integrated farmers, ranging from high to low quality.
As previously mentioned, the range of dynamics of the manure-pond interactions will be studied.
(iv) Composition of manure and its relation to fish yield
Throughout the above experiments, the composition of the manure will be monitored. The parameters measured will include: manure biological oxygen demand or BOD (1 day at 30°C and also at local pond temperature), ammonia, Kjeldahl nitrogen, phosphate or phosphorous, potassium, percent dry matter (dried to constant weight at 70 to 100°C), percent volatile matter (combusted at 550°C in a muffle furnace). The volatile matter is a good indicator of the total organic substrate available for a microbial, heterotrophic food web. From time to time, measurements of lignin, crude fibre, not including lignin, and total fibre (crude fibre, lignin, hemicellulose) should be made. These measurements may be done at a feed analysis laboratory since they are not frequent.
The manure analysed in these studies will be from the yield experiments conducted at Wuxi Lead Centre. Comparison of the data describing composition of the manures with the measured fish yields from these experiments may show a correlation which will enable us to construct a model relating some features of manure composition to expected fish yield per unit quantity of the manure. This model, if it can be formulated, will permit the evaluation of a proposed integrated animal-fish or crop-animal-fish farm without the costly and time-consuming effort of actual pond experiments.
(v) Manure application and fish yields
There are differences of opinion on the most Suitable procedure for application of manure in fish ponds. It is believed that frequent applications, distributed over large areas of the pond surface, provide a uniform input of substrate for growth of natural fish foods. However, this requires special equipment and more effort than does application once in 10 days at one or only a few locations in the pond. The relative benefit of these approaches, such as saving of labour and increased fish yield must be quantitatively evaluated.
Because distribution cannot be realistically simulated in small ponds, these studies should be conducted on commercial commune ponds, preferably in the vicinity of the Lead Centre.
The distribution systems to be studied include:
(a) amount of manure/unit weight of fish biomass, e.g., kg manure (measured as dry organic matter)/kg fish
(b) frequency of manuring, e.g., once per day; once per week; once per 15 days
(c) distribution over pond, e.g., pile the manure in one or two locations; distribute by boat over most of the pond; distribute from one or two banks or through the water inlet.
(vi) Safe dosages of manure
Fish kill by anoxia, or loss of fish growth by low dissolved oxygen (DO), are two major risks in integrated farming. The oxygen demand of the manure uses pond DO. The mineral-chemical components of the manure stimulate phytoplankton growth. Phytoplankton produce oxygen during the day, but consume it during the night. Appropriate polyculture of fish can contribute to balanced growth of plankton. Changes in the DO cycle of a manured pond should be measured as a function of: manure BOD, fish polyculture, fish stocking density, pond temperature, and insolation (sunlight).
For all the above manure-fish yield experiments, the BOD of the added manure, pond temperature, and DO cycles will be monitored. From these data and the fish polyculture and fish density, correlations between the effects of given amounts of manure on pond DO, for specific pond condition (temperature, polyculture, density) will be sought. If such a relationship is found, safe amounts of manure can be recommended for given pond conditions.
Some researchers have found that BOD of fresh manure closely correlates with dry organic matter content of the manure. It this is consistent with data obtained in the Wuxi Lead Centre, then the easily measured parameter of dry matter percent may serve as an indicator of the manure BOD and hence as an indicator of the effect that the particular manure will have on a pond's DO regime.
(vii) Number of animals per unit area of pond
From the above experiments, the total amount of various types of manure that can be safely added to a unit area of pond will be derived. The manure production rate of pigs, cows, ducks and chickens on varied diets will also be measured. From these data, useful guidelines on the number of animals that can supply the required quantity Of manure to a given pond area (taking temperature, seasonal cloudiness and rain, fish polyculture and stocking density, animal feed quality, into account) will be derived. This will allow the integrated farmer to plan his fish pond-animal integration accordingly.
4.1.2 Green manure
The input of green manure, or green fodder, is of obvious benefit in integrated fish farming, utilizing polycultures of a large variety of species, but: (1) its relative value as compared to animal manure; (2) benefit derived from its direct use as food; and (3) its influence as a manure in the production of natural foods (bacteria, protozoans, plankton, benthos, etc.), are not clearly known. Studies should be made of: (1) the relative value of green manure versus animal manures; (2) the relative value of various types of green manure (grass, vegetable tops, etc.); (3) their direct utilization as food, compared to their use as a manure; and (4) their relative value when applied fresh or when applied after composting.
4.1.3 High fibre content substrates
(i) Treatment to increase digestibility
Substrates with high fibre content are often available in fair quantities in integrated farms. These substrates include among others rice straw, wheat straw and sugar cane waste (bagasse).
The cellulose of these substrates is often lined with lignin. This greatly reduces the rate at which these fibres can be digested by bacteria. Chopping the straw and partially hydrolysing it with weak sodium hydroxide (NaOH) has been reported to more than double the digestibility of straw in a cow's rumen. Since the processes in a pond may be similar to those in a rumen, treatment of these high-fibre substances may make them more useful as organic inputs to ponds.
To investigate the usefulness of the treatment, standard digestibility tests will be performed on treated and untreated samples of rice and wheat straws and on sugar cane waste. Treatment will consist of chopping the straw to 0.5 to 1 cm long pieces and moistening with 1 percent NaOH solution for 1 to 4 days at ambient temperatures and at 25°C.
Digestibility tests will be used to determine the available energy per unit weight as a function of original lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose. These tests will be conducted in vitro.
(ii) Fish growth in ponds with treated straw substrates
The effect of treated straws on fish growth can be measured in small ponds or large out-of-door tanks. Development of microbial growth on treated and untreated straws (bacteria, protozoa, nannoplankton) should be monitored. Straw contains low amounts of nitrogen and phosphate. These must be supplemented with chemical fertilizers to raise the C:N:P to approximately 20:1:0.5, which is considered good for microbial growth.
4.2 Fish species for culture
The Chinese experience has led to the use of polycultures containing as many as 8 or 9 compatible species having diverse food habits. It is not clear, however, whether such a practice has developed because it is significantly more productive than a polyculture containing fewer species. An efficient population must contain fishes that feed in all niches and consume the available foods. It is possible, however, that: (1) similar rate of production might be achieved using a fewer number of appropriate species; and (2) that the disadvantages of producing fewer species 