<title>ADCP/REP/80/14 - Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Outline Research Programmes </title>
<section>1</section>
PART I - OUTLINE RESEARCH PROGRAMMES FOR THE LEAD CENTRES IN INDIA AND THAILAND
PREFACE
A. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, DHAULI (BHUBANESWAR) INDIA
B. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, BANGKOK, THAILAND
PREFACE
One of the major objectives of the UNDP/FAO project for the establishment of a Regional Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia is the organization of systems-oriented multidisciplinary research for solving the problems faced in the wider application of production or farming systems that have been selected by the countries of the region for large-scale aquaculture development (see Aquaculture Planning in Asia - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Asia, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-17 October 1975. ADCP/REP/76/2: 154 p). It was intended as a support service along with training of key personnel and information dissemination, to accelerate investment in the aquaculture sector and increase production in a reasonably short period of time. Under the project's work plan, one of the first activities proposed was 'the detailed planning of research in the Lead Centres with the help of a team of experts' and identification of the facilities and equipment required for the
implementation of the proposed research.
The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), responsible for the organization of the regional project, fielded a task force consisting of the following members to carry out these preparatory activities, in respect of two of the Lead Centres: viz. the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Bangkok, Thailand, and the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre of the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute in Dhauli (Bhubaneswar), Orissa, India:
Dr. N. Fijan
(Yugoslavia)
Dr. J. Olah
(Hungary)
Dr. V.R.P. Sinha
(India)
Dr. P. Suraswade
(Thailand)
Dr. V. Varikul
(Thailand)
Mr. R. Neal
(U.S.A.) (for Thailand only)
Dr. B. Hepher
(Israel) (for India only)
Mrs. M. Delmendo
(FAO) (for Thailand only)
Dr. K.W. Chow
(FAO)
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
(FAO)
Dr. Michael New and Dr. Alex Fedoruk, FAO/UNDP experts working in Thailand, also participated in the discussions and research programme formulation in Thailand.
The task force spent considerable time with the research and extension staff of the two institutions and other agencies concerned; some field visits were made to supplement the information collected through informal and free discussions.
Both the institutions designated as Lead Centres have a wide range of activities, but the farming systems selected for research are high-priority interest items to them as well as the region as a whole. However, there are some significant differences in the involvement of scientific staff in research in the two institutions. The scientific staff of the National Inland Fisheries Institute in Bangkok combines technical services and extension work with research, whereas research and extension work, are to a large extent separated in the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute in India. The task force did not, therefore, attempt to formulate a uniform approach to research within the two institutions. Instead, programmes were recommended that can be carried out within the existing framework, with possible strengthening and external assistance. In each case, the benefits that can be derived by the host country and the other participating countries of the region, within a
reasonably short period of time, were given special consideration.
Although many problems worthy of research could be identified for each aquaculture system, an attempt was made to determine priorities. The research proposals are limited to areas that promise the greatest short-term and medium-term benefits. A major consideration in the formulation of research programmes was the feasibility of the application of improved technologies developed as a result of the proposed research. The general time-frame used for planning was a two-year start-up period followed by a five-year period of concentrated research The task force has limited itself to suggesting research approaches. The actual detailed design of experiments and observations will, naturally, be the responsibility of the multidisciplinary teams to be established for research on each farming system or specified research aspect. It is expected that the services of senior consultants can be made available to assist in this task, as well as to initiate the research programme. If required,
external expertise may have to be made available during the course of the investigations and towards the end of the start-up period to evaluate the work and suggest any needed changes in priorities and future approaches.
Even though the task force has, in every case, recommended a multi-disciplinary systems approach to research aimed at improving selected farming systems, it has also considered and emphasized the basic need for the development of essential capabilities in the disciplines involved and the laboratory and field facilities required for research in these disciplines. The task force lays special emphasis on some of the disciplines that are generally not adequately covered in aquaculture institutions such as engineering, economics, and feed technology, even though these may not have been specifically mentioned under the research requirements.
Besides the expertise necessary for developing appropriate designs of fish farms, hatcheries, raceways, cages, pens, etc., there is also a need for the development of suitable farm implements and harvesting devices. Cost-benefit analysis should form an integral part of each of the proposed experiments and should be considered as an important item of research concerning each farming system. Economic studies of farming operations must also be carried out to determine the minimum economic size of farms and enterprises. Similarly, surveys of locally available feed ingredients, determination of the nutritive values of the feed ingredients, and the formulation, preparation, and testing of least-cost feeds for various life stages of the cultivated animals, should form a basic activity in each of the institutions. Experimental and pilot-scale feed mills will be necessary for such work.
Although much of the feed technology work would initially be based on the nutritional requirements of the few warm-water fishes and crustaceans that have already been studied, it is necessary to start nutrition and food requirement studies of the species utilized in the selected farming systems as soon as possible. Similarly, expertise and facilities for diagnosis and treatment of diseases will have to be strengthened in the institutions in order that they participate effectively in integrated research programmes
Though in early research on aquaculture in the region, some attention was given to the hydrobiology of ponds, relatively little work has been done on the management of ecosystems in cultivated water bodies. An understanding of the structure and functioning of such ecosystems, including the production processes, can provide the scientific basis for proper management of a culture system. It is, therefore, necessary to develop or strengthen the capability and facilities for such work.
A. REGIONAL AQUACULTURE LEAD CENTRE, DHAULI (BHUBANESWAR) INDIA
1. INTRODUCTION
2. BACKGROUND
3. RESEARCH NEEDS
4. RESEARCH APPROACH
1. INTRODUCTION
The culture systems proposed for study in the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centre at the Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre at Dhauli (Bhubaneswar) are:
(i) mono- and polyculture of Indian, Chinese, and common carps in ponds,
(ii) systems of carp culture in undrainable, freshwater ponds, and
(iii) culture of carps in reservoirs.
The Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI) from its inception in 1947, has given very high priority to research on problems relating to carp culture. At present, 65 of its research projects relate to this sector of inland fishery work. The Institute, through its Freshwater Fish Culture Division, has done some very outstanding work in the development of carp culture technologies, although greatly handicapped by the lack of adequate experimental and laboratory facilities. The All-India Coordinated Research Project on composite fish culture and fish seed production, operational research projects, and rural aquaculture projects implemented during the last eight years, has given the Institute opportunities to test technologies under field conditions in different states in India and also to carry out adaptive research.
The construction of the Freshwater Aquaculture Research Centre in Dhauli, which is expected to become operational in 1980, will make available to the Institute for the first time, the necessary facilities for well-planned laboratory and field research required for upgrading the technologies involved. The Dhauli centre will have 656 experimental ponds of different sizes, a modern hatchery, a feed mill, 32 laboratories, an aquarium, wet laboratories, cisterns, plastic pools, fibre-glass tanks, a raceway, workshop, and other ancillary facilities. There will be a total of 62 scientists and 94 supporting technical staff of different categories. A farmers' training centre (Krishi Vigyan Kendra) and Trainers' Training Centre are also attached to the Dhauli centre; this would give the research centre greater exposure to the problems of application of technologies in the field and extension work among the farmers. The concept of multidisciplinary systems-oriented research is already
accepted and implemented in the Institute. The staffing of the Dhauli centre, with possible strengthening and adjustments, could provide the services of disciplinal units/groups concerned with aquaculture engineering, fish breeding and seed production, genetics, limnology and pond management, nutrition and feed technology, fish pathology, statistics, and economics. It is necessary to develop the laboratory and field facilities for research in these disciplines, to enable effective interdisciplinary investigations.
The centre will receive UNDP/FAO assistance under the country project 'Intensification of Freshwater Fish Culture and Training (IND/75/031)' in the form of equipment, fellowships, and short-term consultants to (a) strengthen the central research, training, and demonstration facilities required to sustain the future development of freshwater aquaculture at the national level, (b) train the highly specialized staff required for the purpose, and (c) formulate and implement realistic research and demonstration programmes the existing gaps in fish culture technology as well as directed toward the aimed at filling transfer of the newly developed technologies to the producer. The regional project for the Establishment of an Aquaculture Network in Asia (RAS/76/003) will expand and strengthen the national research on carp culture to meet regional needs within an extended time-frame, providing, in addition, essential support for the national development activities in this sector. As
the facilities of the Dhauli centre for work on carp culture in reservoirs are limited, investigations on this system will have to be organized at a selected reservoir near Dhauli, for example, Hirakund in Orissa.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Cultivated Species and Species Combinations
2.2 Fish Farms and the Use of Multipurpose Ponds for Fish Culture
2.3 Breeding, Seed Production and Genetics
2.4 Predator and Weed Control
2.5 Fertilizing and Feeding
2.6 Health Protection
2.7 Harvesting and Economics
2.8 Culture of Carps in Reservoirs
The pond culture of Indian, Chinese and the common carps is probably the most ancient system of aquaculture in Asia, although its importance and contribution to fish production differ considerably among the various countries of the region. There are plans for the expansion of carp culture in almost all the countries through the transfer of existing technologies and their adaptation and improvement through research.
2.1 Cultivated Species and Species Combinations
The traditional form of carp culture in South Asia is based on the so-called Indian major carps, catla (Catla catla), rohu (Labeo rohita), mrigal (Cirrhina mrigala), and calbas (Labeo calbasu). The three varieties of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) were introduced into India almost a century ago for culture in certain areas, but the interest in the culture of exotic carps became substantial only some two decades ago with the introduction of the Chinese carps (grass carp, Ctenopharyngodon idella, and silver carp, Hypophthalmichthyus molitrix). As the Indian major carps, like the Chinese carps, do not breed in stagnant ponds and generally spawn only in their natural habitat, the farmers had to obtain the seed in the form of eggs, hatchlings, and fry from rivers. The seed of all the species occurred together in nature and could not be sorted out easily according to species. The farmers, therefore, collected and cultured them together in ponds. Thus a system of polyculture
evolved.
The zonation in their feeding habits; catla feeding largely on the surface and the mrigal and calbasu at the bottom (the latter feeding also on snails) gave a scientific basis for this combination of species. The CIFRI has conducted considerable research on the species ratios and stocking densities that give high yields under a series of culture conditions. In recent years this species combination has been enlarged to include the Chinese and common carps, generally omitting the calbas. In experimental and demonstrations ponds, CIFRI has obtained a rate of production of up to 10 000 kg/ha per annum with fertilization and supplemental feeding. However, the wide-scale adoption of this practice by farmers would obviously depend on the availability of fry or fingerlings of the various species at the appropriate time and in sufficient numbers. The complexity of culture is also obviously increased when a larger number of species with differing habits and requirements have to be
cultured together.
Although the benefits of polyculture are widely accepted and high production has been obtained, it has not yet been established that the combination of species now adopted is the most appropriate one, particularly in view of the overlap of feeding habits of some of the species. It has also not been experimentally proved that monoculture will not yield high and economically acceptable production, rendering the overall culture operations simpler. On the other hand, in areas where the ponds are infested by a large snail population, the addition of a snail feeding fish like the pangas (Pangasius spp.), which has been shown to be a good culturable species, may prove valuable. This could replace the slow-growing calbas, which is now generally omitted from the species combinations.
2.2 Fish Farms and the Use of Multipurpose Ponds for Fish Culture
An important feature of carp culture in the countries of South Asia is the use of ponds and other water bodies constructed for other uses, instead of well laid-out fish farms with dependable sources of water supply. Most of the ponds used for carp culture cannot be drained by gravity and pumps or mechanical devices have not generally been used for this purpose. This leads to the accumulation of large deposits of silt that create unfavourable conditions for fish culture. The value of properly planned fish farms for efficient fish culture is understood, but due to the large initial capital investment for construction, there is a general belief that such farms will not be economical. The majority of fish farms in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, etc., belong to government fishery departments and are generally used only for seed production or for experimental purposes. There is obviously a need to establish the economic viability of such farms, with special reference to the use of
sites such as swamps and waste lands that are likely to be available for farm construction, methods of controlling seepage and other water losses, economical means of draining and filling, etc.
As stated earlier, the general practice in at least South Asia has been to culture fish in existing water bodies, such as village and homestead ponds. These are usually constructed for purposes other than fish culture. They are simultaneously used for washing, bathing, watering cattle, and irrigating vegetable crops. The main source of water supply is seasonal rain and, therefore, the depth of water depends on the amount of rainfall, intensity of evaporation, and seepage. Significant fluctuations in water level are a common feature. Many ponds are seasonal and others have only a very low water level during summer months. As the ponds are stocked during or immediately after the rainy season when they have the maximum water level, the biomass of fish in the ponds will be highest during the dry months when the fish have grown in size and the volume of water is lowest. Obviously this creates major hazards to the fish stock. There is often no ready source of water in the
neighbourhood to feed the ponds and, even if available, cannot be used for lack of pumping facilities. The present high price of fuel often leads to the view that pumping will not be economical. The use of unconventional sources of energy, such as solar and wind power, has not yet been tried for operating pumps in this region.
The ponds that cannot be drained by gravity can be referred to as undrainable, in the circumstances described. These ponds have heavy deposits of sediments at the bottom and many of them have permanent or seasonal blooms of blue-green algae, mainly Microcystis. A number of studies have been carried out in CIFRI and elsewhere on these plankton blooms, but there is probably not yet a full understanding and reliable quantification of the basic production processes in the water column and sediment-water interface and the role of the reduced, slowly decomposing sediment, to form the basis for suitable management measures.
The development of a dependable source of water supply may serve to minimize or obviate a number of problems faced in the use of undrainable ponds and other water bodies for carp culture. The use of shallow or deep tubewells, where groundwater supplies are adequate, has been considered, and some progressive farmers are now planning to try this. Such wells, besides providing a source of water for the ponds, may also serve the domestic needs of villages and thus contribute to human as well as pond sanitation. Aerators have been used elsewhere to improve water quality and growth rate of fish in ponds. Thus far, these have not been tried in the south or southeast Asian countries.
2.3 Breeding, Seed Production and Genetics
The major highlights of research at CIFRI relate to the induced breeding of Indian and Chinese carps and to the development of improved nursery practices. The technique of induced breeding by the injection of pituitary extract was developed in India as early as 1957 and both Indian and Chinese carps were bred at the Institute. However, India still depends to a very large extent on the collection of spawn from rivers to meet its carp seed requirements. From the point of view of technology, the two major factors responsible for this difference would appear to be the lack of suitable brood fish-rearing techniques and poor hatchery methods. The general practice is to obtain mature or maturing fish from farms or natural bodies of water during, or just before, the spawning season. The Chinese experience would indicate the need to relate the inducing technique to the age, size, and species of carp, as well as whether the individual fish has been bred before and, if so, the number
of times it has been bred. There is reason to believe that the response to hormone administration would be higher in older fish that have bred more than once. The need for pituitary extract can possibly be reduced or avoided in such cases and commercially available mammalian or human chorionic gonadotropin used instead. Proper handling methods and the treatment of spawned fish and their feeding and maintenance for future breeding have yet to be developed for both Indian major carps and Chinese carps under Indian culture conditions.
CIFRI has carried out some work on the potency of pituitary material and the dosages to be used for breeding, including the ampouling of extracts for ready use. However, considerable work remains to be done to standardize the dozes as the percentage of success in breeding is still variable; at times not more than 50 percent. Besides the low potency of donor pituitary and poor condition of the brood fish, failure may often be due to unfavourable weather conditions. Breeding success is still dependent on hydrological conditions created by monsoon rains. The determinant factors have not yet been clearly decided to make breeding independent of uncertain monsoon conditions.
Work in CIFRI has demonstrated the feasibility of spawning the same fish two or more times during the season. Proper development of the relevant techniques for multiple spawning and shifting of breeding time can prove of great benefit to seed production.
The traditional technique of hatching and rearing larvae in cloth hapas in open bodies of water is widely followed. Although with some improvements the hatching and survival rates have been increased, comparative studies indicate the superiority of modern hatcheries. Even though the initial cost of a hatchery is higher, in the long run it may be more economical in view of the increased efficiency and longer life of hatchery equipment.
The potential benefits of genetic manipulation in carp culture are well recognized in CIFRI and other research institutions of the region, but very little work has so far been done, due to either the lack of expertise or adequate facilities. Once the method of controlled breeding was developed, CIFRI attempted some preliminary experiments in inter-specific and inter-generic hybridization, mainly for the purpose of improving the market quality of the fish (smaller head and deeper body as in crosses between catla and rohu) or obtaining faster growth rates. Even though the results achieved are encouraging, it has not yet been possible to carry out adequate progeny testing due to a lack of facilities. Genetic selection experiments to prevent inbreeding depression or to obtain strains with greater resistance to temperature variations common in tropical ponds, resistance to diseases, enhanced growth rates, etc., have not been attempted.
The availability of pituitary material in sufficient quantities remains a major constraint as there is, at present, no dependable source of supply. The common carp has proved to be a very satisfactory donor and, therefore, it has been suggested that the culture of an adequate number of common carp in each farm, primarily to meet the pituitary requirements, may be an effective way of meeting the need.
As stated earlier, CIFRI's work on nursery practices has resulted in relatively dependable technologies. Survival of fry has been raised to as much as 80 percent and stocking rates up to 10 million/ha. The techniques consist of the eradication of predator and weed fishes with indigenous piscicides, followed by liming and fertilization with organic or inorganic fertilizers, control of aquatic insects which prey upon carp seed, and supplemental feeding. The addition of cobalt chloride (at 0.01 mg/fish/day) is reported to result in high survival rates. The maintenance of a standing crop of the required food organisms is a key factor and appropriate fertilizing schedules for this have to be fully worked out. Some preliminary studies have been undertaken oh the culture of selected fish food organisms such as Chlorella, Daphnia, Moina and Brachionus. However, these studies are still in very early stages of determining the feasibility of producing food organisms in separate
cultures for introduction into nursery ponds for mass culture of fry and fingerlings.
2.4 Predator and Weed Control
Two of the major problems faced in production pond management, besides water supply in undrainable fish ponds, are the control of predators and weeds. Even with repeated fishing, using suitable nets, it is not possible to remove all the predators, particularly because of the deposits of silt and organic matter at the pond bottom. Due to the unavailability of commercial derris powder, CIFRI has made a search of indigenous fish poisons of vegetable origin. Mahua (Basia latifolia) oil cake is now used and recommended by the Institute as it is a selective piscicide, only marginally toxic to fish food organisms. It also serves as a manure, and toxicity is lost in ponds in a short period of time. The roots, bark, and seeds of Barringtonia acutangula have been found to be an effective piscicide. The growing of an adequate number of these trees by the side or on dikes of fish farms may be a convenient means of making a suitable piscicide available for pond treatment.
Aquatic weeds constitute a serious constraint to the reclamation of water bodies for fish culture, as well as to the management of fish ponds. As a result of many years of research at CIFRI, effective methods of controlling or utilizing macro-vegetation have been developed. However, the economic feasibility of the methods, when incorporated in an intensive pond management system, leading to increased production and higher profits, has not been determined. The absolute cost of weed control would not be a useful criterion for deciding the economics of its use in fish culture. Although some research has been carried out on the control of algal blooms in fish ponds, a dependable method has yet to be developed, especially for ponds fertilized with inorganic fertilizer and for undrainable ponds with permanent algal blooms.
2.5 Fertilizing and Feeding
Fertilization with organic manures and inorganic fertilizers is also recommended for fish food production in rearing and stocking ponds. The most commonly used organic manure is cow dung. Studies have been made on the use of inorganic fertilizers such as urea, ammonium sulphate, calcium, and ammonium nitrate, and triple and single super phosphates under different soil and water conditions. The combination of N and P is reported to give high fish production, but a combination of mustard oil cake and inorganic fertilizers (N-P-K) appears to give better results (at least in nursery ponds). Despite these valuable findings, the basic data for the development of definitive fertilizing schedules on a national or regional basis is lacking. In view of the competing demands for the presently-used organic manures and the problems of handling, transporting, and storing large quantities of such manures, greater attention will have to be given to the use of inorganic fertilizers for
large-scale fish farming. This will necessitate the simultaneous development of suitable methods for controlling algal blooms, as chemical fertilizers have been observed to promote such blooms.
In carp farming in this region, complete feeding does not appear to have been tried. Supplemental feeding is done in most nursery ponds and in some rearing and stocking ponds. The commonly used feeds are rice bran and oil cakes. These are not inexpensive and also have other uses. Although preliminary experiments with leaf proteins and other unconventional feeds have been undertaken, a critical survey of the availability of potential feed ingredients, their nutrient values and costs, has not yet been made. Some indicative information has been gathered on the requirements of essential nutrients and this could form the basis for the preparation of test feeds, pending more detailed information on the nutritional needs of different life stages of the various species of carps.
2.6 Health Protection
Although occasionally fish-kills occur in carp ponds, the incidence of diseases is believed to be generally low. Most such mortalities are due to sudden changes in water quality. However, many ecto- and endoparasites have been described from carps and occasionally unexplained mortalities have also been reported. With the adoption of more intensive farming techniques including higher stocking rates, there is every likelihood of increased health hazards. Diagnostic and control measures must be developed, in advance, to meet such eventualities. Research in CIFRI 80 far has been restricted to systematics of parasites and application of some known disease control techniques. Laboratory facilities for diagnostic work and disease control research and adequately trained personnel for such work need to be developed for the assessment of disease incidence, development of systematic health protection measures for rearing brood fish, hatchery operation, rearing of fry and fingerlings,
and production of marketable fish. Suitable measures will have to be adopted to prevent the spread of diseases from infected hatcheries and ponds.
2.7 Harvesting and Economics
Although the seine nets used for harvesting in ponds are reasonably efficient, complete harvesting is seldom achieved in non-drainable ponds. The problem is more serious with certain species, such as the common carp. Very little research or improvisation has been directed so far to this problem.
One of the reasons for slow progress of fish culture in India and other countries of the region is said to be losses sustained because of poaching. Small ponds or farms may not justify round-the-clock watch and ward, but even in larger farms this has not proved to be so efficient, due to social and practical problems. Of all the devices so far used to prevent poaching by CIFRI, placement of barbed wire on identified spots in ponds, appears to have been the most efficient deterrent.
The few studies on the economics of carp culture so far carried out indicate its high profitability. However, these studies related mostly to culture in existing water bodies, which meant very little capital investment. The need to determine the comparative economics of fish culture in properly designed fish farms and in undrainable village or homestead ponds, has already been pointed out. It has to be determined whether the higher investment can be justified in terms of sustainable returns on a long-term basis. At present, fish farmers grow carps to a size of about 1 kg before harvesting, as that size fetches a good price in the market. Fish of even smaller size, weighing about 500 g, can be sold and it appears necessary to determine the minimum economic size to which carps should be grown in ponds. Similarly, there is at present a lack of necessary basic information to recommend the minimum economic size of farms for carp culture.
Economics form a major consideration in every aspect of commercial aquaculture but this element has not often been identified and measured in experiments. The need for appropriate evaluation of techniques is now increasingly recognized and it can be hoped that future research will yield some of the essential data required for economic modelling of fish culture operations.
2.8 Culture of Carps in Reservoirs
There are extensive lakes and reservoirs in Asia that can be used for fish production by the application of culture techniques. The Chinese manage their lakes and reservoirs, more or less as large fish farms. In other countries, a system of stocking is adopted to increase fish populations. In India, there are about 500 large and medium reservoirs covering a total water area of about 3 million hectares. The All-India Coordinated Research Project at CIFRI undertook a detailed investigation in seven reservoirs, and based on the ecological information obtained, management practices were developed. These practices have served to increase fish yields from 25 kg/ha to 80 kg/ha within a span of five years. This ecosystem-oriented reservoir development includes a stocking policy based on trophic strata in terms of shared, unshared, and vacant ecological niches.
The Dhauli centre does not have any reservoirs in its immediate vicinity to undertake detailed investigations for a critical evaluation of stocking techniques. However, it should be possible for the centre to undertake some experimental work on cage or pen culture of carps in a selected reservoir, such as the one at Hirakud in Orissa State. Cage culture of Chinese carps has already been tried with encouraging results in lakes in Nepal. Pen culture, along the lines of 