<title>ADCP/REP/78/4 - AID for Aquaculture Development. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Aid for Aquaculture </title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Most countries of the world, particularly developing countries, are interested in the development of aquaculture for increasing fishery production. Based on the rates of increased production achieved in countries that have given the essential support to aqua-culture industries it has been projected that a five-fold increase in overall world production, which amounts to about 30 million tons, is achievable by the end of the century. Such increased production is expected to be achieved through:
(a) wider application of known technologies, including the expansion of areas under culture,
(b) improvement of existing technologies to enable more intensive farming, and, to a lesser extent,
(c) the development and utilization of new technologies.
It is, however, recognized that such an increase is contingent on a variety of factors, the most important of which are financial investment, technical expertise, production inputs and support services. Developing countries would need substantial external aid for the implementation of their development plans. No single aid agency can provide all the aid needed and it is obvious that some form of cooperation between aid agencies and coordination of assistance programmes could prove very valuable. The FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture held in Kyoto, May-June 1976, considered this matter and suggested that "some suitable means of frequent consultations between bilateral and multilateral donor agencies should be established so as to enable the best use of funds and facilities available". Partly in implementation of this recommendation and largely in pursuance of the objective of developing close working relations with donor agencies, the FAO/UNDP ad hoc Consultation on Aid
for Aquaculture Development was jointly organized by FAO and UNDP through the Aqua-culture Development and Coordination Programme in La Toja (Pontevedra), Spain, 20-23 June 1978.
The meeting was inaugurated by Mr. Herman Watzinger, Assistant Director-General (Fisheries) of FAO who described the increasing importance of aquaculture in world fisheries and consequently in the programme of work of FAO. He pointed out the need to mobilize support from all available sources to facilitate accelerated development of the industry. Mr. William A. Ripley, Fisheries Advisor, UNDP, welcomed the participants on behalf of UNDP and briefly traced UNDP's role so far in the development of this sector of fisheries, particularly the launching of the inter-regional Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and the series of regional and national projects under its umbrella.
Dr. Clarence P. Idyll, Chief of the Division of International Fisheries Development and Services, National Marine Fisheries Services, NOAA, Washington (U.S.A.) served as the Chairman of the meeting and Dr. T.V.R. Pillay (FAO) as Secretary.
The agenda followed and the list of participants are given in Annexes I and II respectively. Commander Miguel A. Bringuis Villanueva, Naval Chief, Villagarcia Bay, addressed the closing session of the meeting on behalf of the Director-General of Fisheries of Spain. The field visits on 22 June 1978 were organized through the courtesy of Centro Experimental del Plan de Explotación Marisquera de Galicia, with the assistance of Prof. F. López Capont, University of Santiago de Compostela.
<section>2</section>
2. AID FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
In discussions on overall aid requirements for aquaculture the meeting took into account some of the special characteristics of aquaculture that are significant in connexion with the procurement of aid.
Aquaculture can be organized as either small- or large-scale enterprises, adopting the level of intensification desired by the operators. It conforms very closely with the priority areas of concentration of many aid-giving agencies, as is evident from the following. Aquaculture is accepted as a major means of increasing food production, especially of animal proteins in developing countries, including the Least Developed Countries (LDC's) and the Most Seriously Affected Countries (MSA's). It can contribute substantially to the improvement of the economy and living conditions of the rural poor, generate more employment in rural areas so as to reduce unemployment and under-employment in developing countries. Through increased food production it contributes to the achievement of self-sufficiency in fishery production and in many cases save or earn much-needed foreign exchange. Aquaculture is an important means of protecting aquatic areas from pollution and other environmental
degradation through compatible management measures adopted in farming. In spite of such close conformity of objectives, the quantum of aid given to aquaculture by donor agencies continues to be small.
The meeting discussed some of the reasons for the limited flow of aid to aquaculture. Being a labour-intensive type of industry, aquaculture in developing countries utilizes only very limited equipment and even major inputs like feed will normally be produced locally using local ingredients to make the operation economically feasible. So aid in the form of equipment has only limited relevance in aquaculture. Expertise in this field, particularly in tropical aquaculture, is scarce in donor countries and this also acts as a deterrent to greater involvement of donors. But probably the most important factor appeared to be the unfamiliarity of the field and lack of information on the profitability and success of aquaculture enterprises. On the other hand failures of some of the ill-conceived projects have received wide publicity, creating the image of an unprofitable industry, not contributing very much to fishery production. During discussions on this point, it was suggested
that early action should be taken to compile information on successful aquaculture programmes and to present it in a manner that will be understood and appreciated by donors and financiers. A reliable data base, particularly of relative economics, has to be developed to facilitate decision-making by aid-giving agencies. It was pointed out in this connexion that demands are often made, as a pre-requisite for aid, that aquaculture should fulfil criteria that other, even long-established and well-supported food production enterprises, are unable to meet. Some of the reluctance to risk aid may be traced to the lack of adequate legislative support for aquaculture enterprises. The need for governmental recognition of the importance of aquaculture in national development and the accordance of appropriately high priority in national development policies has been well demonstrated by countries where such recognition has led to very significant advances.
<section>3</section>
3. INVESTMENT NEEDS
Rough assessments of the investment requirements made on the basis of the projected increases in production in 32 developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America were considered by the meeting. The initial investment for increased production per ton (covering capital construction, including water supply and auxiliary facilities but excluding the cost of land) was roughly estimated at about U.S. $ 1 000 on a global average. This is probably somewhat higher than what is required for equivalent production by fishing, but the economic life of fishing equipment is short and the depreciation therefore high. On the contrary, the economic life of other aquaculture facilities is very much longer and in the case of fish farms, if well maintained, almost unlimited. If the investment cost for production of inputs and for the processing and marketing of produce is added, the total average investment would work out to about U.S. $ 1 235 for a ton of increased production. Based on
this the total capital investment requirement of the above mentioned 32 countries works out to about U.S. $ 6 304 million by the year 1985. The operating costs for an initial period may average about U.S. $ 450 per ton. As both the capital and operating costs vary very considerably between countries and even between localities within a country, these figures are to be considered as only indicative and providing a basis for evaluating the magnitude of financial investments involved.
As the foreign exchange component of investments involved is small, some countries may find it possible to raise a good proportion of the required resources internally. However, clear proof of financial profitability will have to be provided if such investments have to be obtained from commercial banks or similar financing agencies. Programmes like rural aquaculture organized for integrated development of rural areas cannot be evaluated purely on the basis of financial benefits as often the social and nutritional benefits derived by a community may even outweigh the financial returns. The meeting noted that the World Bank and regional banks like the Inter-American Development Bank give adequate weightage to social and other benefits in appraisals of projects for financial assistance. This does not, however, minimize the need to demonstrate the financial benefits of aquaculture. In fact there is sufficient evidence available, even though not fully documented, to show the
financial efficiency of aquaculture and the superiority of it in this respect in combined operations such as multiple use of water bodies, crop-cum-fish production, etc.
<section>4</section>
4. TRAINING OF MANPOWER
The scarcity of well trained and experienced practical aquaculturists is probably the most important constraint to rapid expansion of aquaculture worldwide. While different categories of personnel are needed for a well-rounded development programme, institutionalized training is needed for three categories of core personnel, viz., senior aquaculturists, technicians and extension workers. The number of senior aquaculturists needed in most countries at any particular time is too small to warrant national training arrangements. It would, therefore, be necessary to organize multidisciplinary training of such personnel on a regional or sub-regional basis in suitable institutions with adequate facilities and qualified training staff. Technicians and extension workers have to be trained in their own countries or, when necessary, on a group-country basis in the local language, with adequate emphasis on the culture systems and techniques that are likely to be utilized in their future
work.
The establishment of regional training centres for senior aquaculturists and national centres for training of technicians and extension personnel would therefore be of high priority. Due to the multidisciplinary nature of the training to be imparted and the need for adequate facilities for practical work in the field, hatcheries and laboratories, the establishment of such training centres will obviously be somewhat expensive. Because of this it may be necessary, at least initially, to combine training with research, even though this may not be the ideal arrangement.
<section>5</section>
5. RESEARCH
Effective aquaculture research has to be oriented toward developing feasible husbandry practices. As the projected increases in aquaculture production in the developing world are expected to be obtained by the application of known technologies, adaptive research to enable the transfer of technologies or the improvement of the techniques involved will have highest priority in the context of a strategy for worldwide development of the industry. The nature of facilities and variety of disciplinal expertise required make it extremely difficult, at least for the present, to organize the required type of research on a national basis. On the other hand, centralizing such research in one international centre would be counter-productive because of the differences in species cultured and the need to study the various aspects in the set of environmental conditions in which the particular species occurs and those in which it has to be reared. However, geographic regions which have, or
plan to adopt, the same culture systems and have very similar climatic and socio-economic conditions, can be identified. Problems facing the application of selected systems in those regions can be investigated more economically and efficiently in regional institutions. The results of such work will have to be tested in national centres and any major problems encountered referred back to the regional institutions for further studies and solutions. The national centres need to be strengthened for this purpose and for undertaking research on problems of a purely local nature. Close linkages will have to be established between the regional and national centres so as to form effective networks of research centres. These centres could also organize the multidisciplinary training of core personnel for aquaculture development as indicated earlier. If existing research stations are to be expanded to serve as regional research and training centres the estimated capital costs would be
between U.S. $ 5 and 10 million. The annual operating costs may be about U.S.$ 1 million for one region.
<section>6</section>
6. INFORMATION
A free exchange of information is of primary importance in the development of aquaculture, particularly since the major increases in production in the near future are to be achieved through transfer of technology. A unified comprehensive information gathering, processing and dissemination system would be necessary to meet the needs of aquaculture development. The existing information systems of some relevance to aquaculture attempt bibliographic coverage of aquaculture publications. What is of greater significance to aquaculture development would be the unconventional types of information and data contained in unpublished documents and restricted reports. Collection of these have necessarily to be done on a decentralized basis. The regional networks of research and training centres discussed earlier could be well utilized with advantage for this purpose. All input centres must use the same indexing vocabularies with a high degree of consistency if the system is to function
properly. It is necessary to process inputs from various sources at a central point for feedback of the total processed information to the input stations for dissemination in appropriate forms. If existing systems such as the National Aquaculture Information System (NAIS) sponsored by the Sea Grant Program of U.S.A. or the Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS) jointly sponsored by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of Unesco and the FAO Fisheries Department, were to be utilized, the cost of the whole operation could be minimized. The central processing station could also serve as an information retrieval centre for areas not covered by regional networks, thus serving global needs in this regard. It was suggested that such a system could be operated at an annual cost of only about U.S. $ 70 000 if existing facilities could be utilized. During discussions it was, however, pointed out that the
cost may be higher if additional staff expenditure is involved in data gatherings.
<section>7</section>
7. REVIEW OF CURRENT AND PROPOSED AID PROGRAMMES
7.1 International Foundation for Science (IFS)
7.2 United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
7.3 Sea Grant Programme, U.S.A.
7.4 German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
7.5 International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
7.6 International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources (ICLARM)
7.7 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
7.8 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
7.1 International Foundation for Science (IFS)
The International Foundation for Science (IFS), founded in 1972, is a non-governmental organization based on scientific academies and research councils in 42 countries, of which two-thirds are in developing countries. Its objects are to promote and support research in natural and social sciences and in technology for the benefit of developing countries. The Foundation provides young scientists and technologists of outstanding merit with financial and other support for their work. The main criteria for a grant are the scientific quality and promise of the proposed research and its relevance to the country concerned. In addition, IFS sponsors seminars and workshops of a regional or international character. The first regional meeting on aquaculture is to be held 28 September - 1 October 1978 in Malaysia in cooperation with the School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia.
Fifty-three grants for aquaculture were approved by IFS in 1974-77 (see list in Annex III). This is 21 percent of all IFS grants in the period, and aquaculture ranks in number of projects as the third of the six IFS priority areas. Some of the projects supported are at a stage where extensions into pilot production projects can be foreseen.
Table I
Africa
Asia
Latin America
Total
Universities
National Research Institutes
Total
Table I shows that three-quarters of the projects are carried out at universities, and in Asia the ratio is as high as four-fifths. But good extension services are vital for the practical application of aquaculture research, particularly in small-scale rural programmes, and here national research institutes often have an advantage over universities. While maintaining its interest in support to university research, IFS would encourage more applications from national research institutes (or from agricultural universities).
The following table shows the classification of projects based on subject and ecological coverage.
Table II
Freshwater
Brackish and Marine Waters
Others
Fish
Shellfish
Algae
Others
Total
The most important species studied are mullet (9 projects), tilapia (8 projects), catfish (5 projects) and carp (4 projects). In addition, there is one project of groupers in floating cages, one on ectoparasites on milkfish, one on the agricultural by-products for trout breeding and nine on local fish fauna.
Mullet (9 projects)
The species of mullet studied by IFS grantees are mainly Mugil spp. and particularly Mugil cephalus. Three grants have been awarded to Indian scientists to carry out bio-systematic analysis of grey mullet and to investigate the influence of temperature, salinity and dissolved oxygen on the survival, energy utilization and growth of the mullet species, Rhinomugil corsula. One grantee in Sri Lanka is investigating the possible polyculture of the grey mullet (M. cephalus) with prawns. In Turkey, a project was started in 1975 on the rearing of grey mullet fry, including work in artificial and natural feeding and induced spawning. This last project was terminated after one year because the grantee left the country. In Egypt, where mullet is already extensively cultured in fish farms, a grant has been given to a research project on induced spawning in order to satisfy the great need for fry. A project was initiated in Sierra Leone on the feeding biology and feed requirements of
the grey mullet in relation to productivity. The intention is to continue this project with aquaculture experiments of grey mullet in ponds of both fresh and brackish water. Finally, two grants have been recently approved for two projects in Colombia and Cuba, respectively, to study fish farming of mullet, including induced spawning experiments.
Tilapia (8 projects)
Five of the eight projects on tilapia relate to controlling their reproduction in ponds by various methods, including hybridization, and use of predators for reducing fry populations.
In addition, there is one project on artificial feeding and consequent growth rate and one on the testing of different types of fertilizers and different fish feeds to determine the most productive and economic combinations.
Catfish (5 projects)
Two projects are concerned with Chrysichthys spp., which are limited to West Africa and have not before been used for aquaculture. One of the main obstacles has been to obtain fry through artificial spawning. Growth and reproduction patterns of these species under different feeding conditions are also currently being investigated.
Three projects are concerned with the following catfish species: Pimelodus clarias (nicuro). Clarias macrocephalus, and air-breathing catfish, Clarias and Anabas spp. Research areas covered by these three projects are controlled breeding and nutritional studies, including the use of inexpensive diets from locally produced feed.
Carp (4 projects)
Three projects are concerned with improvement of cultivation of the common carp in monoculture or in combination with tilapia, through artificial feeding and artificial fry production in Madagascar and in Egypt. The fourth project concerns artificial feeding of three different species of carp, i.e. Catla catla, Labeo rohita and Cirrhina mrigala and fertilization trials in fish ponds.
IFS supports one project on the rearing of Epinephelus tauvina in floating cages in Penang.
Milkfish (1 project)
IFS supports a project on the investigation of milkfish ectoparasites in Indonesia. Another project aims at studying the utilization of waste products of sericulture as feed for local fish farms which cultivate milkfish.
Trout (1 project)
One grant has been awarded to study the utilization of agricultural by-products for trout breeding in Peru.
Local Fish Species (9 projects)
IFS supports nine projects on investigations on the culture of local fish, including the following species: Alestes sp., Osphronemus sp., Prochilodus reticulatus, Petenia umbrifera, Tor tambroides, Polunemus inducus, Eleutheronema tetradactylum, Brycon sp., Colossoma nigricans and Oxyeleotris marmorata.
Crustaceans: Shimps and Prawns (6 projects)
Four projects are carried out in Southeast Asia (three in Thailand and one in Malaysia), one in India and one in Sri Lanka.
The main lines of research developed in the five projects on Macrobrachium are:
- Artificial incubation of Macrobrachium eggs;
- Techniques for rearing of larvae up to seedling stage;
- Feeding experiments using locally available feeds;
- The occurrence of osmotic and ionic stress in the prawns during their migration from marine or brackish water into fresh water;
- Tolerance of the prawn to various pollutants by bioassay methods;
- Investigation of the possibilities of Macrobrachium culture in reservoirs.
In addition there is one project aimed at verifying the effect of tea seed used to control predator fish in shrimp ponds.
Mussels (1 project)
Only one project has been initiated in this field (in Malaysia). The work has mainly been focussed on the possible mass farming of the mussel, Mytilus viridis Linnaeus. The spawning season, physiological factors, various culture methods, feeding pattern, induced spawning for laboratory programmed production of seedlings and other related matters, are investigated.
Successful induced spawning of M. viridis was achieved in a seawater medium containing 0.2 percent NH[4]OH.
Algae (3 projects)
One of the projects supported by IFS aims at studying growth, reproduction, nutrition and ecology of local algae of economic importance as potential sources of food for cattle, poultry and even human beings.
The two remaining projects investigate algae as a potential source of raw material for industry. In Tanzania, studies have been initiated to estimate the content of colloid substance in selected Tanzanian seaweed. The results could serve as a basis for possible seaweed farming in Tanzanian coastal villages. A small pilot plant for local production of gum could also be established in the implementation phase of this project. Another project concerns a study of the ecological factors limiting the growth, biomass production and gel production of Chilean gelidiales (Rhodophyta). The experimental results in the laboratory will be used to start mass cultivation of algae under controlled conditions.
7.2 United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) established in 1976 a Fisheries Division to assist with development of small-scale fisheries, fish processing and other fishery problems as well as with aquaculture. This step reflects a renewed interest in fisheries and aquaculture by that agency. Four people currently are assigned to the Fisheries Division, two fisheries advisors, an aquaculture advisor and an economist. The Fisheries Division serves two broad functions:
(1) managing research and development projects with broad potential application, and
(2) serving in a technical advisory role to the regional bureaus and overseas missions of AID to assist with individual country development projects.
AID'S goals and objectives are oriented toward specific impacts on increasing food production and employment, income, and nutrition of the rural poor in developing countries. For this reason most aquaculture activities are limited to small-scale practices with low-priced species and with species for local consumption rather than for export. Emphasis is placed on relatively simple, small-scale production units which can be operated by small land holders with limited resources. AID does not participate in large-scale commercial activities, such as shrimp farming or deep sea fishing because investment money for these activities is available from the business community. While these activities are recognized as being important, AID'S mandate is to assist countries with programmes that impact on poor and disadvantaged people in the LDC's.
Three centrally-funded activities are presently managed by the Fisheries Division. Support for the International Center for Aquaculture at Auburn University has been provided by AID for a period of 7 years to assist in the development of research, training and extension capabilities of the University in the field of aquaculture. This support has enabled Auburn to play an active role in a variety of development projects in the LDC's. The level of support during 1977 was about U.S. $ 350 000 per year. Auburn University has a strong graduate-level educational programme, offers a five-month practical training course in aquaculture each year, and presently has about 30 foreign students involved in on-campus research, as well as both practical and academic training. All aspects of the Auburn programme are intended to be transferred to field projects where Auburn staff serve in a wide range of roles including technology transfer, development of extension and educational programmes
and research implementation.
A research project on the artificial propagation of milkfish at the Oceanic Institute in Hawaii is supported by AID. This research is directed toward improving methods of handling, maturing, and spawning milkfish adults in captivity. This research, which is funded at a rate of about U.S. $ 370 000 per year is scheduled to continue for one additional year. Additional work is needed on milkfish reproduction and larval rearing in spite of recent advances, and support to some ongoing activity in this field is planned.
Through a small centrally-funded contract AID has assisted Brazil with the development of research and training capabilities at the aquaculture centre in Pentecoste, Brazil. The annual budget for this activity is about U.S. $ 60 000 per year, and the project will end in early 1979.
A number of AID-supported aquaculture projects are being carried out under contracts managed directly by the USAID Missions in developing countries. A list of presently active projects follows:
Honduras - Small-scale aquaculture demonstration project - U.S. $ 80 000 per year.
Indonesia - Brackish water aquaculture - U.S. $ 220 000 per year.
Jamaica - Fisheries programme development - U.S. $ 170 000 per year.
Peru - Trout production - U.S. $ 150 000 per year.
Philippines - Aquaculture research and extension - U.S. $ 130 000 per year.
Colombia - Aquaculture facilities, training and extension - U.S. $ 2 200 000 loan over several year period.
Cameroon, Central African Empire and Zaire - Cooperative assistance with U.S. Peace Corps projects - low-level funding assistance.
In addition AID is interested in the activities of the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), and is considering financial support to this institution. A number of country projects are being planned in the field of aquaculture, and a new programme is being developed to support collaborative research involving U.S. and foreign institutions and related to either small-scale fisheries or fish farming.
7.3 Sea Grant Programme, U.S.A.
The Sea Grant Programme of the National Oceanographic Administration in the U.S.A. has given special emphasis to aquaculture research and development. A new Sea Grant programme will begin this year, which will provide support for programmes to enhance the research and development capability of foreign nations in aquatic sciences (including aquaculture).
Proposals for such support are accepted from United States universities (or other research groups). A U.S. university applying should have created an association with a university or other partner (a fishery agency, or a research laboratory) in the foreign country.
The amount of funds available for this new programme is U.S. $ 900 000 for fiscal year 1979 (FY 79) beginning 1 October 1978. At least this same amount will probably be available in FY 80; for subsequent years funding has not yet been arranged.
Foreign research groups which have or can establish partnership arrangements with an American university can suggest research and development projects in aquaculture (or other aquatic science subjects) to the U.S. institution. If that institution agrees to do so, it can apply to the Office of Sea Grant for funding.
The FY 79 funds have been committed, in response to a considerable number of applications. And since many of the projects are of a nature that they cannot be completed in one year, a substantial part of the FY 80 money has in effect also been committed. However, there may be some funds available for new projects in FY 80, and if the programme continues past that year applications will be accepted from United States/foreign partnerships. Proposals most likely to be funded are those that have a strong component in training and education. Some of the proposals likely to be funded this year include aquaculture components,
7.4 German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
The technical assistance to developing countries provided by the Government of Germany through the Ministry for Economic Cooperation is implemented by the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), which is a privately organized company operating under civil law. Its task is to spread know-how in the fields of "food production techniques, education, economics and organized aspects" at the request of governments of developing countries, preference being given to sectors for which high priority is accorded by the governments. About two-thirds of the projects are implemented directly by GTZ staff and the rest by consultants. Formerly the Animal Production Department dealt with fisheries, but a separate Fisheries Department was created in 1975. The Department is at present responsible for the operation of twelve on-going projects and six more are in the pipeline.
Aquaculture is a relatively new activity as far as GTZ is concerned. Interest is at present mainly concentrated on the transfer of well-known technologies, mainly semi-intensive culture of trout and carp with emphasis on hatcheries. Due to the lack of expertise it has not been possible to implement any aquaculture projects so far but two projects, one in Egypt and another in Turkey, are now in the pipeline and are expected to be implemented shortly. The German Ministry for Economic Cooperation would welcome properly prepared project proposals in the field of aquaculture for technical support and implementation.
7.5 International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
The observer from IDRC briefly outlined its aquaculture programme which involved 10 projects in six countries of Asia, seven projects in five countries of Africa, and two projects in two countries of Latin America. There were three additional supporting projects in Canada and more than 12 projects in the pipeline. The programme provided assistance to self-managed projects involving equipment training, operational costs and, where necessar