<title>Report of the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture Rome, </title>
<section>1</section>
PREPARATION OF THE DOCUMENT
This document reports on the discussions and outcomes of the Expert Consultation on Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture, which took place at FAO Headquarters in Rome, from 28 to 31 May 1996. Dr Manuel Martinez-Espinosa of the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI), organized the event as part of the Regular Programme activities. The Consultation was attended by 29 participants, of whom 14 were FAO staff members and 15 were external experts.
Apart from her valuable contributions to the Consultation, the assistance of Dr. Elizabeth Harrison, Lecturer in Social Anthropology, School of African and Asian Studies, University of Sussex (England), for editing the final version of most of the papers presented is kindly acknowledged. Thanks are also addressed to Dr. André Coche for his inputs.
Distribution:
Participants
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional and Sub-regional Fishery Officers
Selected list of experts
<section>2</section>
ABSTRACT
Martinez-Espinosa, M. (comp.)
Report of the Expert Consultation on Small-scale Rural Aquaculture. Rome, Italy, 28-31 May 1996.
FAO Fisheries Report. No. 548 Rome, FAO. 1996. 182p.
The objective of the Consultation was to provide FAO and its members with information and advice on the role of small-scale aquaculture in rural development. To this end, participants were asked to analyze and reflect on four keynote papers prepared by selected participants. The keynote papers covered four themes, identified in an overview paper: "Options for small-scale aquaculture development". The four themes were:
· Defining objectives and indicators and identifying target groups.
· The implications of integrating small-scale aquaculture within agriculture and rural development.
· The institutional context: the roles of the public/private sector.
· Options in research methods/approaches and mechanism for extension based on research results.
In addition, four information papers were presented and discussed. This document presents a summary of discussions and principal conclusions reached, followed by abstracts and full versions of the overview and thematic papers plus the abstracts of the information papers.
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS USED
ADCP:
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
AEA:
Agro-ecosystem Analysis
AIT:
Asian Institute of Technology
ALCOM:
Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme
AQUILA:
Regional Aquaculture Programme in Latin America
ARAC:
African Regional Aquaculture Centre
BID:
(IDB) Inter-American Development Bank
BOBP:
Bay of Bengal Programme
CATIE:
Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre
CEC:
Commission of the European Communities
CGIAR:
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIAT:
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture
CIFA:
Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa
CIMMYT:
International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement
CLSU:
Central Luzon State University
COPESCAL:
Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America
EIFAC:
European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission
FAO:
Food and Agriculture Organization
FIPIS:
Fisheries Project Information System
FIRI:
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FAO)
FPC:
Field Programme Committee
FPR:
Farmer Participatory Research
FSR:
Fanning Systems Research
GCP:
FAO/Government Cooperative Programme
GFCM:
The General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
GIS:
Geographic Information Systems
GNP:
Gross National Product
GTZ:
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
IAS:
Institute for African Studies
ICA:
International Center for Aquaculture and Aquatic Environments, Auburn University
ICLARM:
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDB:
Inter-American Development Bank
IDRC:
International Development Research Centre
IFAD:
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IICA:
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture
ILEIA:
Information Centre for Low-External-Input and Sustainable Agriculture
IMF:
International Monetary Fund
IPFC:
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission
IRM:
Integrated Resource Management
ISNAR:
International Service for National Agricultural Research
LUSA:
Land Use Systems Analysis
MAGFAD:
Malawi-German Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Project
MEDRAP:
Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Programme
NAC:
National Aquaculture Center
NACA:
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia and Pacific Region
NARS:
National Agricultural Research Services
NGOs:
Non-governmental Organizations
NORAD:
Norwegian Agency for International Development
ODA:
Overseas Development Administration
OECD:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OXFAM:
Oxford Committee for Famine Relief
PACON:
Pacific Congress on Marine Science and Technology
PRA:
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PVOs:
Private Voluntary Organizations
RESTORE:
The Research Tools for Natural Resource Systems Monitoring and Evaluation
RRA:
Rapid Rural Appraisal
SAAFSR-E:
Southern Africa Association for Farming Systems Research-Extension
SADC:
Southern African Development Community
SAP:
Structural Adjustment Programme
SDA:
Social Dimensions of Adjustment
SEAFDEC:
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre
SIDA:
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SIFR:
Study on International Fisheries Research
SSA:
Sub-Saharan Africa
T&V:
Training and Visit
TCP:
Technical Cooperation Programme
UNDP:
United Nations Development Fund
UNICEF:
United Nations Children's Fund
UNZA:
University of Zambia
USAID:
United States Agency for International Development
WB:
World Bank
ZAREP:
Zambia Agricultural Research and Extension Project
<section>4</section>
BACKGROUND TO THE CONSULTATION
The focus of the Consultation was small-scale rural aquaculture. This term requires some clarification, because the term "aquaculture" generally covers a broad range of culture systems and practices. These range from industrial scale intensive fish fanning undertaken principally for financial profit, to small-scale fish fanning as an integral part of rural development. The bulk of aquaculture production comes from small-scale farmers in rural areas. For many of the adopters of this kind of aquaculture, it is a secondary activity. It may be integrated with other aspects of farming, such as crop and livestock production, with each aspect enhancing the benefits of the others. Small-scale rural aquaculture has a potential for enhancing food security. It also has an important potential role in a number of other areas: as a supplement to incomes, a source of extra food, and a means of spreading risks. These features of small-scale rural aquaculture have made it a focus of
development assistance.
Although small-scale aquaculture has a long history in some parts of Asia (China and India for example) which is reflected in a thriving sector, optimism about the prospects for developing similar models elsewhere has waned in recent years. This is most marked for Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America. The precise nature of the "failure" is complex. However, certain factors are characteristic: the reluctance of farmers to adopt the technology, a tendency for ponds to be abandoned, less than optimal productivity, and the poor sustainability of aquaculture development projects. On the departure of external assistance, aquaculture activities have often slowed down, and eventually stopped. Arguably, such problems have beset many other aspects of rural development.
The FAO/NORAD/UNDP Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (1987) reviewed FAO assistance to aquaculture between 1974 and 1984. The Evaluation drew attention to a number of weaknesses in small-scale aquaculture development projects. These combined technical, economic and social factors. They often involved a failure to establish the economic viability and social acceptability of proposed culture practices. Other problems concerned the lack of well-articulated policies and rationales for aquaculture development, to faults in project design and conception, and to poor management.
Since this time, the context for aquaculture development has changed in many countries. There has been a revision of accepted approaches to government involvement in development. In many sectors, the role of the state is reduced and there has been a pressure to turn over previously government-controlled activities to the private sector.
Recently, a number of attempts have been made to learn from the findings of the Thematic Evaluation and the prevailing sense of earlier failure. These include the work of the FAO's Aquaculture for Local Community Development (ALCOM) Programme in Africa and the Regional Project for Aquaculture Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (AQUILA). Research has also been supported through the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) in Thailand, the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), the Overseas Development Administration of the UK (ODA), and the French Ministère de la Coopération et du Développement. The WB/FAO/UNDP/CEC Study of International Fisheries Research (SIFR) and its follow-up studies in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, have provided a comprehensive overview of research needs and an indicative action plan for research.
Although diverse in geographical coverage and approach, this work produced a number of common findings. These include the need for greater clarity about objectives, the means for their achievement and their measurement. Other findings concern the need to support aquaculture within the framework of rural development as a whole, the importance of the institutional context, the need for more iterative and appropriate approaches to extension, and the need to rethink the concepts of target groups previously in operation. Efforts to address these issues and to build on more participatory approaches to rural development (such as participatory appraisal and fanning systems research/extension are relatively recent).
Before the Consultation, little attempt had been made to digest or synthesize the implications of this work or to reflect on the impact and effectiveness of recent actions. Such a process was felt to be necessary in order to provide guidance for appropriate future actions. Planners and policy makers need a clarification of options, the key questions to ask for different contexts, and the likely results of subsequent choices.
The Consultation brought together selected experts from both within FAO and outside for critical discussion of four related themes. For each theme a keynote paper was presented, followed by focused discussion. On the final day, interim conclusions were outlined and their implications discussed as summarized in the next section.
<section>5</section>
SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS ^1
^1 The conclusions summarized in this table are the result of the discussion on background and information papers presented at the Consultation.
CONCLUSIONS
IMPLICATIONS/SUGGESTIONS
Concerning objectives and how they are to be ascertained.
The farmers most likely to be early adopters of even relatively low input aquaculture technology are not going to be the poorest people in any community, unless they are specifically targeted for support.
Aquaculture may not be the most appropriate option for the poorest of the poor, for example the landless, sick or elderly.
While the need for 'target group' participation in the planning and implementation of rural aquaculture is recognized, there are potential problems in fitting such participatory approaches into existing organizational, administrative and planning structures.
Every effort should continue to be made to develop low-input, low-cost aquaculture accessible to poorer strata of the rural population.
A deliberate emphasis on the "poor" as a target group may not always be appropriate.
PRA and RRA should be regarded as options which can be combined with other approaches as appropriate.
Concerning aquaculture as an aspect of rural development.
Aquaculture should be seen as one aspect of rural development, not an isolated technology. It must be integrated into a holistic approach to development. This requires a wider use of interdisciplinary approaches to rural development which include aquaculture.
This is mainly relevant in two areas:
Þ the organization of and approach to extension.
Þ the internal functioning of the FAO in terms of communication, structures and procedures. The current organizational structure of the FAO does not encourage interdisciplinary work.
FAO could help with the incorporation of aquaculture information into the wider agricultural data collection process.
More information about the impact of small-scale aquaculture on the environment must be fed into the international agreement process.
There is a need for more participatory methods at all decision making levels in FAO.
This entails:
Þ attention to the effects of the structural divisions of the FAO;
Þ the promotion of contact between units;
Þ a review of internal funding arrangements;
Þ improved communication through Information Technology;
Þ joint field missions for planning;
Þ training of FAO staff in management of and participation in group activities.
Concerning the role of the state and the private sector.
The effects of changes in the macro-economic environment in many less-developed countries on the development of small-scale rural aquaculture is not clear and needs to be better understood.
Changes in the resources available to aquaculture development and extension programmes have resulted in a greater emphasis on private sector involvement in the sub-sector without any proper understanding of the full implications of this.
There is a need for investigation of the impact of the changing macro-economic environment on small-scale farmers.
There is a need for a review and analysis of the wide range of institutions with which the FAO will be working, directly and indirectly, including those within the private sector.
The FAO should support governments in the necessary restructuring of extension, credit and marketing.
The FAO should have a continuing role in the support of national and regional information systems and cross-sectoral activities, between and within governments.
Concerning the location of FAO activity and research-development linkages.
Research should be iterative and adaptive to local conditions in order to meet development needs but this may require important shifts in the structure and focus of many aquaculture research institutions.
Given the acute pressure on resources available to the FAO, there is debate regarding on which level its interventions should focus - the regional level through specifically established bodies, national governments to assist in planning and policy development, or at the local level.
The FAO has an important role to play in the coordination of research efforts and the collection and dissemination of information.
NARs/NGOs and universities should be the principal contact points. FAO may also assist governments in the decentralization of research activities.
Regional offices and programmes should be emphasized over activities directed by headquarters.
FAO should not withdraw from immediate contact with the users of the technology and locally based institutions.
<section>6</section>
PROCEEDINGS
Abstract of Overview Background Paper
Abstracts and Discussions of Background Papers
Concluding Discussion
Abstract of Overview Background Paper ^1
^1 This overview document was not intended for discussion.
OPTIONS FOR SMALL-SCALE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
by Elizabeth Harrison
The paper highlights key issues which are critical to the development of small-scale rural aquaculture and synthesizes recent attempts at implementation. Although there remain diverse technical constraints to aquaculture development, less attention has been paid to the interaction of these with social, economic, and political factors. The focus is smaller scale, low input and output aquaculture. For many of the adopters of this kind of aquaculture, it is a secondary activity, providing a supplement of incomes, a source of extra food and a diversification strategy.
Despite the existence of a thriving sector in some areas, particularly parts of Asia, optimism about the prospects elsewhere has waned in recent years. In Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America, problems in small-scale rural aquaculture development are especially marked. There are parallels in many other aspects of rural development.
Data on aquaculture production should be treated with extreme caution. However, it is clear that the contribution of aquaculture to aggregate food supplies in Africa south of the Sahara and Latin America is minimal when compared to that of Asia. The great increases in aggregate aquaculture production in southeast Asia and parts of Latin America largely reflect the development of higher value species. The effects on the well-being of the poorest are uncertain.
Over the last thirty years, the promotion of small-scale rural aquaculture by international development organizations has often replicated early approaches. A principal criticism has been that production was subsidized from government and donor funds without creating the stimulus required to ensure autonomy. Recent changes in the political and economic environment have led to a change of approach. The role of the state has been reduced, and the emphasis is now on decentralization and privatization.
The Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture (1987) assessed FAO assistance to aquaculture between the period 1974-1984. A central finding was that there had been insufficient attention to the economic viability and social acceptability of culture practices. Recently, a number of attempts have been made to learn from the Thematic Evaluation. Although diverse, this work has produced a number of common findings. These concern: clarity about objectives and the means for the achievement and measurement; the place of aquaculture within rural development as a whole; the importance of the institutional context; and the need to strengthen research-development linkages. The paper discusses these findings and their implications.
As with many other technologies, those most likely and most able to become productive fish farmers are not the most needy. Policy makers face a dilemma: whether to focus development efforts on the resource poorest or to concentrate on technology development which may be viable in the long term but which is unlikely to be closely related to the needs of the poorest, at least in the short term. The intensification and consolidation of the activities of model farmers is increasingly seen as the key to sustained fish farming. However, these are not always easy to identify, because a strict dichotomy between commercial and subsistence orientation cannot be maintained. A further argument is that in addition to the characteristics of individual farmers, the status of the agricultural economy should also influence intervention. Factors likely to be important include population density and the availability of land. Decisions about target groups should be accompanied by awareness of
potential costs to non adopters. These include changes in the value of land and access to resources. Aquaculture is also likely to have an effect on labour relations and the value of labour. These occur both within and between households. The majority of aquaculture adopters are likely to have certain characteristics in common. They are more likely to be men, better off and better educated.
In order to improve small-scale rural aquaculture development, consideration of the institutional context is critical. The relationship between external donor and host institutions is important. It is often characterized by divergent expectations and priorities. In addition, in many places the stability of the institutional framework has generally been poor. Since the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture, there has been a change in focus away from the provision of tangible inputs towards capacity building. For example, in the context of Africa it is recognized that government supply of fingerlings is hindered by both technical difficulties and a lack of transport. The situation is less straightforward in many Asian countries where fingerling supply from government farms succeeded in popularizing aquaculture. Regarding the provision of credit, caution is warranted; small-scale rural aquaculture generally requires inputs that are available on-farm, and there are many cases of
credit becoming a tool to be manipulated by those least in need of it. Privatization is also not a simple solution because the private sector is made up of a diverse range of individuals and associations with different motivations and potentials which need to be properly understood.
Recognition that small-scale aquaculture is an aspect of farming rather than fishing may have a number of implications for the organization of extension. Suggestions have been made that the functions of a specialized aquacultural extension service should be integrated into the agricultural extension service. For donors, there is a need for better collaboration between fisheries departments with responsibility for small-scale aquaculture, and those dealing with other aspects of rural development.
Concern has been expressed that the relationship between research and development activities should be closer and better coordinated. In many countries, collaboration could be much stronger. There has been a tendency for researchers to concentrate on their technical speciality rather than development needs and constraints. On the other hand, it has been pointed out that many development constraints for small-scale aquaculture cannot be alleviated by research. Geographical information systems (GIS) have a potential for predicting viable sites for small-scale aquaculture development. Such data is useful as a starting point and obviously needs to be supplemented with political, institutional and social analyses.
Disenchantment with both the approach and the results of earlier rural development has led to more participatory approaches. These aim to enable local people to define their own agendas and to be active in the establishment of their needs. The application of these approaches to aquaculture is relatively recent. Examples exist in the work of ICLARM in Asia and Africa, and ALCOM in Africa. Participatory approaches have their critics. They may be construed as politically dangerous, because they are associated with independent decision making, self determination, and empowerment. Also, requirements of flexibility and adaptability are difficult for some organizations to meet. Development organizations thus face a challenge: how to give meaningful content to the participation they espouse.
Abstracts and Discussions of Background Papers
Theme 1: Objectives and Indicators for Aquaculture Development
Theme 2: The Place of Aquaculture in Rural Development
Theme 3: The Institutional Context
Theme 4: Research-Development Linkages
Theme 1: Objectives and Indicators for Aquaculture Development
by Richard Pretto
Abstract
The paper analyzes the short, medium and long-term goals of small-rural aquaculture development projects as well as the most commonly associated problems.
The main issues of aquaculture are discussed and criticized. In the past, fish culture was promoted without taking into consideration the other needs of the farmer, his family and rural community as a whole, such as roads, housing, latrines, wells, stoves, domestic supplies, medicine, clothes, education, and also infrastructure facilities for meetings, sports and religious activities, etc. These aspects should be analyzed at the time production plans are conceived.
New trends such as integration of small-rural aquaculture with other in and off farm activities, innovative extension methodologies and marketing survey strategies, are still in their early stages in Latin America. More recently, governments and NGOs are promoting demonstration farms for sustainable agriculture so that farmers may be self sufficient in such aspects as seed production, grow out, diet diversification and marketing. However, in general, these efforts are still considered small.
It is necessary to establish "Sustainable Development Committees" organized in provincial federations and national confederations to really ensure a sound technical assistance to the farmers. When farm by-products are utilized as fish feed, yields tend to be lower than those obtained when concentrated feed is given. However, when the quality and quantity of bio-fertilizer given is appropriate, high yields are reported. The important point is that production systems depending on local resources tend to be more sustainable. This paper stresses the importance of using bio-fertilizers and green manure in this type of aquaculture as well as the need to develop and adopt a series of standards in relation to organic fertilization, taking into consideration the specific situation of each region.
It is widely accepted that conventional methods for socio-economic rural diagnosis have not been very effective in determining the real needs and aspirations of people when development projects are formulated. In this context, new diagnostic methods have appeared, such as Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) and Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA), that incorporate community members in the identification, analysis and evaluation of their limitations and possibilities, according to their own perceptions, so that together with institutional facilitators priorities are established.
Factors affecting the sustainability of small-rural aquaculture such as seed production, fish feed, fish species, fishing gear, etc., are analyzed within the framework of the lessons learnt during the last years.
The economic feasibility of Small-Scale Rural Aquaculture activities is strengthened when, in addition to components that directly influence the cost and current income, other elements, such as species diversification and integration within the context of multiple water users, the optimal use of family labour, processing crops, nutrient recycling, etc. are considered. The interaction of aquaculture with the environment is also discussed. Some general conclusions are taken from the paper and some related recommendations are made.
Organization of session
The session involved discussion of both the thematic paper and an information paper, Rapid rural appraisal, participatory rural appraisal and aquaculture, by Philip Townsley (Annex 2).
Discussion
The discussion revolved around two main areas: (i) the value of participatory approaches in target identification and monitoring/evaluation and (ii) the question of the choice of farmers with which to work. Underlying both of these was the more fundamental issue of how to set objectives for aquaculture development. In this initial discussion, the extent of agreement was partly determined by conceptions of the role of the Consultation. While for some participants, the Consultation constituted a forum in which the more effective promotion of small-scale aquaculture was the focus, for others the appropriacy of aquaculture over other technologies was itself in question. As one participant put it 'the reason these are poor farmers is not that they don't have access to fish'.
It was agreed that the success or failure of aquaculture development activities can be determined in two main ways: whether the activities succeed in the terms set by promoters; and whether they make sense for the farmers. Notwithstanding the importance of accountability to donors, it was agreed that farmers' own acceptance or rejection of the technology should ultimately be the most important criterion. Thus, adoption and retention are important indicators. These need to be supplemented by a range of other indicators, both qualitative and quantitative. Examples suggested included:
· improvement in farmers' management skills,
· species diversity;
· resource recycling;
· improvement in incomes;
· improvement in nutrition.
It was pointed out that there is sometimes a need to disaggregate the interests of different members of the household, for example when incomes and resources were not pooled and shared between all members.
Regarding the use of participatory approaches to monitoring and evaluation, it was pointed out that there is a difference between rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal (PRA). The former is useful for extracting information. It involves simplification and systematization and is thus a tool for developers. It may enable people involved in promoting aspects of development to get information more accurately and more quickly. Its greater accuracy lies in a methodology which involves the information givers identifying the key issues themselves to a certain extent. RRA is more limited in its scope and implications than PRA, which embodies notions of empowerment and local people defining their own solutions. PRA is thus ideally about much more than information extraction and may have political and resource control implications which are unlikely to be acceptable to all institutional actors.
From this, it was agreed that the notion of 'participatory planning for aquaculture' is in a sense a contradiction in terms; if it is decided in advance that one technology is most appropriate, then the intended beneficiaries have already been excluded from a vital part of the decision-making process. The acceptance of this fact does not however, preclude the use of less radical approaches in order to ensure the appropriacy of technology development.
In particular, participants agreed that it is important to use techniques of RRA in both the formulation and the implementation of aquaculture support activities. Doubts about the accuracy of RRA techniques were expressed by some participants. It was felt that they are more subject to error and bias than conventional survey techniques, particularly because of rapidity. The idea of 'triangulation' aims to address this worry, through cross-checking from at least three sources.
Moving on to the issue of whether 'target groups' should be identified in advance, initial discussion focused on the use of communal or group promotion. In Panama, according to the thematic paper, communal groups were used for education. Farmers then undertook productive activities on an individual basis. Farmers were also taught a wide range of skills and activities including rice cultivation and water management generally. Fish culture was secondary to these activities and the production of fish seen as a welcome by-product. Participants agreed that this approach appears to be appropriate for Panama, but caution is required in attempting to apply it elsewhere. In Africa in particular, group-based aquaculture has only been successful where there was a prior and well established history of collective practices.
Participants agreed that early adopters of aquaculture are unlikely to be the resource poorest in a community. Even very simple small-scale aquaculture involves a minimum of physical strength and access to resources to which the poorest of the poor simply do not have access. A number of participants stressed the importance of working with those farmers who show evidence of capacity to succeed. The constituents of this capacity were the subject of some debate. While there was general consensus about minimum capacity in terms of land and water availability, there was more disagreement as to whether it is justifiable, appropriate, or possible, to attempt to identify in advance those farmers with 'progressive' or 'entrepreneurial' attitudes. Some participants suggested that these are a necessary prerequisite for successful adoption, while others maintained that promoters should not impose such criteria. Participants agreed that although early adopters are likely to be better off
than many others in rural communities, the promoters of aquaculture should ensure the continuing availability of low-input and low-cost technology.
Where aquaculture is practiced at relatively low levels and by few people in rural communities, such as in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, there is little evidence of negative side-effects for non adopters. However, more intensive cultivation by many people has led to problems for poorer people in parts of Asia. These include loss of resource control and environmental degradation. Some participants stressed that acceptance of 