<title>Traditional Management of Seaweeds in the District of LÃ©on</title>
<section>1</section>
PREPARATION OF THIS PAPER
This document was prepared in collaboration with CNEXO as part of FAO's Regular Programme activities, aimed at assisting fishery administrators and other persons responsible for the management of fisheries. It is one in a series of technical papers relating to the PRACTICES OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT, a list of which you will find at the end of the document.
Distribution:
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional Fisheries Officers
Directors of Fisheries
Selector SM
Fisheries Management Selector
Author
For bibliographic purposes this document should be cited as follows:
Arzel, P., 1984 Traditional management of seaweeds in the district of Leon. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (249):49 p.
ABSTRACT
This document describes and analyzes the customs and practices concerning the exploitation, allocation and conservation of seaweed resources in the area of Léon, one of the provinces of Brittany. It constitutes one of a series of technical documents prepared by the Fishery Policy and Planning Division of FAO on the principles and various methods of fisheries management. The author demonstrates that the community composed of seaweed harvesters of the Léon manages the harvest by establishing, for instance, cutting periods and exploitation rotation, as well as regulating the use of tools and practices which might damage the resources. The study also notes that the allocation and share of resources is ruled by a set of regulations regarding effort and competition in order to ensure a more rational and equitable resource management. The author concludes that this traditional management scheme has promoted the rational exploitation of the seaweed stocks and the involvement of the
community in this exploitation.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The recent extension of their territorial waters to 200 miles by coastal nations promises to have far-reaching effects upon the world's fisheries and opens new perspectives in fishery management. The task of formulating and applying policy in each country will be all the more difficult for lack of practical experience in this new situation. For this reason the Division of Fishery Policy and Planning has decided to prepare a series of technical documents on the principles and various methods of intervention in this domain. Traditional fisheries, however, often possess a valuable heritage of practices and customs of resource exploitation which may remain unknown to both fishery scientists and national administrators. Several reasons for this are:
a) Cultural isolation. Whether one speaks Breton or Tamoul, a similar problem exists: communication with official services is difficult.
b) Geographic isolation. National fisheries are often composed of small groups of fishermen, living on a rocky cliff or a remote island. The difficulty of access increases the difficulties of communication.
c) Economic isolation. Due to geographic isolation, production is dispersed. Usually sold ex-vessel, it never figures in official statistics.
d) Administrative isolation. Because information about production is lacking, the administration has only a limited understanding of the activities of these fishermen.
A fishing community thus isolated organizes and lives of itself. Such a community, composed of the seaweed harvesters of the Léon, is the subject of the current study.
Each of the customs and practices relative to the exploitation, allocation and conservation of seaweed resources may be important in resource management and therefore should be described and interpreted.
The Léon is one of the provinces of Brittany. Due to its linguistic peculiarity and its history as a former bishopric and principality, it is unique among the regions of Brittany.
In this region can be found the greatest abundance of diverse and densely growing marine fauna of the Atlantic littoral. Here, boreal species and those of warmer seas coexist. Here, the southern distribution limits of the former and the northern limits of the latter overlap (Bichard-Breau, 1964).
As fishery resources, these marine plant stocks represent a great advantage: being sedentary and often intertidal, they are more easily exploitable and quantifiable. This abundance of natural attributes makes seaweed harvesting more important in the Léon than elsewhere in France. Today, 90 percent of the national yield comes from North Finistère. Over the years, societies which earn their living by seaweed exploitation have developed a body of laws and customs for the rational organization of this exploitation.
The purpose of this study is to describe these regulations and analyze the reasons for their creation.
<section>3</section>
2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
2.1 Review of seaweed use
2.2 Review of harvesting regulations
2.1 Review of seaweed use
2.1.1 Domestic use
2.1.2 Industrial use
Seaweed harvesting is an age-old activity in the Western world. Seaweed has two uses: domestic and industrial.
2.1.1 Domestic use
2.1.1.1 Fuel
Prior to World War II, seaweed was dried to be used as fuel during the winter. On Batz Island, shore weeds gathered in September were reserved for this purpose. This seaweed was sometimes ground and combined with cow manure. The resulting mixture, or "glaouad", was formed into flat cakes, stuck to the walls of houses, and left to dry.
2.1.1.2 Food for human consumption
In general, authors who write of seaweed as food for human consumption refer to use by northern populations (British Isles, Iceland, Scandinavia). In Brittany, human consumption of seaweed is restricted to a very particular use. Chondrus crispus, dried and bleached, is boiled in milk. As it cools, it jellifies and is similar to flan or custard.
2.1.1.3 Animal feed
Palmaria palmata bears the Breton name "bijin-saout", or "cattle-weed". These seaweeds were widely used as feed for livestock. According to Dizerbo (1974), cows roaming on Batz Island and Sein Island sought out this seaweed to graze on. Sauvageau also observed this in 1920 and remarked that the inhabitants of Ouessant even created paths through the rocks so that their animals could reach the seaweed without the risk of breaking their legs. Palmaria is even used as food in the stables of Sein (Richard, 1958).
These practices are widespread on the Scottish island of Lewis (Hendrick, 1916), in Iceland and the Scandinavian countries.
During World War I, military authorities hoped to use dried seaweed to replace oats and fodder, then in scarce supply. Experiments showed that Fucus could indeed be used, just as we add seaweed meal to livestock feed as a source of vegetable protein today.
2.1.1.4 Fertilizer
In the past, because farmers kept few animals and were unable to accumulate large quantities of manure, it became customary to use seaweed as a fertilizer. Seaweed of the genus Fucus were most highly prized. Agricultural use of seaweed is recorded as early as the 14th century. In the 19th century, collection of shore seaweed gave rise to a veritable industry, strengthened by the 20th century appearance of railroads in the Saint-Politaine region. Seaweed arrived from every coastal area to provide fertilizer for local agriculture. The development of chemical fertilizers, however, caused this industry to decline.
2.1.2 Industrial use
2.1.2.1 Glass production
Soda is one of the ingredients used in the synthesis of glass. Wood ash was gradually replaced as a source of soda by the ash of certain coastal plants of the Salicaceae family. By the end of the 17th century, glassmakers in the Cherbourg region replaced these plants with seaweed ash. Not until after 1790 were these products replaced by the industrial soda produced by the new process perfected by LeBlanc.
2.1.2.2 Iodine
In 1812, an army chemist by the name of Courtois, experimenting with seaweed ash in the processing of saltpeter, discovered a new substance which he named iodine. Its therapeutic uses were soon discovered. The chemical industry became involved and, as early as 1825, the Couturier factory of Cherbourg was producing 400 kg of iodine per year. The first factory specializing in the production of iodine from seaweed ash was founded in 1829 at Conquet. After 1860, there were a dozen factories producing 60 to 70 tons of iodine per year. Production then stabilized and has remained at this level.
2.1.2.3 Alginates
Although Stanford first isolated algin in 1883, it was not until the early 20th century that a small-scale algin industry was created at Pleubian in the Côtes-du-Nord region. This industry was relatively unimportant until the disappearance of iodine factories around 1955-1960. French algin production (1,000 tons annually) has a great deal of competition on the world market at present.
2.1.2.4 Carrageenates
Carrageens, like alginates, are colloidal substances which appeared on the market after 1885-1890. The current reduced harvest of seaweed cannot meet the needs of the carrageen industry, which now relies on imports.
2.2 Review of harvesting regulations
Desouches (1962) informs us that the seacoast was defined as royal property under Charlemagne, although the principle of royal sovereignty over the coastline was not applied everywhere. In Brittany, Article 8 of the "Laws and Customs of the Principality of the Léon" specified that residents of coastal parishes had the right to collect both driftweed and shoreweed (Hevin, 1693).
In 1681, Colbert issued the important Marine Ordinance, intended to promote the organization of a French Merchant Marine, the development of the fleet and port system, and to define the status of French seamen. The Ordinance is composed of five Books. Title X of the fourth Book contains a special passage concerning seaweeds.
Title X of the Ordinance:
Pertaining to the harvesting of seaweed
Article I - The Inhabitants of coastal parishes will assemble on the first Sunday of the month of January of each year, following the parish mass, in order to determine the opening and closing dates of the annual harvest of the seaweed found in the sea adjoining their territory.
Article II - The assembly will be convoked by the church wardens or parish treasurers, and the decision of the assembly will be posted at the principal door of the church. Failure to do so will result in a fine of 10 livres (pounds).
Article III - The inhabitants are forbidden: to cut the seaweed during the night and at times other than those determined by the community, to cut the seaweed elsewhere than along the length of the coast of their parish, or to transport it to other territories, failure resulting in a fine of 50 pounds and confiscation of their horses and harnesses.
Article IV - It is forbidden to all lords of coastal properties to appropriate for themselves any portion of the rocks where seaweed grows, to prevent their vassals from gathering it during the open season, to demand anything of them in return for the right to gather it, or to allow non-residents of the parish to participate, failure resulting in punishment for misappropriation.
Article V - The right to gather any and all seaweed cast upon the shore by the tides, and to transport it where they will, is granted to all.
Subsequent changes in regulations are many. Laws regulating the actual harvesting of seaweed (see Appendix) evolved gradually, often in response to the demands of those concerned. Although the open season was sometimes determined arbitrarily (as in 1731), the need was recognized for a more flexible system which would allow the municipalities themselves to determine the dates best suited to local conditions. As the Revolution abolished privilege, the revolutionary governments decided that seaweed was a public resource which should be accessible to all. This position was later abandoned, however, and seaweed once again became the property of coastal populations only (Decree of 18 Thermidor, Year 10).
Among the measures which should be mentioned are the allocation of bottom weed to registered sailors (1853) and the official definition of a coastal resident (1890).
<section>4</section>
3. TRADITIONAL EXPLOITATION
3.1 The Léon Region
3.2 Seaweed resources
3.3 Means of production
3.1 The Léon Region
Figure 1. The Léon, a province of Brittany
The Léon is a small province of Brittany which includes the arrondissements of Brest and Morlaix. Geographically, the area corresponds to the northwest point of the Breton peninsula. It is a rather low plateau, deeply carved by tides which have created the deep estuaries so characteristic of this region. The plateau is a shale-covered platform, 1 to 5 km wide, which extends under the sea to the isobath-40. Strong currents and gale force winds are typical of the sea off these coasts.
The Léon is densely populated (100 inhabitants per km^2). The inhabitants are peasants, fishermen, and seamen in the navy and merchant marine. The same socio-professional division is found in the littoral communes situated where the Arvor, a narrow land stretching along the coast, meets the Menez, an inland region.
3.2 Seaweed resources
The conditions present along the Breton coast are favourable to the development of all varieties of seaweed. The rocky bottom essential to seaweed growth is found on the ocean floor and also in intertidal areas. Because the various seaweed species have different ecological needs, their populations grow in successive layers or bands:
1) The Pelvetia caniculata and Fucus spiralis band is at high-sea, spring-tide level and is wave-beaten.
2) The Ascophyllum band. Ascophyllum nodosum is found in sheltered areas at mid-high, spring-tide level.
3) The Fucus vesiculosis band. Fucus vesiculosis lives at the same level as Ascophyllum nodosum but in a more open, wave-beaten location.
4) The Fucus serratus band. This seaweed is found below the preceding seaweeds, reaching as far as the low neap-tide level. It tends to prefer calmer areas.
5) The Himanthalia elongata band is found in both rough and sheltered areas, beginning at the low neap-tide level. Chondrus crispus and Gigartina stellata, two valuable red seaweeds, occur together here.
6) The Laminaria band. Laminaria digitata occurs beginning at the low-tide level, coefficient 90. It prefers calm zones and is replaced by Laminaria hyperborea in more open areas. Laminaria ochroleuca can be found below these two seaweeds, to a depth of 10 metres above the sea floor. The following diagrams by J. Y. Floch (1964) illustrate this zonation (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Zonation of seaweed populations. J.Y. Floch (1964)
A quantitative inventory of littoral flora can be obtained through research of the kind done in 1967 in the Molène Archipelago by J. Y. Floch, U.B.O., and now being conducted on the coasts of Brittany by Perez, et al., of the Scientific and Technical Institute of Maritime Fisheries.
3.3 Means of production
3.3.1 Harvesting methods
3.3.2 Labour force
3.3.3 Production
3.3.4 Fleet transformation
3.3.1 Harvesting methods
3.3.1.1 Driftweed
Large quantities of seaweed torn from the bottom by winter winds are left on shore by the tides. A considerable amount of beached driftweed, or cast, is also seen in the spring when Laminaria hyperborea fronds are shed and regenerated. Professional harvesters and also farmers seeking inexpensive fertilizer are mobilized for the collection of this seaweed. The professionals prefer drying these seaweeds to be burned later to make "soda".
3.3.1.2 Shore seaweed
a) Black seaweed. Throughout history, black seaweed has been the most sought after seaweed variety. Since the 19th century, it has been reserved for agricultural use. During open harvest season, virtually every member of the community is involved, some using sickles to cut the seaweed and others carrying it to the cart tracks to be taken away. The very poor transport their harvest in baskets.
b) Lichen. Harvesting lichen is a recent activity in Brittany, begun in the 1890s on the initiative of German industrialists. It began in the Côtes-du-Nord, eventually spread to the Finistère region, and reached from Picardie to Oléron by 1920. The only materials required for this totally manual harvest are sacks and baskets in which to collect the clumps of lichen torn from the rocks. Later the harvest is spread on the dunes to dry and bleach.
3.3.1.3 Bottom seaweed
Boats are usually used to harvest bottomweed. The tool used, called a guillotine, is a sickle-like blade mounted on a handle 3 to 4 metres long. The sloop-type boats used are about 6 metres long. Their rigging consists of a staysail and a topsail, lowered during the harvest to make less work. Dry-cutting is possible at times of very low tide. The crew leaves the boat moored at some distance from the coast and then proceeds to cut the seaweed with sickles. When the tide turns, the harvest is loaded into the tender and transferred to the boat.
3.3.1.4 Yield estimates
a) Driftweed. It is difficult to estimate driftweed yield because the abundance of the cast, or drift, varies. During an average morning's work, however, one team can remove 8 to 10 cartloads, or approximately 5 to 6 tons of wet seaweed.
b) Rockweeds. During the first days of the season, a family of five or six can usually collect 12 to 15 cartloads of black seaweed per day. This is the equivalent of 7 to 9 tons of fresh seaweed.
For lichen, the estimate is only approximately 100 to 150 kg per person per day, because these seaweeds are small and must be gathered by hand.
c) Bottom or Oarweeds. Yield obviously varies from one region to another, but on the mainland, a single harvester with a boat is able to produce at least three cardloads of Laminaria per day, or about 2 tons. Yield is greater in the islands. By the end of the season, an industrious professional will have produced 100 tons of fresh seaweed on the continent or 250 tons of fresh seaweed from the islands.
3.3.2 Labour force
It is usually a simple matter to quantify the manpower and fleet involved in a fishery. In the case of the seaweed industry, this task is complicated by the occasional addition to the professional labour force of farmers, fishermen and also women, children and retired persons. Resource abundance determines the numbers involved. A rough estimate places the number of professional seaweed harvesters in the Léon during the year between World Wars I and II at about 2,500. Since 1950, their number has been recorded and can be found in the Appendix.
3.3.3 Production
Production statistics are often inaccurate. Product classification, category grouping and units of measure (ton or m^3) are not standardized. Dry and fresh weights are cited indiscriminately and allowance is rarely made for seaweed processing.
Yield statistics, if available, might not be truly representative as it is unlikely that the tonnage of shore seaweed taken directly for use as fertilizer would be included. The annual Fucus harvest in the Léon before World War II is estimated at 30 to 40,000 tons of fresh seaweed. The annual production of 60 to 70 tons of iodine required about 200,000 tons of fresh Laminaria. Post-war production is better known (Appendix) and most originates in the Léon region, whose contribution has risen from 50 percent of the total in 1920 to 90 percent today.
3.3.4 Fleet transformation
Post-war modernization of the seaweed industry began with the motorization of the fleet. The next step, in 1960, was the adoption of a new hand tool. The "scoubidou", which pulls seaweed out rather than cutting it, increased yield considerably.
In their effort to eliminate manual labour, seaweed fishermen first tried in 1960 to vacuum from the bottom seaweed which had first been cut by a diver using a sickle. When this failed a new method was sought. A second experiment, begun in 1967, used a steel hull fitted with a hydraulic crane. The crane had a strong metal arm ending in a hook which rotated under water to pull out seaweed. As the crane moved in the opposite direction above the ship's hold, the seaweed dropped and was stacked. Seventy-five of these units have been built since 1971. The present fleet is limited to this number for commercial reasons (see 7.2.3 Bottomweed).
<section>5</section>
4. SOURCES AND METHODS
4.1 Field inquiry
4.2 Bibliographical research
Data upon which this report was based was compiled from both field inquiry and bibliographical research. We will examine each source in turn.
4.1 Field inquiry
A preliminary inquiry located those regions where customs and regulations had been preserved and those where they had lost their importance. Further field research concentrated on those areas where tradition remains strong, limiting further study of areas where tradition had been lost or weakened to only one or two communes.
The inquiries conducted in the Léon concerned 21 of these 32 coastal communities (Figure 3). Thirty-eight informants were contacted and the archives of 16 town halls were consulted. The interviews took place in homes and former work places. They were conducted in French, in Breton, or in a combination of the two and followed a pre-established but not inflexibile pattern.
Figure 3. Scope of the research. The communes marked are those in which the inquiry was conducted
4.2 Bibliographical research
One bibliographic source, the municipal ordinance, provides an invaluable bridge between field inquiry and pure bibliographical research. A vivid record of the local past and present, these ordinances are mayoral decisions recorded in a special register and carry the force of law within the commune. This type of municipal decree differs from the more widely applied decisions of the municipal council as a body.
Bibliographic research is important because it records facts and events beyond the memory of those living. Our memory is in fact quite short, each generation remembering little of the history of the generation preceding it. Because our informants could furnish little information about the time before the early 20th century it was necessary to go back in time by means of bibliographical research.
Reference to this extensive bibliography is made as needed throughout the text. All titles referred to are found in the final bibliography, although they are only a few of those available.
Unloading seaweed at the Aber Wrach'h in the early 1900s. Notice the family's involvement in the harvest, rare in sea-related industries, where women and children usually may not go on board.
A modern seaweed boat returning to port with a load of about 10 tons of Laminaria. L'Alber-Ildut, 1981
Condition of an Ascophyllum field after the harvest (Tréompan, 1978)
<section>6</section>
5. RESOURCE CONSERVATION
5.1 Determining minimal biomass
5.2 Determination of the cutting periods
5.3 Control of harvesting practices
5.4 Substratum maintenance and improvement
5.1 Determining minimal biomass
It is essential to conserve a minimal biomass to ensure stock regeneration after each harvest. After the Fucaceae harvest, however, seaweed fishermen believe that they have left the littoral completely denuded.
To obtain an objective view of the impact of the harvest on a stock, a study was made of exploited zones and also adjacent unexploited control zones. The study showed that only 95 percent of the exploited zones had been harvested, leaving at least 5 percent of the original biomass. The obvious explanation is that it would be a waste of time to collect all the seaweed from rocks that are always covered by a thick seaweed growth.
Whatever the seaweed fishermen may say, the littoral is never entirely exploited. There are areas where harvesting is forbidden, where seaweed is scarce or access difficult or impossible.
A portion of the biomass is therefore always preserved. We do not know if it is sufficient to renew the stock or even what minimal amount of the biomass is needed for stock restoration. Have algologists and phyto-sociologists found answers to these questions?
A few tufts left on the rocks cannot repopulate the shores. Recolonization is accomplished by sexual reproduction when fertilized female gametes are implanted on the bare substratum.
A minimal biomass able to produce gametes is therefore a requisite for repopulation. Because there is no record of a disappearance or rarification of the resource, it can be assumed that the minimal biomass has always been preserved, even if undefined, throughout the history of seaweed exploitation.
The Applied Algology Department of the I.S.T.P.M. recently determined a yield quota for Laminaria, limiting the maximum harvest on the North Brittany coast to 40,000 tons of fresh seaweed. Although study of minimal biomass has just begun, they suggest that harvests surpassing this limit might impede resource renewal.
Does this scientific view contradict that of seaweed harvesters? The seaweed harvester is both peasant and sailor and understands farming. He understands that there is no spontaneous generation; that no seaweed will grow if the coasts are truly left bare. For him, the exploitation of a seaweed bed and of a prairie are comparable. The concept of resource conservation exists for the harvester but is interpreted differently.
The possibilities of stock regeneration seem infinite. "Even when everything is cut, it grows back" they say. "Even the farmer cuts the hay every year". The first statement is based on the idea that the tendril remaining after the harvest is enough to allow the plant to grow again, but this assertion is false. The growth zone is located at the junction of the frond and the stipe in Laminaria, and is apical in Fucaceae.
The parallel drawn between land and sea leads to the belief that annual harvesting actually maintains the seaweed bed, encouraging growth, and that unexploited seaweed beds may be lost, like fallow land gone to seed.
Although biologically unsound, the seaweed harvester's understanding of resource renewal led to the gradual adoption of measures intended to ensure rational resource exploitation. The question is whether these measures have had a positive impact on exploitation or have simply provided a framework for its management.
To answer this question we will first examine existing measures as a whole. They can be divided into the following four groups:
a) cutting period and age at harvest;
b) harvesting methods;
c) maintenance and improvement of the substratum; and
d) shore maintenance.
5.2 Determination of the cutting periods
5.2.1 Seaweed maturity
5.2.2 Perception of need - inserting the harvest in the annual work calendar
5.2.3 Cutting periods
5.2.4 Exploitation rotation
The determination of the cutting periods responds to biological and also social imperatives.
5.2.1 Seaweed maturity
There exists two concepts of seaweed maturity: that of the scientist and that of the seaweed harvester.
5.2.1.1 The viewpoint of the population dynamics specialist
The population dynamics specialist can use models combining natural mortality and weight increase to define the moment at which the population reaches its maximum weight. By varying age at first catch and effort, he determines optimal exploitation conditions. In this case, however, the fundamental difference between the plan and animal worlds should be noted. For seaweeds, negative growth is normal. It appears at two levels, first over an annual period and then over the life span of the seaweed (about 5 years for Laminaria).
Each year, after the emission of spores, the plant tissues which held them are disorganized. They are dilacerated by the agitation of the sea, causing apical wear. The leaf is broken and weight is lost.
Moreover, while the stipe continues to grow, the leaf reaches its maximum length by about the third year. During the third and fourth years, apical wear overcomes growth and size decreases progressively.
Therefore the plan reaches maximum weight during the third year. It is important to learn whether this is also true of cohorts. This, however, requires data on natural mortality not currently available, and this aspect of the study could not be pursued.
Even when growth and mortality parameters are known, they apply to the given area only. They vary considerably depending on where the seaweed is grown:
a) submerged or exposed zone;
b) depth;
c) exposure (wave-beaten of sheltered mode);
d) amount of sunshine received; and
e) hydrodynamism (currents).
Even for the same population these factors vary, demonstrating how difficult it is to obtain a global view of biological phenomena.
5.2.1.2 The viewpoint of the seaweed harvester
The seaweed fisherman's perception of these phenomena is different. For him, the concept of seaweed maturity is not globalized but related to the plant's seasonal evolution, which he understands quite well.
As the season opens at the end of April, the first loads of Laminaria are not very dense. Most seaweed fishermen believe that Laminaria increase their weight by one-third during the course of the season, attaining maximum weight in July or August. The names they use to refer to the first seaweed harvested describe it as "tali moan" and "tali dister" (thin or skinny Laminaria), and "paper butum" (cigarette paper). "It loses all its weight drying" they say. "It shrivels away" and "it isn't ripe".
The mayors responsible for choosing harvest dates in each commune are aware of these problems. In 1904, the mayor Landunvez spoke of these plant resources in the following terms in a request that the Marine Minister modify regulations then in force:
Seaweed can certainly be compared to wild prairie grass; it has its periods of germination, of growth, of blossoming and maturity. Its harvest should be authorized only from the moment when this sea grass reaches a certain development, in April or early May.
Similar ideas are expressed by Mr. E. de Poulpiquet, mayor of Plouguerneau, in the preamble of an ordinance regulating seaweed harvesting in 1811:
Because it is of major importance to the community that the cutting or harvesting of black seaweed take place at a fixed date acceptable to the community and because this sea grass is most valuable when it has reached full maturity but deteriorates and loses all value if cut in any amount and at any season.....
5.2.2 Perception of need - inserting the harvest in the annual work calendar
Determination of the open season is not influenced by questions of maturity alone. Intemperate weather imposes other constraints.
5.2.2.1 Allowance for drying time
Because adequate sunshine is essential to the proper drying of seaweed, the open season must occur in the summer months.
5.2.2.2 Importance of plowing time
In the Upper Léon region, it was customary to open the seaweed harvest in February. This cutting was well timed to provide fertilizer for the fields about to be plowed. The objection that the seaweed harvested at this time was not fully developed was countered by the argument that the longer the seaweed grew, the greater the risk that it would be torn out by bad weather. According to this reasoning, waiting until May would result in waste of the resource.
Our own observation is that while Fucus are certainly present in the cast, they are not a major portion of it, even today when no harvest may take place for several years in certain areas. The management practice mentioned above is therefore based on faulty reasoning.
5.2.2.3 Other needs
On Batz Island, a harvest regularly took place in September to stock fuel for the winter.
5.2.3 Cutting periods
5.2.3.1 Opening the season
The Fucus harvest takes place in May when these seaweeds reach full development. The seaweed fishermen of Plouguerneau patiently awaited this time in order to offer a product of the highest quality, saying that local farmers were willing to wait and pay more for their product than buy lower priced seaweed elsewhere, earlier.
Ascophyllum reaches maturity near Michaelmas (29 September) and the season is extended to include that date. At Landéda in 1926, the harvest lasted from 17 June to 31 October. The season for Fucacaea was from 14 May to 17 July.
Soon after large-scale exploitation of lichen began off the coasts of Léon in about 1905, it was observed that lichen reached its optimum development in the summer. Dates for the open season were set accordingly.
Seaweed fishermen on the west coast of the Léon region were accustomed to beginning their harvest of Laminaria in mid-April; much sooner than in the Pagan region. Although they knew that the season began too early, and "Eun hanter re abred" (Too soon by half) became a local proverb, these fishermen resigned themselves to this early season in order to shorten the long period of winter inactivity.
Even an early season was an im