<title>Livestock in Mixed Farming Systems of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
The Context
The last few decades have seen considerable changes taking place in livestock population, structure, and management systems in the mid-mountain areas of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas (HKH) where mixed crop-livestock farming systems predominate. These changes have altered the relationship of livestock to overall farming systems and natural resources' management. In addition, changes in the natural resources themselves have also had an impact on how livestock are managed. In general, change is greater in the hill/mid-mountain regions of Nepal and in the Western Himalayas where there has been rapid population growth leading to decreased farm size and increased land fragmentation.
Several studies have been carried out in the past on the livestock sector development in the HKH by different institutions and agencies in particular areas and with different objectives. However, knowledge about how these changes affect sustainable livestock production systems has not yet been systematically integrated. This report seeks to bring together various studies on the linkages that influence the livestock sector of the HKH region and aims to provide better understanding of the changing linkages between livestock production systems and other components of the farming system such as soil fertility, crop productivity, and natural resources. It is based on a comprehensive review of relevant secondary sources and is supplemented by additional field data gathered from sites in three high-pressure hill districts of Nepal. It is acknowledged that prevailing policies and strategies for livestock sector development in the HKH hills need to be re-examined for their
appropriateness in the context of a rapidly changing hill farming and livestock production system.
It is in this context that the FAO Animal Production and Health Division commissioned the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) to carry out this study, the main purpose of which is to provide input from the Hindu-Kush Himalayas to a global FAO study on sustainable livestock production presently being undertaken in the East African highland areas and in the Andean countries of South America. The process has led to an international symposium on `Livestock in Mountain/Highland Production Systems: Research and Development Challenges into the Next Millennium' which will be held jointly by the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Global Mountain Programme, International Potato Centre (GMP, CIP) and International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) in Pokhara, Nepal, from December 7 to 11, 1999.
Terms of Reference/Areas of Enquiry
A Letter of Agreement between FAO and ICIMOD was signed. ICIMOD undertook the following areas of study according to the terms of reference given in this Letter of Agreement.
- What have been the changes in livestock population and composition in areas in which livestock are an integral part of the overall farming system?
- How has the growing human population affected livestock population, animal productivity, and agricultural productivity?
- How are population pressures contributing to landholding sizes and livestock holding sizes?
- What are the linkages between livestock and crops and with common property resources and private land?
- What are the changes taking place in terms of livestock holding and management practices as a result of the high pressure on land and increasing cropping intensity?
- How are livestock contributing to the sustainable management of agricultural land and how are they contributing in terms of farm power/energy?
- Are livestock contributing to an improvement in natural resources or to their degradation?
- What are the key policy issues for the Himalayas in terms of livestock sector development?
- What is the role and contribution of gender to livestock management at the household level ?
- How are gender issues addressed in livestock policy formulation, e.g., in extension service delivery systems and research?
- What are the new options for improving livestock management and productivity?
Study Areas and Methodology
This study focusses on `high pressure' areas of the Himalayan region, namely, the middle hills of Nepal and the Western Indian Himalayas. These are places in which livestock densities in terms of cultivated land, grazing land, and forests are high and areas where mixed crop-livestock farming systems predominate. The areas for study were selected on the basis of these criteria. Overall, the pressure of livestock population on land resources is relatively less in the Eastern Himalayas than in the Western Himalayas.
Since this is a state-of-the-art study, it involves a comprehensive critique of relevant secondary sources and a careful review and analysis of the data and information gathered from these sources. Several case studies carried out by other organizations are reviewed and the data/information collated. In addition, a vast set of scattered data and information from government sources and other research reports are reviewed and analysed. Simple analysis in terms of percentage change between two time periods and growth rates is carried out for data from the livestock sector.
The districts for the field study in Nepal were chosen after ranking all the hill districts based on the values of `Livestock Pressure Indicators'. High pressure areas were determined on the basis of both livestock and human components (Annexes 1 and 2). The following parameters were used to determine the pressure indicators.
- Human population per hectare of cultivated land
- LSU (livestock units) per hectare of cultivated land
- LSU per hectare of forest and cultivated land and specifically in the case of high pressure in terms of small ruminants
- Small ruminants (sheep and goats) per hectare of cultivated land
The districts selected in Nepal were Kaski and Parbat in the western middle hills and Dolakha in the central hills. Parbat and Kaski both demonstrated intense human pressure on cultivated land. Total livestock pressure on resources is also high in both these districts. The average number of buffaloes per hectare of cultivated land is higher in both Kaski and Parbat than in Dolakha. Dolakha is subject to dense pressure in terms of small ruminants such as sheep and goats.
The information gathered was through general reconnaissance, informal survey of households, and through supplemental information from key informants on the issue of changing trends in livestock management practices and farmers' perceptions on the state of livestock feed resources.
Informal interviews and group discussions took place with farmers' groups, buffalo traders, smallholder dairy farmers, women farmers' groups, milk cooperatives, field-based technicians, and officials.
Following the completion of the draft report, a one-day workshop was carried out to discuss the findings with different stakeholders and experts who have had a lot of experience in livestock sector development. Twenty-eight individuals took part and sufficient time for discussion was provided. A checklist questionnaire was also developed to draw upon their expertise. Their suggestions are incorporated in this study.
<section>2</section>
Livestock Composition
in the Himalayan Mountain
Introduction
In the Himalayan subtropical mountains, particularly those of Nepal and India, the majority of farmers operate mixed crop-livestock farming systems. There are a great many different types of agro-ecosystems in this region. Geographic and topographic variations (mountain specificities - Jodha et al. 1992) have combined to provide a microcosm of the earth's vegetation types and farming systems. Landholdings are small and fragmented, consisting mostly of marginal uplands. The most common livestock species in mixed crop farming are cattle 1 , buffaloes, sheep and goats (Annex 3 summarises typical management practices).
The raising of livestock is integrated with food crop production. While crops provide feed and fodder, livestock provide meat, milk and milk products such as cheese and `ghee' (clarified butter) for subsistence and as a source of cash income. Livestock also supply draught power to till the land and provide power for other agricultural operations such as threshing and transport.
In this farming system there is a dynamic relationship between common property resources, livestock and crops. It is clear that livestock depend to a certain extent on fodder and grass growing on CPRs: the animals then return the fodder, grass, and crop residues to the cropland via manure. Indeed, livestock are integral to the sustainability of hill and mountain farming. However, this relationship is now under increasing pressure from different sources.
Livestock also supply draught
power to till the land
There are now varying degrees of commercialisation within these mixed crop-livestock farming systems. In fact, livestock production systems are becoming quite dynamic in certain pocket areas of the mountains with accessibility to road networks and a market for milk. Farmers are being provided with a strong incentive to keep livestock; not just to fulfill the traditional role of providing draught power, milk, meat, and manure for households; but also to generate cash income through the sale of milk and meat. In these areas there has been a shift in management practices, with linkages to common property resources (CPRs) beginning to break down.
Two types of specialised livestock production systems may be noted today. The first is in valley areas with good access to markets. Here, a specialist cattle milk production system based on Jersey cross-bred cattle is emerging. Some areas in Himachal Pradesh (HP) practise such specialisation.
The second specialised system is emerging in the middle hills of Nepal where smallholdings close to the main roads depend mostly on crop residues and fodder/grasses grown on private land and CPRs to feed livestock. In these areas, commercial smallholder dairy farming is becoming common. These places are on (or close to) roadheads where government organizations and private dairies establish milk collection centres. There is an increase in the trend for feeding animals purchased concentrate feed, an especially common practice with farmers who are raising improved cross-bred cows or improved buffaloes. Thus, dependency of dairy animals on common property resources is minimal in these areas, and stall feeding is the key management practice. Linkages between crops, livestock, and the forests have weakened. Farmers now rely more and more on private land to meet fodder needs, and there is a decline in the relative importance of farmyard manure (FYM)/compost in the nutrient
management system. This decline has to some extent been compensated for by the use of chemical fertilizer. Chapter 4 discusses the issue in detail.
Population Growth and Land Fragmentation
As a result of growing human populations in the HKH mountains, land resources per household are decreasing, with sub-division and fragmentation of land over the generations. Sharma (1993) compiled data on trends in population growth and per capita cultivated landholdings in selected areas of the HKH. The magnitude of reduction in per capita cultivated land is as high as 46.7 per cent within a decade in the case of the Central Himalayas (see Table 2.1). Similarly, the reduction in per capita landholdings in the Western Indian Himalayas and Nepal is also significant. In all likelihood, this trend grew throughout the 1990s.
On average, a mountain/hill household raises six to 10 head of livestock.
Although the head of livestock per household is decreasing, the number of livestock overall has not decreased enough to match the reduced per capita resource availability. This is because livestock are an integral part of a large majority of subsistence households and must be maintained at a certain minimum threshold.
Trends in Livestock Population and Herd Composition
In the mixed crop farming systems of the middle mountains of Nepal, pressure from livestock is heavy. In relation to the amount of arable land per person, the livestock population is one of the highest in Asia (LRMP 1993). The population of livestock in Nepal in 1996 was estimated to be about 6.5 million head of cattle, 3.4 million buffaloes, 5.9 million goats, and 0.9 million sheep (Agricultural Statistics of Nepal 1996/97). Livestock contribute 20 per cent of household cash income in the hills and mountains , without taking home consumption of livestock products into account (Nepal Rastra Bank 1988). On average, a mountain/hill household raises six to 10 head of livestock, including large and small ruminants (Shrestha and Sherchan 1998).
Table 2.1: Population Growth Trend and Per Capita Cultivated Land (ha) in Selected Areas of the HKH
Country/region
Year
Population growth trend
Per capita cultivated land (ha)
Percentage decrease in landholding
India
Himachal
Pradesh
UP (8 districts)
Nepal
39.1 (as of 1961)
Source: Sharma 1993
The analysis of livestock data in Nepal reveals that the most noticeable change in the hills is the significant increase in the buffalo and goat population between 1988/89 and 1996/97 (see Table 2.2). Percentage changes in the number of buffaloes and goats are a positive indication of their importance, while the change in cattle and sheep is negative and shows their decreasing importance in the total herd composition and in the economy. The most noticeable change in the mountains is the considerable decline in the sheep population in total herd composition.
Table 2.3 reveals that between 1984/85 and 1989/90 there was significant growth in the pig population in both the mountains and hills of Nepal. Conversely, the population grew at a rate of slightly more than one per cent annually between 1991/92 and 1997/98.
Table 2.2: Livestock Population and Composition in the Mountains and Hills of Nepal (%)
Livestock classes
Mountains
Hills
Change in Population (1988/89 -1996/97)
Change in Share* (1988/89 -1996/97)
Change in Population (1988/89 -1996/97)
Change in Share (1988/89 &1996/97)
Cattle
Buffaloes
Sheep
Goats
Sources: (1) Agricultural Statistics of Nepal (1990) and Statistical Information on Nepalese Agriculture (1996/97), HMG Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Statistics Division, Singha Durbar, Nepal
*[Percentage share of individual species in total livestock population (Cattle+Buffaloes+Sheep+Goats) ]
The number of poultry grew significantly between 1984/85 and 1991/92, at a rate of 10.4 per cent and 7.1 per cent in the hills and mountains respectively. This growth stagnated in the hills between 1991/92 and 1997/98, but still grew at an annual rate of 2.5 per cent in the mountains
Table 2.3: Population Growth Rate (%) of Poultry and Pigs in the Hills and Mountains of Nepal
Percentage
1984/85 to 1989/90
1991/92 to 1997/98
Poultry
- Hills
- Mtns
Pigs
- Hills
- Mtns
Source: Statistical Information on Nepalese Agriculture Series (1984/85 to 1997/1998), Ministry of Agriculture, Nepal
In Himachal, the poultry population increased very significantly by 145 per cent from 1972 to 1982. The increase continued between 1982 and 1992. On the other hand, although the population of pigs increased by 179 per cent from 1972 to 1982, it decreased by 14 per cent from 1982 to 1992. In the Kumaon areas (Uttar Pradesh hills), the poultry population has increased since 1972 (see Table 2.4).
Table 2.4: Trends in Population of Poultry and Pigs in Himachal Pradesh and UP Hills, India
Himachal Pradesh
% Increase from 1972 to 1982
% Increase from 1982 to 1992
Poultry
Pigs
UP Hills (Kumaon)
% Change between 1972-1978
% Change between 1978-1982
% Change between 1982-1986
Poultry
Source: Himachal,`Livestock Census Himachal Pradesh, 1972, 1982, 1992': UP Hills, in R. Swarup (1991) "Agricultural Economy of Himalayan Region."
Data from the Indian Himalayas have shown that a large proportion of livestock is raised under the mixed cropping system. Cattle are most common (47.5%), followed by goats (15.8%), buffaloes (12.3%), and sheep (10.4%) in mixed crop farming in the central and eastern Himalayas (Rao and Saxena 1994). Under this system, the landholdings are small and livestock provide a critical supplement to farm incomes. According to studies on livestock conditions, livestock pressure is increasing in the Western Himalayas of India.
In Himachal Pradesh, cattle population during the past two decades has remained at the same level, whereas the buffalo population grew more rapidly. Composition of the cattle population in the state showed improvement as a result of an increase in the share of milch cows and a decrease in the share of dry cows and young stock. Population of in-milk bovines increased at a faster rate that that of other categories of bovine animals and livestock. These changes indicate that livestock owners were replacing low productivity cattle and buffaloes with more productive animals (Chand 1997).
Furthermore, in Himachal about 75-80 per cent of rural households keep milch cattle and over 90 per cent keep either milch or draught animals. Buffaloes are kept by about 50 per cent of households in Mandi District. Smallholder farms commonly keep one to two draught cattle and two to four milch and growing cattle or buffaloes; although the number of households owning two or more milch animals has been declining. Overall, about 40-50 per cent of households keep sheep and goats.This proportion increases to 60-70 per cent in highland areas.
An analysis of temporal changes in livestock population and composition from 1978 to 1988 in the UP Hills and in Himachal Pradesh from 1982 to 1992 (Table 2.5) shows that, whereas the cattle population has declined, the buffalo population has greatly increased. Among small ruminants, the sheep population has declined. It is interesting to observe that there has been a significant increase in the goat population. The percentage share of cattle and sheep has gone down in the overall herd composition, while the percentage of buffaloes and goats has increased.
Table 2.5: Livestock Population and Composition in the Indian Himalayas
Livestock species
Central Himalayas (Uttarakhand) 1978-1988
Western Himalayas (Himachal Pradesh) 1982-1992
% increase in population
% change in composition
% increase in population
% change in composition
Cattle
Buffalo
Sheep
Goats
Source: Directorate of Land Records (1992), Livestock Census, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla.
Revenue Department, Livestock Census, Govt. of UP, Lucknow, India
To conclude, trends in the population of various livestock classes in high-pressure areas under study - Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and Nepal - are summarised in Table 2.6.
Table 2.6: Trends in Livestock Population and Composition in the Himalayan Region
Province/
State/Region
Population
Composition
Year
Cat-tle
Buf-falo
She-ep
Goat
Cat-tle
Buf-falo
She-ep
Goat
Himachal Pradesh
Uttarakhand
Nepal (Mtns)
Nepal (Hills)
Significant Increase
Increase
Decrease
No change
Land Fragmentation and Changes in Livestock Composition
The growth in population has led to an increased number of farm households, but with a decreased farm size. The present trend sees more livestock but fewer animals per household. The increased number of livestock overall has put pressure on natural resources and has necessitated that land be cultivated for animal feed. The following section analyses available data related to this issue.
Field investigations were carried out to ascertain the changing trend in livestock management practice and farmers' perceptions on the state of livestock feed resources. Land fragmentation and the corresponding household-level adaptation emerged as the main issue. There was clear evidence of significant, ongoing changes over the past two decades. This time frame also coincides with the period of active implementation of government policies to control access to common property resources. Table 2.7 shows that, with the shift towards the nuclear family, there has been extensive fragmentation of landholdings. Thus, while holdings increase in number they decrease in size. The person-land ratio has risen significantly over the area as a whole. Arable land has remained much the same, and there is little prospect for increasing it. With more effective community protection of common property resources, it is logical to conclude that land-based feed resources for livestock are
becoming more and more difficult to provide under the prevailing system. These factors have led to the present reduction in the number of livestock in individual farm households. Labour shortages and the change to productivity-enhancing management practices have further contributed to the reduction in livestock numbers at the household level.
Table 2.7: Change in Land and Family Size in Selected Households of Kabhre VDC, Dolakha, Nepal
Farmer
Land Size (ha)
Family Size
% Decrease in Holding Size
20 Years Ago
At Present
20 Years Ago
At Present
Danima Sherpa
Krishna
Ram P. Dahal
Nuru Sherpa
Source: Field Survey, Dolakha 1998
Farmers in the area have reduced the number of large ruminants while increasing feed resources (privately planted trees, shrubs, and ground grass) to sustain small ruminants (Table 2.8).
Table 2.8: Change in Composition of Livestock in Selected Households of Kabhre VDC, Dolakha, Nepal
Farmer
Cattle
Buffaloes
Sheep
Goats
20 years ago
Now
20 years ago
Now
20 years ago
Now
20 years ago
Now
H. P Lamichane
Nuru Sherpa
B.K. Chaulagai
R. P Dahal
Source: Field Survey, Dolakha 1998
The practice of planting fodder on private land has increased in recent years because of decreased access to public land. Goats are easily managed because they feed on a wide range of fodder, grass, and shrub species that are planted around the homestead. Because of their size, their feed requirements are also nominal compared to large ruminants such as buffaloes. Goats also have an advantage in that they can be tended by children. The villages are close to the main highway, i.e., the Lamoshangu-Jiri Road, that provides ready access to large markets. As a result, households are keeping more goats and reducing the number of large ruminants (see Table 2.8).
Box 2.1
Two Farmers from Dolakha District
Case 1: Damina Sherpa from Thuloban of Dolakha District
Damina Sherpa's family had 90-100 ropani (4.5-5 ha) of land 20 years ago and now has approximately 41 ropani (2 ha) left. There were 14 family members in his family 20 years ago, and now there are six members. The total livestock population has increased due to the change from a joint to a nuclear family, which entails individual families possessing their own livestock. A remarkable increase in the total population of goats has occurred for this reason. According to the farmer, the population of sheep has declined due to a lack of pasture land. The price of selected livestock has been increasing. A goat with a live weight of 20-25 kg presently sells for Rs 2,000-3,000 (farmgate price).
Case 2: Krishna from Sisneri Village of Dolakha District
Krishna lives in Sisneri. His family had 35 ropani (1.75 ha) of land 20 years ago. Now he has only 20 ropani. Family size has increased from six to twelve. This particular farmer had a total of 26 livestock 20 years ago, consisting of cattle, buffalo, and goats. Goats accounted for most of his livestock. Currently, he has a total of 11 head of livestock. He states that the livestock population has decreased due to lack of feed/fodder and medical facilities. The animals in his household are fed on fodder from his own land or from fodder which he purchases. (A bundle of hay costs Rs 100). One of the two buffaloes is of an improved breed. Cattle are mostly raised for manure and goats for meat. In Krishna's opinion, the forest has decreased because of the increase in population. However, many grass species are now grown in private forests. These include napier, Settaria, pine, Ulnus, bamboo and broom grass. In times of fodder scarcity, Krishna gets fodder for his livestock from
private land..
Keeping fewer animals with more output (milk) by replacing local stock with high-yielding animals and through stall feeding has become an established trend in the middle hills. Stall feeding of animals has increased over the last ten years. One of the disadvantages of this system is the big demand for human labour to tend the animals. The human labour available in the middle hills is increasingly allocated to home-based livestock-rearing activities such as stall feeding.
There has also been a significant improvement in agricultural mechanisation
The changes in farming conditions are also affecting the use of draught animal power. For instance, paddy requires more bullock-pair days than other food crops. The shift to plantation crops in Himachal Pradesh has reduced the demand for draught power. Consequently, the numbers of draught animals declined in six districts of the state during 1972-1992. The shrinkage in the average size of holdings from 1.53 hectares in 1971 to 1972 to approximately 1.20 hectares in 1991 to 1992 has also contributed to a reduction in the draught animal population in the state.
There has also been a significant improvement in agricultural mechanisation in the low-lying districts and in the valley areas of Himachal Pradesh during the last two decades. Singh (1996), however, points out that vegetable cultivation, as opposed to orchards, is labour-intensive, requiring large inputs of both human and animal labour.
"One assumes that fruit farming (apple orchards, for instance) requires no draught animal power (DAP) input. But the fact is that the area under fruit trees is used extensively for vegetable cultivation. As a result, it has been noted that the orchard-vegetable cropping system demands more DAP than a cereal-based system" (Vir Singh [1998]).
The number of draught animals has increased in areas under commercial crops, such as potatoes and off-season vegetables, that require more bullock-pair days for the preparation of the field than traditional crops. However, there has been an overall decline in the draught animal population. This is a positive development towards a reduction in the overall pressure of livestock on land resources in mountain areas.
^1 The author has used the term cattle here to mean strictly cows and bulls and not all domesticated quadrupeds, or all species in the Bos taurus category.
<section>3</section>
The Increase in Smallholder
Dairies in Mountain Areas
Importance of Livestock in the Farm Household Economy
Livestock have been playing an important role in the farm economy of mountain households. Table 3.1 shows that livestock alone contribute 47.3 per cent and 35.7 per cent of the total agricultural income in the mountains and hills respectively.
Table 3.1: Contribution of Livestock to Total Agricualtural Income of Farm Households (Rs)
Ecological Region
Crop
Livestock
Agriculture
Mountain
Hill
Terai
Nepal
Figures within parentheses indicate percentage contribution.
Source: Shrestha and Sherchand (1988)
Similarly, a case study in the Western Himalayas (Himachal Pradesh) shows that livestock contributes 25-26 per cent of the total farm income per household (HH).
Table 3.2: Contribution of Livestock to Total Farm Income per HH in Himachal Pradesh (IRs per HH)
Transformed Area
Non-transformed Area
Income per HH
Share in Total (%)
Income per HH
Share in Total (%)
Livestock
Crop Production
Fruit Crops
Vegetable Production
Total
Source: Sharma (1996)
Increasing Trend of Smallholder Dairy Farming
Smallholder dairy farming is becoming increasingly popular in many of the accessible pocket areas of the HKH. It has also been the driving force behind the transformation of the rural economy in many parts of the Nepalese and Indian hills. An established market for fresh milk and the development of milk cooperatives and milk collection centres have made this possible.
While the development of smallholder dairy farming in Nepal's hills was achieved by replacing low-yielding cattle with high-yielding buffaloes (murras, or murrah cross-breeds); development in the Indian Himalayas, and particularly the Western Indian Himalayas, came about through the replacement of local cattle with improved cattle (Jersey or Jersey cross-breeds). Smallholder dairy farming in both Nepal and the Indian Himalayas is discussed in greater detail below.
SmallHolder Dairy Dynamics in the Middle Hills of Nepal
Waiting by the road with milk for collection.
In Nepal's hills, areas that are accessible via the road network have experienced significant growth in smallholder dairy farming. The marketing of milk has been facilitated by the establishment of milk collection centres that transport milk to the main chilling centres established by parastatal government organizations, as well as by private dairies, in the main towns or cities. The government has established chilling centres that are the ultimate market for the milk sold by the smallholder.
Smallholders manage their herds in order to maintain a steady supply of milk. The number of milch animals that can be reared in a smallholder system has a certain ceiling. The obvious determining factors to this are the size of landholding, the availability of feed, and human labour. There was general consensus among the farmers interviewed that the optimal number of milch buffaloes that can be maintained under the prevailing conditions for smallholders rarely exceeds three animals. Most farmers interviewed owned between one to two milch buffaloes. Given the limitation of the herd size for milch animals, the main problem is ensuring a continuous supply of milk when one or more of the animals in the herd is not lactating.
Innovative farmers have adapted to the changing circumstances. Box 3.1 illustrates one strategy adopted by a smallholder dairy farmer.
Box 3.1:
Managing a Buffalo Herd in a Smallholder Dairy
A farmer buys a milch buffalo from a lowland buffalo trader at a price of Rs 23,000-28,000. The animal is milked for eight months to a year and the gross income amounts to Rs 25,000-30,000. Some farmers sell expectant ` bakerno' buffaloes for Rs 18,000-20,000 after one year of milking and buy an in-milk buffalo `laino' from the trader at a price of Rs 25,000-30,000. This is to ensure continued milk production. If the farmer waits for the `bakerno' buffalo, it takes about eight months before it calves and begins producing milk. The strategy is most suitable for smallholders who manage only one buffalo, but it is also being adopted by those who have more than one buffalo. In circumstances when old buffaloes become `tharo' (dry) , they are sold for meat for about Rs 8,000-10,000, depending on body weight. Similarly, in cases in which animals do not conceive for ten years, they are sold for meat, generating a salvation value of Rs 4,000-6,000. The majority of smallholders do not
raise buffalo calves to maturity. The calves have a poor survival rate and are deliberately starved. Buffalo calves, if raised, consume three to four litres of milk each day for at least three months, and therefore reduce the amount of milk that can be sold in the market. They are also difficult to maintain after the weaning period because of feed resource constraints. In most cases, the buffalo provides milk from the third day after calving. The process is made easier by an injection that hastens lactation.Farmers prefer lactating buffaloes without calves.
[Based on discussions with farmers from VDCs in Kaski District (exchange rate at the time 1 US$ =68 Rs)]
Preference for Buffaloes
Table 3.3 shows that most of the milk production in Nepal is from buffaloes. The share of buffalo milk and cow's milk in the total milk produced 1996/1997 was 69.4 per cent and 30.6 per cent respectively, showing that buffaloes are the main milk producers.
Table 3.3: Production and Productivity of Buffaloes and Cows in Nepal, 1996/1997
Total Popu-lation
Milch Animal Popu-lation
Milk Pro-duction (in MT)
Share in total milk produced
Milk Yield (kg/year)
(average of district values)
Buffaloes
Cattle
Source: Statistical Information on Nepalese Agriculture, 1996.1997, HMG, Nepal
The high yield of buffalo milk suggests a high proportion of of improved buffaloes, especially in accessible areas.
The preference for buffaloes for milk production has led to a great demand for the high-yielding murrah breed. The main reasons for this are identified in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Farmers' Reasons for Preferring Buffaloes
