Gender Database for Agriculture and Resource Management Policies in Pacific Island Countries.
RAP Publication: 1999/7.
By Heather Booth Demography Programme Research School of Social Sciences Australian National University, Canberra FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand ISBN: 974-86644-2-2.
Editorial support: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer Ms. Marlynne E. Hopper, Consultant For copies write to: Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
The designations and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
2.3.1 Agriculture 2.3.2 Fisheries 2.3.3 Forestry 2.3.4 Natural Resource Management 2.3.5 Rural Development.
The Impact of Policies on Household Livelihood and Food Security 3.1 Fiji 3.2 Vanuatu 3.3 Samoa.
Gender-Disaggregated Data Needs to Address Policy 4.1 Data Availability and Unavailability.
Capacity Building in Gender-Disaggregated Database Development Bibliography Annex 1: Statistical Sources and Planned Activities Annex 2: Persons Consulted.
Women in development activities in the Pacific Region should be built on solid foundations of good data and area specific information on gender roles in local production. Policies and programmes in such sectors as agriculture, ecological resource management and rural production should reflect the realities of country specific gender roles in these sectors. Though in recent years the development agenda has addressed gender concerns, we still have not achieved the goals set by various UN conferences on women since 1985. In Pacific Island countries, a major barrier to full integration is a lack of current information on the status of women in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprises. FAO, as the lead technical organization in the UN system, has a special interest in developing appropriate databases on women's participation in agriculture and associated sectors that determine household food security. In reflection of such commitment, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific has produced this document on "Gender Database Development for Agriculture and Resource Management Policies in Pacific Island Countries." The document presents an overview of the policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprise development, and examines the current status of gender integration in these policies. The focus of the analysis is on the current integration and potential for these policies with gender considerations to achieve sustained household food security in the selected Pacific Island countries. Drawing from such a review, the document provides detailed guidelines on data requirements relating to gender dimensions in agriculture, natural resource management and rural development in Pacific Island countries. We hope this document will be of value to the Ministries and other interested groups who aim to improve the integration of women in development and country specific genderdisaggregated databases among Pacific Region countries.
Prem Nath Assistant Director General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand January 1999.
Acknowledgements.
This document is an outcome of various missions undertaken by Heather Booth, a demographer and social statistician with extensive experience in the Pacific Island region. The report was prepared under a consultancy agreement with the Women in Development Programme of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific. Visits were made in April-May 1997 to the three Pacific Island countries covered in the report, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, in order to collect information and interview key people. A list of the individuals consulted appears as part of the report. Each one of them is gratefully acknowledged for their assistance which enabled FAO/RAP to prepare this report. Dr. Vili A. Fuavao, FAO Sub-Regional Representative for the Pacific Islands, is sincerely thanked for his support to this mission. The report provides an analysis of the current status of gender and women's concerns in policies concerning natural resource management, agriculture and rural enterprise development in relation to food security. It also addresses data needs in order to address the gender aspects of these policies. Although the report is developed based on field visits to three island countries in the Pacific Region, we hope that the database framework that forms part of the document will provide guidelines for gender sensitive database development for other island countries in the region. Women in Development Service Sustainable Development Department Group (RAPS) FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand January 1999.
Women in Pacific Island countries play an important role in agricultural and natural resource management and in contributing to food and livelihood security. Yet, programmes and policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprises do not always take women's roles sufficiently into account given the scarcity of relevant gender-differentiated and sex-segregated information. In order to better address food security issues, it is therefore necessary to understand the status of women as compared to men and to strengthen women's roles in agriculture and natural resource management. This requires the availability of relevant information. This report examines existing policies in the areas of agriculture, natural resource management, fisheries, forestry and rural enterprises in three Pacific Island countries, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa. The focus is on their relevance to women and their impact on food and livelihood security as a means to analyse the current status of gender integration in these policies. On the basis of this review and analysis of existing policies, the report identifies relevant sex-disaggregated data needs at both the national and community level, as well as appropriate sources and data availability. Strategies for capacity building in the identification, collection and tabulation of sex-disaggregated data are subsequently discussed as a means of enhancing database development in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. While acknowledging the importance and complementarity of qualitative data, such as detailed studies of gender roles or gender sensitive case studies of farming systems, the focus of the report is on the quantitative data required to understand the roles of women in agriculture, rural development and food security. Sex-disaggregated data are a crucial prerequisite to the formulation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and.
programmes aimed at enhancing the role of women in agriculture, natural resource management and rural development. However statistical data of this nature are not readily available in Pacific Island countries. In this context, the report identifies data needs as well as appropriate data sources for the three countries in the study. Data needs are grouped into seven broad areas: i) economic activities; ii) access to means of production; iii) time use and productivity; iv) decision making; v) income and expenditure; vi) food security; and vii) education and training. Within each area, a range of data requirements at the community and/or national level are defined, data availability or unavailability is discussed, and sources or proposed sources are identified. The report is cognisant of the importance of database development as a means to strengthen policy formulation and planning in the areas of agriculture, natural resource management, forestry, fisheries and rural enterprise development. It discusses how database development involves defining data needs, collecting and tabulating required data and organizing data such that they are available to users. In addition, it recognises the need to foster effective communication channels between data users and data producers. On the basis of the analysis of existing policies related to agriculture and natural resource management in Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, the report reiterates the absolute necessity of according full attention to gender-disaggregated and sexsegregated information in database development. In this context, four strategies for capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development are identified and discussed. Firstly, the need to increase gender awareness among both users and producers of databases in order to enhance recognition and definition of data needs, and to improve communications between them. The second strategy recommends capacity building in gender-disaggregated database development for users in order to increase their statistical awareness given the tendency for users concerned with women in development issues to be unfamiliar with data collection. The third strategy.
focuses on the need to increase skills in farming systems database development, not currently well developed in the Pacific Region, given their appropriateness for gathering community level information. For instance, in many cases much of the data required at the community level could be best obtained through research and extension activities carried out within communities. Finally, the fourth strategy advocates the need to enhance skills in computer-based data compilation, through training in database management and software use, given the great benefits and potential of electronic technologies for database development. The report illustrates the value and potential of genderdisaggregated database development as a tool for the effective formulation and monitoring of agriculture and natural resource policies. Although the focus of this report is on three Pacific Island countries, Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa, it nevertheless provides a guide to strengthen database development in other countries in the region.
Abbreviations.
ADB AusAID DP3 EEZ FAO GATT GDP ILO Asian Development Bank Australian Agency for International Development Third National Development Plan (1992-1996), Vanuatu Exclusive Economic Zone Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs Gross Domestic Product International Labour Organization.
ISCO-88 International Standard Classification of Occupations 1988 ISIC International Standard Industrial Classification MAFFM Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery and Meteorology, Samoa MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests, Fiji MWA NA NGO RAP SPC Ministry for Women's Affairs, Samoa Not available Non-governmental Organization FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific South Pacific Commission.
SPREP UNDP UNFPA UNICEF UNIFEM.
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme United Nations Development Programme United Nations Population Fund United Nations International Childrens Fund United Nations Development Fund for Women.
VRDTCA Vanuatu Rural Development and Training Centres' Association.
Introduction.
Pacific Island economies are based primarily on agriculture and related activities. For many years, the traditional subsistence economy has coexisted with cash cropping of coconut and introduced crops. This ensured a continuation of self-sufficiency in food and traditional materials whilst at the same time providing cash for essential expenses. Until relatively recently, the agricultural sector received considerable public support and protectionist policies served to ensure food security. The globalisation of world trade and, in particular, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) are however producing significant changes in world commodity markets with repercussions for agriculture in the Pacific. Under the Agreement on Agriculture of the Uruguay Round, policies must have minimal distortionary effects on trade or production. Pacific Island economies have had to adapt to this new environment. The response has generally been a greater emphasis on the expansion of the private sector with exports as the key to economic growth. Under this new approach to economic development, food production and food security are in danger of receiving less attention than they deserve. Since women contribute considerably to food production, especially in Melanesia, women's roles are in similar danger. This only adds to the low status that women in general and women's role in agriculture already suffer. The issue of women's role in agriculture (and concomitant role in natural resource management) is thus closely linked to the issue of food security. Indeed, to some extent, it has been possible to de-emphasise the importance of food production and food security simply because these are women's concerns. In order to address food security issues therefore, it is necessary to address and strengthen women's role in agriculture and.
natural resource management. This requires the availability of information. In this context, this report seeks to make relevant data available for three Pacific Island countries, namely Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa1. An important part of the report focuses on data requirements to inform and strengthen policy and programme planning in agriculture and natural resource management with respect to women's roles in food production and food security. Additionally, the report includes a discussion of data needs to address policy in rural enterprise development given its close links to agriculture. The improved availability of sex-disaggregated data on human resources in agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development will also permit monitoring of the changes in women's and men's roles which will undoubtedly come about as a result of the policies being put in place. A first requirement for determining data needs to address policy is to examine that policy. The report therefore examines current policies, including strategies and plans of action, in the areas of agriculture (including fishing and forestry) and natural resource management as well as rural enterprise development. The focus is on those areas that are relevant to women and on the impact of policies on food security and livelihood concerns. The report then identifies relevant sex-disaggregated data needs at the national and community level, as well as appropriate sources and data availability. Strategies for capacity building in the identification, collection and tabulation of sex-disaggregated data are then discussed as a means to enhance database development in human resources with regard to agriculture, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. This report forms part of activities carried out under the global FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development 1996-2001. The purposes of this plan are threefold. Firstly, to ensure an evolving and dynamic understanding of the situation of rural women including their contributions to, and constraints in, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and rural development. Secondly, to establish strategies and instruments with reachable targets to address.
gender concerns in technical areas. Thirdly, to thereby enhance the benefits that rural women derive from their contributions to sustainable agriculture, forestry, fisheries and rural development, as well as strengthen their capacities to contribute to national development in each of these sectors.
1 Visits were made to these countries in April-May 1997.
Policies Relating to Agriculture, Fisheries, Forestry, Natural Resource Management and Rural Enterprise Development.
This section discusses current policies related to agriculture, fisheries, forestry, natural resource management and rural enterprise development. In order to place these policies in context, some brief background information is also presented.
Policies relating to economic and social development in Fiji were formulated in the early 1990s (Government of the Republic of Fiji, 1993) and remain current after review in 1995 (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). The overall aims are accelerated economic growth through private sector initiatives with an emphasis on exports. The private sector, operating in the open market, is recognised as providing the essential driving force of the economy, employment, rising real incomes and revenue. Women have been entering the labour force in increasing numbers in line with the rapid expansion of the manufacturing sector, in particular, the garment export industry. In addition, an increasing number of women are self-employed in incomegenerating activities such as farming, market-gardening, fishing and reef-gleaning, craft production, retail outlets and food vending. Many of these women are self-made, having received no capital or training assistance. Policies are intended to involve women as equal partners in development, to train women to improve their employment opportunities, to strengthen information on gender and co-ordination of activities, and to examine legislation with respect to gender (Government of Fiji, 1993). Gender issues in agriculture have recently been addressed by the UNIFEM/AusAID/UNDP Mainstreaming.
Project2. Gender sensitisation training has been carried out and gender is now incorporated into mainstream policies and activities.
2.1.1 Agriculture.
In the early 1990s in Fiji, agriculture contributed about a fifth of GDP and almost half of total employment (women's informal sector employment is under reported). Sugar is the major agricultural export crop, accounting for some 40 percent of total exports in the early 1990s and employing almost exclusively men. Copra is also important. More recently introduced crops have included ginger, cocoa and rice. Dalo, duruka and yaqona are also exported. Beef, dairy, poultry and pork production meet most of the needs of the local market. The 1993 Policy3 (Government of Fiji, 1993) aimed to guide the agricultural sector towards a more competitive and market oriented approach to production, and to use this approach in adapting to market changes. Such market changes include: deregulation; export promotion; improved productivity and cost effectiveness; private sector investment; reorientation towards financial performance and price effectiveness; and quality and privatisation. The Government continues to provide essential support services, such as extension, research, marketing, planning, regulatory and infrastructure development, and to enforce measures for sustainability. Under the current refocusing, this policy continues to pursue a corporate thrust, promoting increased co-operation with the private sector and export growth. A Corporate Plan (1997-2000) has been submitted to the Government for approval. Export-led policy aims to provide income-generating opportunities and, at the same time, improve food accessibility and affordability through consistency and quality of supply. It promotes traditional crops and seeks to identify niche markets (in USA, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and Japan) for crops such as fresh mango, pawpaw, taro and traditional vegetables. The European market is an important market for processed fruit puree. The emphasis on.
an expanded export market is expected to generate a surplus for the domestic market. The surplus for the domestic market is intended to absorb lower quality produce and provide economic viability. Most of the produce exported is grown by smallholders with 1-10 acres of land. There is a mix of smallholdings and larger mechanised farms, always with mixed cropping. Constraints to agricultural development include: inadequate extension services; land tenure; water resources; insufficient appropriate technologies; irregularity of supply; undeveloped local and export markets; and a lack of many of the facilities essential for efficient production including infrastructure, capital, cold-storage and freezing capacity (for marine produce), fuel supplies for fishing boats, marketing facilities, quality control, and adequate air freight capacity (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995).
2.1.2 Fisheries.
Although the fisheries sector contributes only 1.6 percent of GDP, it has important potential. Subsistence fisheries are important in themselves and as a source of income. Beche-demer are processed and dried. Trochus shells are collected for the pearl button industry. Women are involved in subsistence fisheries related to gathering from the reef. Women are also successfully involved in freshwater mussel fisheries. A fish cannery employs rural women. The 1993 Policy aims to: expand tuna and deep-sea fisheries; improve efficiency and quality in small-scale commercial fisheries; assist rural fishermen in the transition from subsistence to small-scale commercial fishing; develop aquaculture (e.g. giant clam, seaweed, prawn and crab); improve quality and added value of exports; regulate for optimum utilisation and sustainability; and improve business management and fish handling and processing. At present, however, there is no strategy for inshore fisheries and no assessment of stock levels.
2.1.3 Forestry.
The forestry sector contributed 1.9 percent of GDP in 1994 (AusAID, 1995). Forestry provides rural income through plantation ownership and timber processing. Forest exports are an important component of total exports. Women are involved in community forestry. In response to a request from women, the Forestry Department began to promote the identification and awareness of traditional medicinal plants. A non-governmental organization (NGO), Wainimate, also promotes traditional medicinal plants. The 1993 Policy aims to: encourage private sector involvement; ensure landowner participation; strengthen training; prepare a forest inventory; promote the 1990 logging code; promote conservation, protection, rehabilitation and reserves; and encourage forest development so as to generate employment and export income.
2.1.4 Natural Resource Management.
The 1993 Policy seeks to ensure sustainable development through protection of the environment against activities that threaten long-term productive potential. This includes sustainable use of renewable resources, integrating environmental management in planning and development, strengthening institutional capacity for sound environmental management, environmental impact studies for new projects, and prioritising environmental expenditure according to its contribution to socioeconomic development. Conservation and protection measures are to include community education. In addition, the active participation of rural people is to be encouraged in precautionary environment conservation and management measures.
2.1.5 Rural Development.
Some two-thirds of Fiji's population is rural (Government of Fiji, 1986 Census). In line with national development policies, the private sector is seen as the key to rural development through employment creation and the retention of young people in rural areas. The main areas identified for development are agriculture.
(including timber) and tourism. Policies and strategies for rural development are intended to: improve the effectiveness of local administration; promote private investment; provide supporting infrastructure for private commercial development; maintain effective social services, particularly health, education and basic need services; develop appropriate transport systems; and encourage people's participation, particularly through NGOs (Government of Fiji, 1993). The 1995 review of policy (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995) further emphasised small-scale agriculture and tourism as the key strategic sectors for development. While tourism is an important component of development, the rural population has not benefited as much as possible as a result of inadequately developed linkages to the rural economy. Proposed initiatives thus aim to strengthen these linkages through the development of handicrafts, ecotourism and smallscale agriculture. Women's role in handicraft production has been recognised in the proposed initiative to develop programmes for women's clubs to produce craft work for sale in tourist outlets (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). Other constraints to the development of tourism include: a lack of Government commitment, and a consequent lack of funding; insufficient training facilities; inadequate hotel room and airline capacity; high costs; and land tenure (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995). Human resource constraints also exist in that the market economy cuts across traditional indigenous modes of production. Training in business is therefore seen as an essential part of the development of the rural private sector. Since the majority of the rural population is of Fijian ethnicity, this training has concentrated on the enhancement of indigenous Fijians' participation in business. The recent review of policy in this area (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995) identified three levels for business development: i) corporate; ii) smallmedium enterprise; and iii) income generation. At the smallmedium enterprise level, the review noted that progress had been extremely slow. However, most Fijians are involved at the.
income generation level. The review also noted that the policy of deregulation runs contrary to the enhancement of indigenous Fijians' participation in business since their infant businesses cannot compete with well established larger businesses. Support through advisory and training services is therefore required, and various protectionist measures and tax incentives have also been proposed (Fiji Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1995).
2.2 Vanuatu.
In Vanuatu, agriculture, forestry and fisheries accounted for 23 percent of GDP in 1995, with 10 percent coming from subsistence agriculture and 13 percent from commercial farms and plantations (FAO, 1997). Agriculture, forestry and fisheries accounted for 65 percent of exports in 1995 (ibid.). Livestock production makes a significant contribution to GDP and beef production is well established with exports to Japan and other Pacific Island countries. Despite vast reserves, fisheries production is small. Forestry accounted for some 4 percent of GDP in 1995, this being reduced from early 1990 levels due to concerns about conservation (ibid.). The population of Vanuatu is overwhelmingly rural; 82 percent of the population was classified as rural by the 1989 census (SPC/UNDP, 1991). Rural households are characterised by a semi-subsistence lifestyle. Traditionally women have been responsible for food cropping and marketing while men are involved mainly in cash crop production. Men also assist with the heavier land-clearing work for food production. On average, women spend 18 percent of their time on food production and marketing and a further 5 percent of their time on cash cropping (Agricultural Census, 1983-84 quoted in UNICEF/Government of Vanuatu, 1991). Yet very little agricultural extension assistance is available for women. Until very recently, development policy in Vanuatu was formulated in five-yearly development plans, the most recent of which is the Third National Development Plan 1992-1996 (Vanuatu National Planning and Statistics Office, 1992). A.
shorter planning timeframe of three years has now been adopted, and policies for 1997-1999 are currently being incorporated into a Comprehensive Reform Programme with the assistance of the Asian Development Bank. Traditionally women's involvement in planning and decision making has been minimal. Even today, many national and community issues are still addressed only by men. These include issues such as land use and community water supplies which are of vital concern to women given their role in agriculture and food production. The overall development goal for women is the realisation of their full potential as equal partners and beneficiaries in development processes and the promotion of their full and equal participation in local, national and international affairs. Relevant areas of emphasis include: incorporation of women's issues in mainstream development; recognition of the importance of the empowerment of women as a cornerstone to sustainable development; and recognition of the strategic role of women as agents and beneficiaries of development and in the alleviation of poverty (Vanuatu Department of Women's Affairs, 1995).
2.2.1 Agriculture.
Smallholder producers in Vanuatu accounted for approximately 80 percent of agricultural production in 1994 (Government of Vanuatu, 1994). The main subsistence crops grown are sweet potato, yams, taro, bananas and manioc. The main cash crops are copra and cocoa, together with coffee, kava, pumpkin, pepper, vanilla, groundnut and potato. Emphasis in the past on cash crops, coupled with a lack of foresight, has resulted in a shortage of traditional materials. At the same time, growth in the tourism industry has increased demand for traditional materials including palms for thatched roofing, pandanus for handicrafts, bananas and pawpaw. Yet none of these are planted in sufficient quantities. Although sandalwood was sold for a high price in previous decades, it has.
not been replanted. Similarly, kava consumption has outstripped supply. Given the potential for traditional crop development, smallholders are now being advised to increase planting of all such crops. Vanuatu is unable to export surplus agricultural production due to a lack of proper quarantine legislation (a Bill seeking to address this issue is currently before Parliament). The country has the potential, at both the national and household level, to produce significantly more than current production levels. In general, however, households have fixed cash needs which they meet but do not go beyond. Potential therefore exists to expand household agricultural production as a means to increase household food security and generate increased incomes. The two key objectives under the Third National Development Plan 1992-1996 (DP3) are to: i) expand the agricultural and natural resources sector in a sustainable manner as an economic sector providing, at the national level, domestic employment, income generating opportunities, domestic food security and export revenue; and ii) concentrate and prioritise the provision of sustainable and appropriate assistance to smallholder farmers and fisherfolk. The specific policy objectives of DP3 in relation to agricultural production and national food security include the development of subsistence farming and gardening, with a special emphasis on enhancing women's agricultural activities and welfare, diversification of cash crops particularly coconut, and improved market development for export. The overall thrust of the new Comprehensive Reform Programme for agriculture is one of increased smallholder commercialisation. Greater emphasis is to be given to agro-industries for the promotion of small-scale export enterprises and selected importsubstitution industries, particularly food-processing. In the area of agricultural exports, policy aims to provide high-quality, low-cost efficient services to facilitate growth, including improved wharf operations, upgraded quarantine procedures and the introduction.
of user-pays systems for inspections. Competition in copra and cocoa marketing is also being introduced. In the livestock sector, beef plays an important role with more and more land being converted from forest to grazing. Government policy seeks to encourage low-cost, high-quality beef production for both local and export markets, through measures such as the encouragement of competition in processing, the privatisation of public shares in abattoirs, and the regularisation of industry fees. Given the low status of women in Vanuatu's culture, women's role in agriculture is not recognised in many policies, including delivery of extension services. In this context, farming systems have not been improved. Indeed, they are not seen to be in need of improvement. For example, no assistance has been given to women in terms of appropriate technology (such as hoes for weeding). Additiona