EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL VIII DEVELOPMENT.
Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management in ACP Countries - Linking National and International Efforts.
EC-FAO PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME (1998-2001).
Tropical forestry Budget line B7-6201/97-15/VIII/FOR PROJECT GCP/INT/679/EC.
Wood Products review and improvement of data related to wood products in Uganda.
By Paul DRICH1.
Forestry Officer Forestry Department.
December, 2000.
This report has been produced as an out put of the EC-FAO Partnership Programme (1998-2000) - Project GCP/INT/679/EC Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management in ACP Countries Linking National and International Efforts. The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the EC or the FAO. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
INTRODUCTION Forest products' statistics play a crucial role in policy formulation and planning for sustainable management of the forest resource both at national and sub-national level. Nevertheless, it has been realised that in many countries, the capabilities related to the collection and analysis of forestry information and statistics is either very weak or is given less attention. According to FAO, this has led to the undermining of the adoption of sustainable forest management practices in such countries.
Thus, EC-FAO, initiated a collaborative program, GCP/INT/679/EC, 1998-2000) on `Data collection, and analysis for sustainable Forest Management in ACP-Countries-linking National and International Efforts'. The aim of the program is to strengthen national capabilities related to forestry information and statistics in some selected countries, of which Uganda is lucky to be one. This paper is the output of the work of a national expert who has been hired to review and validate the existing data, including proposals of how to improve the statistical situation in the forest sector in Uganda (see terms of reference attached for details). The paper is structured as follows: In Section 1, an overview about the situation of wood products in Uganda is given, which is followed an assessment of the current status of national forestry statistics related to wood products in section.
Thereafter, an evaluation of the data collected and the methodology is presented in section.
This is then followed by proposals for improvements of the national statistical process in section.
In section 6, the sources of data both published and unpublished are given and finally section 7 reviews the FAO's yearbook of forest products with updates of the data for Uganda. OVERVIEW Forest product statistics involves the collection, processing, and analysis of data on the production, consumption and trade in all forest products such as industrial round wood, sawn timber, veneer, plywood, blockboard, pulp, paper, firewood and charcoal. In Uganda,.
the most important products produced and consumed are sawn timber, firewood, charcoal, poles and posts. Limited plywood is produced in the country.
Sawnwood is mainly used in the construction and furniture industries. With the apparent peace and tranquillity now restored in most parts of the country, there is currently a building boom experiencing an annual growth rate of 10-20 %. Wood is also completely dominant as energy source for the production of other building materials (lime, tiles, and bricks) as well as in other sectors such as, hotels, restaurants, tea and tobacco industries. These sectors are also experiencing high growth rates of consumption of firewood and charcoal (NBS, 1996). At household level, woodfuel (firewood and charcoal) which accounts for nearly 96% of the total energy demand remains as the most important source of energy for cooking and other household requirements. Altogether, it is estimated that biomass derived energy supplies thirty times as much energy (on a final energy or use demand basis) as petroleum and electricity combined. This trend is likely to continue in the near future (ESD report).
External trade in wood products is not much in Uganda. For example, there are no exports of any of the above products produced, while on imports, only pulp and paper products are imported.
CURRENT STATUS OF NATIONAL FORESTRY STATISTICS RELATED TO WOOD PRODUCTS This section presents a brief outline of the actual forest products in Uganda and the type of information usually collected in.
Section 3.2 describes the existing methodology for data collection, followed by a description of the data compilation validation and dissemination in.
In section 3.4, institutions involved in the collection, processing and analysis of forest products statistics is presented. A brief description of wood products produced, consumed and traded is given in section.
Finally, the account of active wood industries in the country is presented in 3.6.
Type of Information.
In Uganda, information collected on forest produce or products relates to industrial roundwood and the products derived from it. Roundwood are mainly for sawlogs, veneer logs, poles, fencing posts while the derived products are, timber, poles, posts, firewood and charcoal.
1.1.1. Roundwood: The production of roundwood is mainly for sawlogs and to some limited extend, veneer logs. A mature tree (usually over 50 cm diameter at breast height, dbh), when felled for timber is sectioned and crosscut into pieces of saw logs (usually in 4 m lengths). The primary data collected are the length and mid diameter for the determination of the volume of each saw log in cubic metres overbark. In addition, defects are also assessed on each log.
1.1.2. Poles and Posts. These are long and slender pieces of round wood used for construction, utility transmission lines and fencing. The difference between poles and posts depend on its height or length and use. For instance, poles used for utility transmission such as telephone or electricity are longer (taller), while posts are shorter and are mainly used for fencing. There are two categories of poles in Uganda based on the source of origin i.e. either plantation class A or natural forest, class B. The former is from plantations, while the latter is from the natural forest or bush. Class A is further divided into three classes depending on the diameter range as shown in table 1 below. Class B is has the same basis of sub division except that it only stops at Class II.
Class I II III IV.
Diameter range 05 ­ 09 cm 10­ 14 cm 15­ 19 cm 20­ 24 cm 6.
Data collected on poles are either count of physical pieces of the wood or running metres of the pole length or cubic metres.
1.1.3. Sawnwood or Timber The piece of wood that is usable in any construction work or furniture is called sawnwood or timber. There are three classes of timber or sawn wood. Class One, which is further subdivided into either hardwoods (IA) i.e. highly priced species for example, mahoganies or Class 1B, i.e. Hardwood of medium value and cypress. Class Two, are all other hardwoods of lower quality and all pines. Lastly Class Three, are all other hardwoods of less value. The information collected for all these classes are either, the overbark volumes in cubic metres or the number of pieces and sizes (width, length and thickness in centimetres, although commonly expressed in inches and feet).
1.1.4. Firewood and charcoal. Pieces of wood especially from stems and branches of trees or when burnt under an oxygen starved environment to produce charcoal used as a source of energy for cooking, heating or other industrial purposes. Firewood information is collected by counting the number of pieces, head bundles or as volumes in cubic metres of stacked bundle while charcoal is measured by counting the number of bags.
Existing methodology for data collection.
Data collection on forest-products statistics starts from the field where timber harvesting and production of charcoal or fuel wood takes place. The starting point is the measurement of the tree before felling and after felling for conversion into timber or charcoal/firewood. The measurements are recorded on a timber harvesting form. Additional source of data on the forest products are declaration and movement permits. A brief description of the methodology for data collection and recording are given below. For details the reader is referred to the Forest Department Starting Orders (DSO): 7.
1.2.1. Round wood for Saw logs and veneer: Before a tree is felled, the forest staff in charge inspects the trees for felling and ensures that they are of the correct size for felling as stipulated in the management plan. Thereafter, he/she marks the trees with a hammer before allowing the tree to be felled. After felling, the license number of the licensee is hammered on the stumps for further control of trees cut. The felled tree is then sectioned and crosscut into saw logs, each of which is numbered in a sequential order and the number hammered at the end of each log. The length of each saw log is then measured to the nearest metre, using a tape while the mid-diameter is measured to the nearest centimetre by use of a calliper or diameter tape. A form called timber harvesting volume measurement, is used for recording the data, under the following column categories: · At the top is general information: Forest, Compartment, coupe, Date, Name of measurer etc. · · · · · · · · Column 1: Tree Number Column 2: Species Column 3: Defect Allowance Column 4: Log number Column 5: Log mid-diameter Column 6: Length of log Column 7: Volume Column 8: Value estimation in Uganda shillings.
This form is filled in quadruplicate, with the original copy sent to the customer (the miller), the duplicate to the FD Head quarters, triplicate to the charge officer (District Forest Officer) and the quadruplicate remaining in the book.
1.2.2. Charcoal and Firewood: The ideal method for measuring charcoal could have been by direct weighing. However, for simplicity and other logistical problems such as lack of relevant tools e.g. weighing scales in.
the field, Forest Department, FD has adopted a simple method of counting the number of bags of charcoal. As for firewood, the measurement is by volume or counting of head bundles. In the former, pieces of the wood are stacked into one cubic meter stacks (measuring 1 m x 1m x 1m). Further conversions to other units are normally done at the head office using appropriate conversion factors.
1.2.3. Produce Declaration Form: Any forest produce moving out of the forest must be declared by the officer in charge of that reserve by filling in a forest produce declaration form. This form introduces the carrier to the District Forest Officer (DFO). The form specifies the sizes of timber, estimate of royalty, number of pieces, the species and the origin of timber. Unlike the timber harvesting form, the forest produce declaration form is filled in triplicate with the original sent to the DO, duplicate to Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the District and the triplicate remains in the book. The DFO, on receipt of this form, proceeds to check the actual quantity and mark each piece of timber with a second timber hammer called a district seal, which shows the code of the district. After marking the timbers, the DFO then issues a Forest Produce Movement Permit (See below). It authorises the transportation of the produce from the District of origin to its final destination.
1.2.4. Forest Produce Movement Permit. The form has the following information: Date, district of origin, vehicle owner, identity card, vehicle registration number, make and capacity. The second part of the form is the authorisation of moving the forest produce from source to destination with details about the type of the produce, size, species and the value. The form further gives information about the forest station, name of licensee and details about the license such as expiry date, name of issuing officer and signature of the issuing officer with his/her designation. This form is filled out and five copies are issued. The original form is sent to customer at destination, a duplicate to the carrier, the triplicate to FD head quarters in Kampala, the quadruplicate to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and the lastly quintuplicate remains in the book.
Data compilation, validation and dissemination.
As mentioned above, the sources of primary data on round wood and forest products are the three forms described above submitted to the DFO's office and FD HQ on regular basis by the officer in charge at the forest level. At the district office, the DFO, then summarises and compiles the data from these forms, together with the timber movement permit records into annual report tables as described further below. These summaries are then submitted to FD head quarters. Table 1: Summary of Production of Roundwood and charcoal. The contents of this table are as follows: · · At the top is the heading and reporting year Column 1: Category or type of the round wood such as logs, poles and fencing post, fuelwood, and charcoal. · Column 2: Unit of measure. Cubic metres over-bark for logs, solid cubic metres for poles, posts and fuelwood. Charcoal is measured in tons. · Column 3: type of forest reserve that is further split into two subcolumns to differentiate between Natural High Forest (NHF) or Plantations with sub totals for each category of produce below. · Column 5: Source of the produce whether from public land or private land with also sub totals of each category of produce below. · Column 6: Finally the totals per each category of produce and all the categories below. The last part of the table is a summary of the average FD royalty rates in shillings per cubic metre, for sawn timber. Timber is divided into the following classes: Class 1A, 1B, Cypress and Pines. Poles are classified into four classes based on diameter classes (I, II, III, and IV as explained above in section 2.1.).
The details of this table are: Column 1: Product sawn wood by class of timber, and how it was milled (saw milled or hand sawn), plywood, block board, particleboard, paper, paper products and matches.
Column 2: Unit, for saw timber it is in cubic metres, while plywood, block board and particleboard are in square metres. Paper and paper products are in weight. Finally, for box of matches it is the number of boxes in thousands.
Column 3: Quantity. Column 4: Average retail price in Shs per unit Column 5: Total value in thousands of Shs. Column 6: Average retail price shs per cubic metre of timber classes The column is further subdivided into 5 columns, corresponding with the five commonest classes such as 1A& iB, II- IV, cypress, pines and eucalyptus.
Export and Import of Wood Products.
There are two separate, but similar tables for capturing information on trade in wood products i.e. export or imports. columns. · Column 1: Product sawn wood by class of timber, plywood, block board, particleboard, paper, paper products and matches. · Column 2: Unit, for saw timber it is in cubic metres, while plywood, block board and particleboard are in square metres. Paper and paper products are in weight. Finally for box of matches it is the number of boxes in thousands. · Column 3: Quantity. The information to be captured is summarised into 5.
Column 4: Value in Shs per unit Column 5: Destination (or country of origin for imports). Column 6: The year, which is sub-divided into two columns to capture both quantity and value. The report captures information for at least 3 years up to the current reporting year.
Note that the instructions given to the charge officer is that this information should be obtained from Uganda Revenue Authority in Kampala, at District HQ and Customs Posts at border entry/exit points.
Data Synthesis, Analysis and Dissemination.
As mentioned above the DFO summarises the data into annual tables. At this stage, simple tools like handheld calculators are sufficient for the processing and compilation. After compiling the above information, the DFOs submit these tables to the Commissioner for Forestry at HQ. The Biometrician, then summarises all the data from all the Districts in Uganda in order to produce a synthesised national forest products statistics. There are computers with the necessary software available at headquarters for summarising this information based on similar table formats as described above. The final output is then ready for dissemination to the users such as the Forest Department, Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and other agencies both within and without the Forest Department.
Institutions involved in data collection, analysis and dissemination The following are the institutions involved in the collection, processing and analysis of data on forest products: 1.5.1.1. Forest Department. At national level, the Commissioner for Forestry is the overall officer in charge with its headquarters located at the Capital Kampala. There are three divisions; each headed by an Assistant Commissioner for Forestry. The Biometrics section which deals with the processing and analysis of all forest statistics falls under the division of Planning, Training 13.
and Administration. District Forest Officers, who are assisted by Assistant Forest Officers (AFO) and Forest Rangers (FR) at the lowest level, collect the primary data as part of the overall management of the forest estate under their charge.
1.5.1.2. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) The URA is another institution responsible for the collection of data on all goods and services traded or consumed, which includes forest products. Although the URA is interested mainly in the value of the product, the quantities of the product on which the taxes are based forms valuable source of primary data on forest products. Besides since this is an independent institution, this information if compiled regularly, could also act as a control and check on the actual quantities of the forest products traded and consumed.
1.5.1.2. Statistics Department Under the same Ministry, it also annually prepares Uganda Statistical Abstract, which contains information on the production, consumption and trade of forest products in Uganda. Other Institutions involved, although on limited scale, are Makerere University and Forest Research Institute. These are mainly research papers by students and research scientists and are hardly sufficient on a national scale. Nevertheless, they are considered more reliable than expert guesses in estimating some of the products.
Wood products produced, consumed and traded.
The production, consumption and trade in wood products can be grouped under four sectors. These are housing, energy, utility transmissions and the printing. Of all the products, the energy sector produces and consumes most of the wood products, followed by construction and energy.
Active Wood Industries.
Wood industries in Uganda are mainly in the sawmilling business. There are two categories of sawmilling, depending on whether they use machines (mobile sawmills and large-scale sawmills or hands (handsaws such as two man-cross-cut saws and other hand tools Currently, there are more than fifty registered companies who operate mobile sawmills with average daily production of around 8 cubic metres of sawnwood, although there are a few with higher outputs than this. Most of the harvesting operations are in the old and mature pine plantations in the forest reserves managed by the FD. The group of other sawmillers is the pitsawers who operate handsaws and other handtools. Although their production on individual or group basis is negligible, on a national scale, they constitute more than half of the timber produced in the country.
EVALUATION OF THE DATA COLLECTED AND THE METHODOLOGY.
The methodology for data collection, processing and dissemination as described in the previous sections looks good on paper. In practice however, the system has completely broken down resulting into many information gaps regarding forest products statistics in Uganda. As shall be further discussed below, a lot remains to be improved on the reliability of the data, including the methodology, monitoring and control.
Information reliability.
Forest Department staffs, both in the field and District headquarters, do not regularly submit the relevant forms and reports to FD headquarters. Moreover, even the few reports, which reach the headquarters, have serious gaps in relevant section, which are crucial for assessing the reliability of the data. For instance, some of them could report that so much revenue has been collected during the reporting period without giving details on the quantity of the.
product sold or in other cases do not report at all. The end result is that currently the FD is faced with not only gaps in the data it disseminates, but also the quality of the available data are wanting. So, under such a situation and perhaps under the pretext of doing one's duty, the officer especially under pressure to produce production figures on forest products, simply looks at the previous estimates and makes an `expert guess' of how the production has increased in the reporting year. This practice has been going since 80s. Therefore, over the years, the users of FD's figures on forest products statistics in Uganda has been what can be correctly described as guesstimates.
Strengths and Weaknesses in the existing system.
2.2.1. Strengths: The strength of data collection, processing and analysis lies in the Forest Department's establishment of professional foresters who are charged with the management and implementation of the forest resource. The Departmental Standing Orders with its clear instructions of what should be done, how and when, together with the appropriate forms is yet another point of strength in the system.
2.2.2. Weakness: The weaknesses identified in the existing system are among others: breakdown of reporting and feed back, lack of logistical support, tools and equipment, lack of monitoring and control, corruption and negligence of duty.
Most DFOs are notoriously known for not submitting their quarterly or annual reports. Even for the few, who do so, the quality of the report leaves a lot to be desired. For instance, the data on quantities of forest products sold and revenue collected is more often than not left out.
making it impossible to crosscheck production figures with the actual volumes of timber or charcoal sold. Logistical supports such as transport preferably a four-wheeled vehicle, motor cycle or at the very least, bicycles for the forester in charge of field operations are hardly available. To compound it all, operational funds for labour, vehicle running costs and basic office running such as stationery, are also hardly available.
2.3.1. Essential tools/equipment: Essential tools like callipers, diameter tapes, hypsometers, weighing scales, and volume tables for the collection of the primary data such as round wood volume, weights of charcoal produced etc are hardly available. For example in many parts of the country, this has led to the use of crude methods such as visual estimation or use of ordinary distance tapes for measurement of log volumes. With such crude methods being applied in the field, the quality of the data collected is doubtful.
2.3.2. Monitoring and control Supervision of field operations by DFOs or even Head quarters staff is not adequate or hardly in place. The result is that DFOs choose whether to submit a report or not. If he chooses to submit one, then more often than not, he decides what information should be passed to head office, aware that HQ will probably not find out or take such a long time that he would have probably also left his station. Lack of monitoring and control therefore, has led to widespread malpractice such as illegal activities and outright corruption, putting a big question mark on quality of data and methodology on forest products in Uganda.
2.3.3. Corruption: Presently the revenue collections on forest products in the country are very low due to rampant corruption and embezzlement of collected funds. For example the National Biomass Study (1996) estimated that if revenue collection efficiency can only be improved to about 10 17.
-15 % on monetary forest products, it should yield between 20 to 30 billion shillings per year as compared to the current collections of less than 1 billion shillings per year. Therefore, for obvious reasons, it would not be wrong to conclude that the actual true quantities of forest products sold or removed from the forest is deliberately concealed by the officers involved in the malpractice, rendering the data/information supplied to FD HQ as inadequate and unreliable.
2.3.4. Methodolog y There are about two weaknesses sighted in the present methodology for the collection of data on major forest products. One of them is related to the development of the timber volume table and the other on the forms. According to Huber's formula, which the FD uses, the volume of a log is estimated by calculating the cross sectional area of the mid diameter multiplied by the length of the log [V = /4d2 l] Where V = Volume  = PI (3.14) d = Diameter in centimetres or metres l =Log length However, a closer check of the log volume tables (both hardwoods and softwoods) as provided in the DSO and used across the country revealed that there are gross errors in the tables. For example, in the log-volume table for hardwoods, under a mid diameter of 30 cm and log length of 1.4 m, the volume given in the table is 0.144 cubic metres, whereas based on the above formula, it should be 0.099 cubic metres. Comparisons with other sets of mid diameters and log length were similarly calculated and proved that the entire log volume table, which the FD uses in the field, is wrong. In the above example, the difference of 0.045 on single logs might be negligible but when extended over for instance, 100 such logs this can translate into 4.5 cubic metres. At national level, this difference can be so alarming when spread out for all the forest reserve.
The second weakness sighted in the methodology is the use of indirect measurement of firewood and charcoal by counting head bundles or number of bags in the field. With no standard conversion tables especially in the field, the forester who collects the raw data is subjected to erroneous estimates. Table 0-1: Summary.
C a te g o ry o f P ro d u c t P r o d u c tio n S tre n g th s R e s p o n s ib le in s t i t u t i o n is a v a i l a b l e w i t h tr a i n e d s ta ff a n d m e t h o d o l o g y in p la c e . N o th in g W eaknesses I r r e g u l a r r e p o r t s , g a p s in th e r e p o r t, m e th o d o lo g ic a l e r r o r s , la c k o f lo g i s t i c a l s u p p o r t , n o m o n ito r in g.
C o n s u m p tio n.
N o C o m p r e h e n s iv e c o n s u m p tio n s u r v e y s a r e in p l a c e . In s t e a d , d a t a is d e r i v e d f r o m th e a s s u m p t i o n th a t w h a t is p r o d u c e d m u s t b e consum ed. E m p h a s i s o n v a l u e r a t h e r th a n q u a n titie s.
U R A d a ta o n r e v e n u e c o lle c tio n o n fo r e s t p r o d u c ts.
Data dissemination and Users.
The data and information on forest products statistics are disseminated to the Forest Department, other government institutions, the public and international organisations. The main user of forest product statistics in Uganda is the Forest Department itself. It enables it to plan for the future supply, consumption and trade in these products. FD also uses this information, in its awareness campaigns about the forestry sector. Other Government agencies which make use of these data/information is Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, especially when preparing budgets and allocation of annual funds to the forestry sector as part of the overall national planning and budgeting. The Department of Statistics formerly under this Ministry and now a body corporate (Uganda.
Bureau of Statistics) also uses this information for the preparation of annual statistical abstracts for the country. At International level organisations such as the Food and Agriculture Organisation, World Bank and its affiliates are all provided with such information, usually on request. For instance, FAO uses it for the global assessment of the forestry sector and production of Annual yearbook of Forest products statistics.
IMPROVEMENTS PROCESS OF THE NATIONAL FORESTRY STATISTICS.
In order to keep any statistical process up to date and respond to the needs of data and information to consumers, there must be a well functioning statistical office with the following objectives (Padovani, 1998): · · · · Collection of the highest quality and most useful data possible Collection of timely data in a cost effective manner Production of the most appropriate and accessible data and Teaching of users on the benefits and methods of using statistical information in order to educated more effectively decision-makers. Padovani (1998) further suggested that such a statistical office must have the following statistical Information cycle: · · · The perception of a need for a `Decision, Action Policy and Program' The definition of the problem and information needed to solve it The information collection is `Designed, promoted, conducted and collected' · · · The information products are produced and released The information products are promoted and disseminated to users Using the knowledge gained from the information products, the user makes the decision or initiates the action, policy or program 20.
Feed Back is given on how to improve the existing information.
Proposals for practical improvement of the system.
From the above, it is obvious that a lot of improvements have to be made in Uganda in order to achieve the above objectives and put in place an information system which is structured in an information cycle as suggested by Padovani. Following are the proposals to improve Uganda's national statistical process. Data collection. Analysis Dissemination.
Proposals for improvement 3.1.1.1. Organisational. As noted in section 2.4, the main organisation charged with the responsibility of collecting, processing and analysing data on forest products is the Forest department. The office of the Commissioner, through the Biometrics section is the overall in charge of the entire statistical process of forest products statistics. Currently, the biometrics section is poorly staffed and lacks the necessary logistical support for running its day to day tasks. For example, there is only one experienced Forest Officer heading this section with an Assistant Forest Officer. There is no other support staff to beef up these two. The section has only one computer. Although equipped with Microsoft office, other essential statistical packages like SPSS and SAS are lacking. Important measurement tools and equipment such as callipers, diameter tapes, hypsometers and compasses are barely enough. The section has no car, no operational funds etc. There is no mechanism in place to link with other institution such as local government, and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) which collect data on forest products is hardly in place.
3.1.1.2. Proposal: · Increase the manpower to at least four Forest officers; equip the office with at least 3 more computers with all the necessary software. More importantly, allocate sufficient funds to run the section more effectively. Institutional collaboration on the collection and processing of data on forest products should be put in place · Data Collection and Reporting: A lot of effort should be put in place on part of the entire forest administration to ensure that each and everyone in the hierarchy does his job and report timely information as stipulated in the standing orders. Without this, the gaps and poor quality of data collected shall continue indefinitely in the future. · Logistical supports such as transport, preferably a four-wheeled vehicle, motor cycle or at the very least, bicycles for the forester in charge of field operations must be available, including operational funds for labour, vehicle running costs and basic office running such as stationery. · Essential tools/equipment. It is impossible to collect reliable data without the necessary tools and equipment. Most essential tools and equipment needed are callipers, diameter tapes, hypsometers, weighing scales, and volume tables. Th proposal albeit not new is to provide these essential tools to every forest reserve and District Forest office in order to eliminate crude and in accurate methods of data collection in the field. · · Monitoring and control of field operations by DFOs or even Head quarter