EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL VIII DEVELOPMENT.
Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management in ACP Countries - Linking National and International Efforts.
EC-FAO PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME (1998-2002).
Tropical forestry Budget line B7-6201/97-15/VIII/FOR PROJECT GCP/INT/679/EC.
Woodfuel review and assessment in Zambia.
By John MULOMBWA December, 1998 Addis Ababa.
This report has been produced as an out put of the EC-FAO Partnership Programme (1998-2002) - Project GCP/INT/679/EC Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management in ACP Countries - Linking National and International Efforts. The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the EC or the FAO. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
1 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
3 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
FAO FOA GDP Ha kW h MENR MMD MW PFAP TAZARA TFAP TOE TOF TV UNIP UPND ZAFFICO ZAMEFA ZCCM ZFAP ZK ZR Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations Forests in Open Areas Gross Domestic Product Hectare Kilo Watt hour Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Movement for Multiparty Democracy Mega Watt Provincial Forestry Action Programme Tanzania and Zambia Railways Tropical Forestry Action Programme Tonne of Oil Equivalent Trees Outside Forests Television United National Independence Party United Party for National Development Zambia Forestry and Forest Industries Corporation Zambia Metal Fabricators Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines Limited Company Zambia Forestry Action Programme Zambian Kwacha Zambia Railways.
4 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
ZAMBIA: General information A. Location and Terrain Zambia is a land-locked country found in central/southern Africa, lying between Latitudes 80 and 180 South of the Equator and Longitudes 220 and 340 east of Greenwich (00) meridian. It is bordered by the Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique, Botswana, Namibia and Angola. It has a surface area of 752,614 km2 most of which forms the highest part of the plateau lying between 1000 and 1600 meters above sea level. The highest parts of the country are in the northeast, with the plateau gradually sloping to the southwest. B. Ecology Climate and Hydrology Zambia's altitude puts it in the broad belt of temperate highlands, which moderates what would otherwise be a harsh tropical climate. The temperatures range from 160C to 270C in the cool and dry season and from 270C to 380C in the hot and wet season. These characteristics result in two major climatic extremes: the semi-arid western region and the swampy Lake Bangweulu area in the North-Eastern part of the country. The country's main drainage systems are the Zambezi River system whose major tributaries are the Kabompo, Kafue and Luangwa rivers, and the Chambeshi Watershed. These rivers together with the large lakes, provide Zambia's most important water, fisheries and tourism resources. Annual summer rainfall ranges from 500 to 1500 mm during the months of November to March, which varies with latitude and altitude. Mean annual rainfall decreases from the equator towards the tropical of Capricorn and from north and north-east to the south and south-west. Vegetation Described in main text of this report. Fish and Wildlife Fish and wildlife are some of the country's most valuable natural resources. Although land-locked, the rivers and lakes of Zambia are known to support about 156 fish species. Zambia is also renowned for the extensive area and biological richness of its wetlands. There are about 190 species of wild animals in Zambia and a large diversity of birds, reptiles and insects; for example, Zambia is known to be the only country with the rare black lechwe, a herbivore that thrives in swampy habitats. 5 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
C. Population The estimated population for Zambia in 1990 was 7,383,097 (1990 census). With a growth rate of 3.1% per annum, population estimates for 1995, 1996, 1997 and 1998 were 9095000, 9397000, 9712000 and 10036000 respectively. About 39.4% of the population is concentrated in urban areas, mostly on the Copperbelt and Lusaka where about two thirds of the total urban population lives; unemployment is prevalent in these areas. Other high-density areas are in the agricultural zone along the central, north-south `line of rail'. The population is thus highly clustered. However, there are vast areas which are almost unpopulated and so on average, Zambia has a very low population density. D. Land-Use Agriculture Zambia's agriculture is characterised by a distinct contrast between commercial and subsistence farming. Large-scale commercial farms are concentrated along the central `line of rail', while subsistence farming is distributed throughout the country. The level of mechanisation is low and use of animal draft power is still to develop fully. In the commercial sector, however, a high level of inputs characterises production. Farming in Zambia is predominantly rain-fed with only about 1% of the potential agricultural land being irrigated. Maize is the main food and cash crop, followed by sorghum and cassava. Livestock Cattle production is limited by poor grazing land and high incidence of disease. Most of the cattle is under traditional herders and cattle are concentrated in the upper Zambezi and middle Kafue areas and the Eastern Province. Overstocking on grazing lands has resulted in bush encroachment and severe soil erosion in certain areas. National Parks Nineteen National Parks (covering 8% of the country) and thirty one Game Management Areas (covering 24% of the country) have been set aside to conserve representative wildlife and ecological units. E. Minerals Zambia's most important mineral is copper. The country has about 6% of the world's proven copper reserves and ranks fifth in production. Zambia also produces cobalt, ranking second in world production (1990). Other minerals include lead and zinc, gold, silver, iron ore and uranium, most of them being produced in marginal quantities. Coal is also mined to a limited extent.
6 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
Discussed in main text. G. Economy Zambia's current economy is driven by the private sector, which has shares in major industries around the country. The major export commodities include copper, cobalt, tobacco, flowers, and many other commodities, which contribute about 12% of, total exports. The GDP at 1998 prices (ZK'Billion) was estimated to be 5921.1 and GDP per capital (ZK'000) at 234.1. GDP growth rate for 1998 was -1.97 and National Income (ZK'Billion) was 5612.0. Per capital monthly inflation rates for September, October, November and December 1998 were 1.4, 2.1, 1.5 and 5.6 respectively Total Labour force for 1998 was 4,712,000 and formal sector employment stood at 465,000. The informal sector employment figures recorded in 1996 were 2,482,387. The poverty status (figures for 1996) were extremely poor (66%), moderately poor (12%) and non-poor (22%). The current economic policy provides for a conducive environment for private sector investment in any business industry, including those that are forestry based. H. Political Zambia is a multiparty democracy country with about 34 registered political parties. The major parties include the ruling Movement for Multiparty democracy (MMD), United National Independent Party (UNIP), United Party for National development (UPND) and the United Democratic Alliance. The Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD) enjoys the majority vote in parliament, having about 118 Seats out of a total of 150. The other seats are shared by the opposition and independents. The political climate is such that any one that enjoys popularity and is a Zambian, can form and register a political party. I. General.
On the social scene, Zambia is best known for its foot-balling (Soccer) prowess on the regional and continental levels. The diverse of culture and ceremonies in various traditional settings, ads flavour to the tourism industry and entertainment sector. Of the total 73 tribal groupings, 7 are recognised to be prominent and are aired on both Radio and TV of the Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC). There are also a number of relic sites, many of which are national monuments and are therefore, protected from any form of defacing of annihilation. 7 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
INTRODUCTION.
This paper looks at the woodfuel situation in Zambia as recorded in the past five-(5) years in the context of production, supply, demand/consumption and trade. Perhaps before going into the details of this study paper, it would be important to give a preamble to forestry development in Zambia over the last three decades. Up to the time that Zambia attained political independence and shortly thereafter, it was endowed with an abundant forest resource base. However, with the declining economic situation, increasing population levels and other negative developments of the last three decades, the forest ecosystem has been greatly impoverished. Such developments resulted in escalating rates of deforestation and coupled with the inadequacy of the Forest Policy (up to 1998), were cited as the major contributing factors to the degradation of the forest ecosystem. While acknowledgement may be made of the fact that between 65% and 70% of Zambia's land area is under one form of forest cover or another, evidence of continuing deforestation resulting in various negative factors is so obvious. It was based upon such trends that the Zambian Government, through the MENR, felt compelled in 1994 to institute appropriate measures, not only to invigorate the integrity of the Forest Estate, but also to provide for a viable policy and legal framework to attract investments, create responsive corporate/public enterprises, redefine forest land ownership and attract meaningful commitment from a variety of stakeholders to tree growing, protection and utilisation of forest products. The ZFAP was, therefore, formulated and instituted in 1995 to provide a ministerial framework for the rational management and conservation of Zambia's forest resources and the enhancement of the forestry sector's contribution to socio-economic development, poverty alleviation, improved food security and environmental protection of the country (Zambia). The ZFAP was Zambia's national response to the aspirations of the FAO initiated TFAP. The Programme undertook to identify key forest sector issues and opportunities available to resolve them and therefore, enhancing national capacity to formulate, implement and monitor a comprehensive participatory forest sector program. The ZFAP, therefore, ushered in a number of coherent changes, which included formulation of the PFAP and redesigning of the Forest Policy and Legislative frameworks. The PFAP undertook to facilitate the formulation of three participatory forest management plans for Central, Copperbelt and Luapula Provinces. The PFAP is an integral part of the ZFAP process and aimed at supporting and improving the ZFAP process by strengthening institutions involved in the forestry sector. The PFAP also aimed at increasing both direct and indirect benefits from forests and trees to citizens of the three Provinces through greater involvement of forest dependent communities and 8 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
resource users, while increasing the revenues accruing to the Government from the forestry sector. The implementation of the first phase of the PFAP lasted from August 1995 to December 1998. Various studies instituted and data collected under the ZFAP (1995 - 1997) revealed how inadequate the old Forest Policy was and how it negatively affected forestry's contribution to the national economy. Features like the Forestry Department being the solely responsible government enterprise in forest production and the negative effects thereof were greatly exposed. The old Forestry Policy proved inadequate due to the narrow context within which the forestry sector operated. The potential contribution of the Forest Estate was neither fully assessed nor attained under the existing circumstances and provisions of the policy. The policy gave explicit and implicit powers to the Forestry Department as the largest and most formidable estate agent and manager in the country. The Department enjoyed unchallenged monopoly to grow trees, determine where and when to harvest forest produce, fix, and revise prices of forest products and services. The policy was, therefore, oblivious of the important roles that local communities could play and was completely silent on gender issues. Such circumstances greatly eroded the possibility of a common forestry goal between the Forestry Department and the citizenry at large. Hence, instead of fostering co-operation and participation of traditional rulers and local communities, the policy intuitively engendered frustration and outright conflict. Evidently, from the above presentation, the need to launch a new policy with dynamic elements for effective participation of all stakeholders was cultivated. The first draft copy of the policy was produced in March 1997 and has since been approved and published in booklet form. The ZFAP also initiated changes to the Forest Law, which led to the drafting of a new Forestry Bill. The Bill is now before parliament and when enacted will usher in the Zambia Forestry Commission that will take over the responsibilities of the Forestry Department. A number of studies were thus conducted during the ZFAP and PFAP phases, to gather baseline data that was later compounded on some of the above concerns. Working papers have since been documented. However, the coverage of the studies was narrow due to the limited time frames and spheres of operation of the ZFAP and PFAP processes. Nevertheless, since the two processes are on-going, this paper has tried to outline some findings of the published papers and has attempted to make other pertinent suggestions on the sustainable management and utilisation of forest resources, based on the prevailing national, sub nation (regional) and local level woodfuel production, demand and/or consumption, supply and trade. The paper is not exhaustive in itself, but suggests a wider scope and framework within which Government Forestry Policy should proceed if the `dream' of meeting the energy requirements in Zambia is to be realised. This paper will therefore be tailored in presentation, to the aspirations of the new policy and those of the National Energy Policy of 1994 that prominently featured woodfuel as the first energy sub-sector recognised. The new Forestry Policy was engineered in such a 9 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
manner that it touched on the main tenets of the Energy Policy concerning sustainable woodfuel consumption. The broad elements of the Energy Policy which pertain to woodfuel production and its implications on the forestry sector are here-under restated: To ensure the management and sustainability of forest resources for woodfuel harvesting To improve the technology of charcoal production and utilisation To improve revenue collection from woodfuel industry To support efforts aimed at finding alternatives to woodfuel in order to achieve higher living standards.
It should also be noted that most figures and/or statistics presented in this paper may vary slightly because of the narrow sampling intensities and non comprehensive nature of most studies conducted, which were mostly locally and/or regionally based and only extrapolated to the national scale. In addition, empirical studies may present variations in precision for different survey localities and timeframes. Nevertheless, the statistics and information presented do give a direction for decision making and planning for sustainable woodfuel production, supply, demand/consumption and trade in Zambia.
WOODFUEL PRODUCTION.
From around the late 1980s, there have been no defined forest management prescriptions that are practically being implemented for woodfuel production. On paper, however, a number of management prescriptions have been suggested that are envisaged to increase productivity of both forests and woodlands in provision of products and services on a sustainable basis. To have a comprehensive understanding of woodfuel production, this paper will define production systems to mean forest ecosystem types and their management for the production of biomass and/or biodiversity for provision of forest products and in this context woodfuel. The definition will go further to imply the various conversion methods used to transform trees into woodfuel and harvesting systems used. This section on production will borrow heavily from studies conducted in the miombo woodlands (which cover between 55% and 60% of total land area) by Professor E. N. Chidumayo and A. Marjokorpi (1996 - 97), M. Grunder (1995), P. L. W. Chitondo (1997) and the Forestry Department (1995 - 1999).
Vegetation Types Ecosystem nomenclature in Zambia is based on vegetation types and Chidumayo and Marjokorpi (1997) have identified five forest types (Dry evergreen, Dry deciduous, Montane, Swamp and Riparian), five woodland types (Miombo, Kalahari, Mopane, 10 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
Munga and Termitaria) and Grasslands. In addition to the natural vegetation types, plantation forests of tropical pines and eucalyptus covering about 61,000 ha. have been established countrywide, with over 80% of these occurring on the Copperbelt Province. About 50,000 ha. of industrial plantations are found on the Copperbelt of which about 80% are pine and 20% eucalyptus. These are currently managed by a parastatal company, ZAFFICO Ltd. About 7,000 ha. of Local and Regional supply plantations in the Provinces are managed by the Forestry Department. The rest are plantations and woodlots managed by individuals at the semi-commercial and farm levels. Dry evergreen forests occur in the high rainfall zone with over 1100mm, on deep freely draining soils with adequate underground water. The dominant genera are Marquesia, Parinari and Cryptosepalum. Dry deciduous is a low rainfall (600 - 900mm) vegetation type on deep and usually sand soils which remain moist at depth during a greater part of the dry season. Dominant genera are Baikiaea and Guibourtia. The forest type covers parts of Western and Southern Provinces. Swamp and Riparian forests occur in the high rainfall zones of North-Western, Luapula and Northern Provinces and parts of the Copperbelt Province. Swamp forests are characterised by dominant trees, which have buttresses and stilt roots to give stability on damp ground. Swamp and Riparian forests are also common at stream heads, streamsides, river estuaries and on wide flats besides rivers and lakes. Dominant genera are Ilex, Mitragyna and Syzygium. Miombo woodland is the most extensive vegetation type in Zambia and is estimated to cover about 55% of the total land area and is dominated by tree species of Brachystegia, Julbernardia and Isoberlinia, which are very good woodfuel species. Soils are generally poor, shallow and slightly acidic, having quartz rubble or laterite underneath. Kalahari woodland is a variant of miombo woodland that grows on Kalahari sand and is widespread on the sands of Western Province and of the western half of North-Western Province. Mopane woodland occurs on alkaline soils of Central and parts of Lusaka Provinces. It is also found mixed with Miombo at the bottom of escarpments and with Munga woodland at dambo edges. The dominant and characteristic species is Colophospermum mopane. Munga woodland is a park-like woodland with trees scattered or in groups. The dominant species are Acacia, Combretum and Terminalia and this vegetation type covers the greater part of Central and Southern Zambia. One prominent characteristic feature is presence of dense tall grass, flat ground and rich clayey soils. Lake basin Chipya is a vegetation type that probably resulted from the destruction, usually by fire, of Parinari and Marquesia forests. It is three-storied with an open, evergreen or deciduous top canopy up to 25m, a broken understorey 6-12m and a 2-3m 11 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
shrub layer. It occurs over an extensive area of Northern and Luapula Provinces around Lakes Bangweulu and Mweru and in the Chambeshi and Luapula valleys. The soils are pale, sandy and very acidic. It also occurs on the Copperbelt where it is called Copperbelt Chipya. Kalahari sand Chipya is assumed to have been derived from Dry Evergreen forests that were destroyed by fire. It is open and composed of fire hardy species. Anthill (Termitaria woodland) is a Savannah vegetation that is dominant in the transition between wetlands, grasslands and plateau forest or woodland. It has tree groves or termite mounds and grasslands on low ground. This woodland supports a community of plants, which is usually very different from surrounding forest or woodland. This is due to such factors as raised elevation, higher clay and mineral content of the soil, high pH, higher moisture content of the soil and a greater biological activity. Species of Boscia, Strychnos, Diospyros and Sterculia are common. Grasslands are either edaphic or secondary and cover dambos, flood plains and margins of pans, swamps and lakes. They are found also in all land that is naturally without trees and in places with a permanently high water table. The dominant grasses belong to the genera Acroceras, Leersia, Oryza, Panicum, Paspalum, Sacciolepsis and Vossia. Open areas outside conservation areas (i.e. Forest Reserves, National Parks and Game Management Areas) contain the highest proportion of each vegetation type. In fact, Swamp and Riparian forests are not represented in conservation areas. Plantation forests and Miombo woodlands are well represented in Forest Reserves as are Deciduous forests, Miombo, Kalahari and Termitaria in National Parks, while Kalahari, Mopane, Munga and Termitaria woodlands are well represented in Game Management Areas. The Total area under forest cover in Zambia is estimated to be 44.6 million hectares, out of which Savannah woodlands account for about 71% of the total land area. Savannah woodlands are dominated by the Miombo, which covers between 41.2% and 55% of the country's total area (Forestry Department, 1999). In relative terms, the Forestry Department (1999) estimates the vegetation cover to be distributed as follows: -Savannah woodlands -Closed forests -Grasslands 65.49% 5.37% 29.04%.
Within climatic limitations, composition and character of vegetation is governed by soil and drainage conditions which in turn are related to geomorphology (Chidumayo, 1997). Both biotic and edaphic factors affect the dynamics of vegetation. The majority of indigenous trees and shrubs have a high potential to regenerate from seed, stumps and roots. However, regeneration can be adversely affected by over-browsing and 12 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
uncontrolled late forest fires. Repeated browsing results in preferred species being depleted, while frequent late dry season fires eliminate fire tender species, thereby preventing adequate forest regeneration. Consequently, use of fire in shifting cultivation has resulted in widespread destruction of original tree cover in Zambia and its replacement by secondary vegetation. The fact that Miombo woodlands regenerate unchanged after clearing, Chidumayo and Marjokorpi (1997) considered that Miombo woodland is mostly regrowth of variable ages as a result of fire, cultivation and exploitation. In contrast, Chipya forest, in which firetolerant species dominate over a tall herbaceous layer, represents a regressive stage after destruction of Dry Evergreen forest. Apparently, reversion to Dry evergreen forest is possible with protection from fire. Of the total land area in Zambia, about 9.9% are gazetted Forest Reserves. Out of this Forest Estate area, 44% is set aside for Production, 30% for both production and protection, while the remaining 26% is specifically for protection (ZFAP, 1997). Table 2.1 : Size of Forest Estate and Purpose of setting aside.
Purpose of setting aside Production Protection Prodn./Protn Total Zambia Total (ha.) 3,293,261 1,927,041 2,267,128 7,487,430 Local Forests (ha.) State 106,618 2,555 243,337 352,510 Trust 807,209 148,541 384,769 1,340,519 National Forests (ha.) Reserve Total State 420,329 1,334,156 106,478 55,365 206,461 225,838 97,716 725,822 225,176 573,410 2,266,439 557,492 Trust 1,408,708 1,375,808 1,957,801 3,842,317 Reserve 443,919 118,934 258,329 821,182 Total 1,959,105 1,720,580 1,541,306 5,220,991.
Source: ZFAP, 1997 It is, however, unfortunate that no comprehensive forest inventories have been conducted in the last three decades. The 1984 - 86 Survey was only undertaken in a few locations and existing yield estimates are essentially based on assumptions of changes that have taken place during the last 30 years. This Survey estimated growing stock to vary from 40 to 154 m3/ha. by Province (ZFAP, 1997). Table 2.2: Estimation of standing stock in 1996; FR = Forest Reserve Forests in open areas.
Province Central Copperbelt Eastern Luapula Lusaka Northern N/western Stocking m3/ha. 82.88 154 84.98 41.16 48.58 40.32 154.28 FR, million FOA, m3 million m3 49.74 0.17 81.46 441.92 72.96 57.48 16.10 27.41 1.53 79.13 45.91 21.32 377.09 781.96 GMA, NP, million million m3 m3 155.83 0.17 15.37 115.10 169.67 38.88 8.22 50.47 19.40 15.87 72.45 17.47 523.65 139.42.
Total, million m3 176.03 657.20 344.65 112.46 117.78 173.10 1830.41.
TOF, million m3 10.12 3.35 5.67 10.26 1.86 15.95 8.31.
13 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
Southern Western Total.
Source: ZFAP, 1997 Note: Stocking of TOF = 5m3/ha, plantations are included in FR. The above table gives the estimated standing stock in solid cordwood volume, in about 4,900 million m3. This figure could be converted to biomass using the above-mentioned estimate, resulting in a total of about 3,700 million tonnes. Latest information compiled by the Forestry Department after the ZFAP and PFAP processes (1995 - 98) is as reflected in the table below: Table 2.3: Growing stock and increment rate according to forest type. Category FR FOA NP TOF Total Growing stock, million m3 779 2798 544 81 4202 Increment rate, m3 12.2 22.4 1.6 3.3 50.6.
Source: Forestry Department, 1999 The rate of growth of natural forests is rather low, ranging from 0.7m3 to 2m3/ha/annum. Hence, the indicative aggregate biomass volume of all forest types is about 3,700 million tonnes (Forestry Department, 1999).
Plant Productivity Chidumayo (1997) has stated that plant productivity in the Miombo woodland primarily depends on:.
2. Soil moisture; and Soil available nutrients.
Rainfall is seasonal and availability of soil nutrients is low. Consequently, productivity is low. Grunder (1995) suggests that vegetation cover intercepts rain drops and reduces its dislodging capacity to the soil. He also notes that vegetation cover increases, through litter fall, the organic matter content of the soil, which plays an important role in making nutrients available and in particular, increases the soil water retention capacity. These factors support plant production and clearly show that good management of vegetation 14 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
cover is important for the sustainable and increased production of woody and agricultural products. Forests with closed canopy (and therefore optimal protection) are limited in extent in Zambia and cover only 6.5% of the total land area. Woodlands, with a reduced cover on the other hand, account for about 70% of the total land area (Grunder, 1995). Chidumayo (1997), recognises two main aspects to Miombo woodland management for increasing plant productivity:.
2. Sustainable utilisation of products Sustainable regeneration of products and services.
Sustainable Utilisation Chitondo (1997) has suggested the following measures for the sustainable utilisation of Miombo woodlands: --Instituting clear felling or coppice harvesting systems as the most appropriate for charcoal production. Under such an arrangement, forest areas are divided into coupes which are laid out in blocks of five (5), with each block measuring 100m wide and the sixth being 110m wide and left uncut as a protection belt. This gives a beacon every 610m. Protection belts are also left at every end of coupes. Coupes have been found to be most applicable in areas that have been selectively thinned for sawlogs, in which merchantable commercial timber species have been removed. However, the system is at the moment just on paper and is not practised by charcoal burners. Woodfuel Conversion and Utilisation Nkomeshya (1997) has listed the following tree species for firewood production: *Julbernardia paniculata (Mutondo, B) *Julbernardia globiflora (Sandwe, B) *Brachystegia boehmii (Musamba, B) *Brachystegia spiciformis (Muputu, B) *Bauhinia thoningii (Musekese, B) *Pericopsis angolensis (Mubanga, B) *Parinari curatellifolia (Mupundu, B) *Uapaca kirkiana (Musuku, B) B = Bemba Language The above tree species are preferred because of their high heat content value and that they last long in burning. Based on the same principle of heat value and durability in burning, 15 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambia - 1999.
preferred charcoal tree species are not so different from those used for firewood. Selectivity in woodfuel tree species has resulted in localised scarcities of the preferred species. However, due to continuously increasing demand for woodfuel and depletion of priority species, current-harvesting methods do not segregate on species and this situation has culminated in complete degradation of certain forest areas. Natural regeneration in these areas has become almost impossible (under current institutional arrangements and economic situation) because regrowths are rarely given a chance to develop into mature trees - some are cut immediately they start to show signs of stem rigidity and others are destroyed by late fires which are very common, especially in livestock areas and in areas under the slash and burn (Chitemene) system of agriculture. Zambian charcoal and firewood are estimated to have heat content values of 32.60 and 15.50GJ/tonne respectively (Department of Energy, 1992). Charcoal is, therefore, the most preferred of the two by most urban markets because of its superior qualities over firewood e.g. cleaner combustion, easy transportation and handling and high heat value. Rural communities on the other hand prefer firewood because they can not compete for charcoal with urban customers whose high demand leads to increased prices which the income `stripped' rural dwellers can not afford. Lack of alternative income generating ventures further alienates rural dwellers from use of charcoal because even those who are able to produce the commodity, would rather offer it for sale to fill the income gap and use firewood for their energy requirements. The major problem that has been associated with charcoal production, however, is in the way it is produced and the kind of losses incurred in its production. The earth kilns used are mostly 10% efficient, implying that in the process of producing charcoal from wood, 90% by weight is lost. From 100 tonnes of wood, therefore, one only expects to get 10 tonnes of charcoal (Kapiyo, 1996). The charcoal production process should therefore be done in efficient kilns or better still, wood should be burnt directly without first transforming it into charcoal. This will serve to sustain the current available, but highly endangered wood stocks. Promotion of alternative and renewable energy sources should be intensified and implemented. Sustainable Regeneration Chidumayo (1997) states that natural regeneration of forests is through seed, stumps (coppices) and roots. He further states that there are five (5) factors that affect natural regeneration:.
Canopy shading in selective felling systems; Inter-shoot competition, whereby only the dominant shoots contribute to the next generation; Capacity to regenerate (coppice) decreases with age and stem size; Late forest fires which kill seedlings and coppices; Cutting of seed bearers for woodfuel and sawlogs and clearing for agriculture. Seed bearers are usually cut because of their bigger diameters and hence are preferred for timber as sawlogs. This contributes to poor regeneration from seed. 16 Woodfuel Review and Assessment in Zambi