<title>Inter-agency Experiences and Lessons</title>
<section>1</section>
foreword
Eliminating poverty is the greatest challenge the world faces in the twenty-first century. The global community is committed to a series of international development targets that set clear "milestones" on the road to achieving this aim. These include a reduction by half in the number of people who are food-insecure by 2015 and a reduction in the proportion of people living in extreme poverty by the same date.
Experience has shown that people, and not the resources they manage, must be placed at the centre of development if poverty is to be reduced and eliminated. Poor people must actively participate in their own development. Sustainable livelihoods approaches to poverty reduction bring together the lessons of "best practice" in a set of principles supported by an analytical framework.
The Department for International Development (DFID) is working with other agencies to refine and apply sustainable livelihoods approaches. The objective is to work together and learn from each other in order to reduce poverty.
At the Inter-agency Forum on Operationalizing Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches, executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and supported by DFID, representatives of five development agencies came together to share their experiences. The Forum demonstrated a high degree of convergence around the principles of sustainable livelihoods approaches. Participants also made recommendations about how the agencies might work together in future to improve effectiveness. These recommendations are being pursued both within the headquarters of the agencies and at country level.
The Forum was a considerable success in its own right. This was due in large part to FAO's vital contribution in organizing the event. However, the long-term measure of success will be in the extent to which the Forum leads to more effective programmes for the reduction of poverty.
Michael Scott
Head, Rural Livelihoods Department
Department for International Development
<section>2</section>
preface
The overarching theme of FAO's activities is "Helping to build a food-secure world for present and future generations". This guiding principle has ensured continuity of purpose as well as consistency with the mandate set out in FAO's Constitution. Effective development is achieved through improvements in the production and distribution of food and agricultural products, including greater access to productive resources, employment opportunities and supplies and higher nutrition levels and living standards of all people.
Poverty is a major cause of food insecurity. Efforts to increase food supplies and accelerate economic growth are sure to bring overall benefits to the country and society, but unless they are accompanied by complementary targeted measures, they are unlikely to completely eliminate poverty and food insecurity among vulnerable populations. Millions of human beings living in rural areas as well as urban centres are at great risk of being left behind.
More sustainable livelihoods and food security can be ensured for these populations only through efforts to increase individuals' opportunities and choices and improve resource productivity, thereby resulting in higher incomes and improved access to food. The promotion of equitable access to natural and economic resources and social services is crucial and will require specific action to address gender disparities. Since most of the world's poor live in rural areas, a major challenge is to improve rural livelihoods, farm incomes and food security, both in food-deficit and economically marginal areas and among the resource-poor in more favourably endowed areas.
The Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 prominently includes an institutional strategy focused on poverty eradication and food security. Among its main components that Member Nations decided to indicate as fundamental are:
Considering that poverty eradication is a major goal of FAO Member Nations, and that it has stimulated a UN system-wide response, the Organization's contributions focused on the rural sector are not provided in isolation, but are an integral part of the broader effort. Critical to the attainment of better rural living standards will be investment in improved access to safe water and sanitation, power supplies, health services and education. From this vantage point, FAO is seeking further integration of its actions within the UN system (notably with IFAD, ILO, UNDCP, UNDP, UNEP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIFEM, WFP and WHO) and closer cooperation with bilateral technical cooperation mechanisms and activities.
The Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) Network on Rural Development and Food Security is an important means of promoting this at both headquarters and field level. Partnerships are also being reinforced with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system, the Global Forum on Agricultural Research (GFAR) system and academic and national research institutions. Building on the longstanding cooperation with the World Bank, regional development banks and IFAD, attempts will be made to stimulate increased official development assistance flows in support of food security and sustainable agriculture and rural development.
New alliances, based on shared objectives and complementarity of action, are sought with organizations operating in the sphere of rural development and poverty alleviation, including specialized non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations and cooperatives (particularly those of farmers, rural people, women and youth), as well as with the private sector.
More participatory and flexible ways of working together to provide services and doing business need to be found. One lesson that FAO has learned in its 30 years of promoting sustainable participatory rural development approaches in member countries is that rural poverty alleviation is not just an income problem. It is a livelihoods problem involving rural people and their complex social and economics links with other stakeholders at community and higher levels that influence and determine their access to productive assets. It is also a problem involving the existing local capacity to foster integrated natural resource management.
Since rural household livelihoods activities are multiple, involving on-farm as well as off-farm actions, and since interhousehold links and relationships at community and macro levels are constantly changing as they adjust to new situations, rural development and food security approaches must also become more comprehensive, multisectoral and flexible. As mentioned before, the Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 gives due attention to these factors by stressing the need to improve opportunities available to the rural poor so they can strengthen, diversify and sustain their livelihoods, increase their incomes and improve their food security.
It is therefore not surprising that FAO has been a strong supporter of the Department of International Development (DFID) initiative to promote broader use of sustainable livelihoods approaches and worked closely with DFID in organizing the Inter-agency Forum on Operationalizing Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches, held in Siena in March 2000.
This issue paper captures much of the richness of the discussion and debate that took place during the Forum. It highlights many of the useful lessons learned, and it identifies other areas that will need to be addressed. We therefore hope that it will be broadly disseminated and read.
Santiago Funes
Director, Rural Development Division
FAO Sustainable Development Department
<section>3</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is the result of a joint effort of the
72 participants at the Inter-agency Forum on
Operationalizing Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches
held at the Certosa di Pontignano, near Siena, Italy,
7-11 March 2000. It highlights the main experiences,
lessons and issues emerging from Forum background
papers, case study reports, an e-mail conference,
plenary sessions and working group discussions.
Vanda Altarelli and Alice Carloni prepared this
report, with contributions from Robin Marsh,
Katherine Warner, Stephen Baas, Jane Clark,
Rathin Roy, David Kingsbury, Ian Cherrett and
Tim Robertson. The report was edited by Omar
Sattaur. Philip Townsley provided special assistance
with graphics, and the layout was designed by
Paul Hollingworth.
<section>4</section>
key lessons
1. Agencies agreed strongly on the guiding principles that underpin sustainable livelihoods (SL) approaches.
2. The SL framework is a diagnostic tool that has to be made context-specific.
3. The tools and methods used to put SL approaches into practice are not specific to SL methodology.
4. SL approaches add value to our work because they:
5. The participatory approaches that underpin the SL guiding principles are not unique to SL approaches and need to be adapted.
6. A participatory analysis of livelihoods, differentiated by socio-economic strata, gender and stages in household cycle, should be conducted early on to determine entry points; overinvestment in research and analysis should be avoided by building on existing secondary data and local institutional knowledge and relying as much as possible on pilot interventions accompanied by participatory process monitoring.
7. Holistic diagnosis may result in interventions in a single sector or at a few key entry points, provided that they address the concerns of the poor.
8. Initial entry points can be sectoral, and can then widen to include other sectors.
9. Grassroots institutional capacity-building and risk-management capacity are crucial to sustainability.
10. SL approaches must consider the interaction between livelihood systems at the micro level and their policy environment.
11. SL-driven policy analysis must consider policy content and processes.
12. SL approaches upstream are valuable, provided that they are linked to micro-level ground-truthing. Policy changes that are driven from below - that have a strong grassroots power base and are supported by civil society - are likely to be more lasting.
13. Certain issues need further clarification:
<section>5</section>
background
This report synthesizes the main issues and lessons learned from the Inter-agency Forum on Operationalizing Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches, held at the Certosa di Pontignano, near Siena, Italy, 7-11 March 2000. The Forum brought together several agencies that had been applying or developing sustainable livelihoods (SL) approaches in their work, including CARE, the Department for International Development (DFID), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The purpose of the Forum was to:
The Forum was expected to provide participants with the opportunity to:
The Forum followed a three-week Web/E-Conference on "Operationalizing participatory ways of applying SL approaches", which served to familiarize Forum participants with SL concepts, guiding principles and the SL framework. Four theme papers were prepared as a basis for discussion during the Web/
E-Conference ^1, and theme moderators prepared guidance notes to support them.
The Forum was organized around a series of case studies in order to focus discussion on concrete issues related to operationalizing SL approaches. Each agency prepared and presented one or more of its own project experiences as a basis for analysing the strengths and weaknesses of SL approaches. Case studies were selected that typified the range of situations confronted by development agencies. These ran the gamut from drought-prone areas of Mali, to upland watersheds in Latin America, to flood-prone lowland paddy areas in Bangladesh, to cold grasslands in Mongolia. Four of the eight case studies concerned sustainable natural resource management (watershed management, land husbandry, soil and water conservation, integrated pest management). The remaining four were examples of dryland agriculture, artisanal fisheries, livestock and household food security (see Table 1). Four mini-case studies dealt with cross-cutting issues: gender, rural micro-finance, institutional
restructuring and the design of a sectoral regional project.
Forum participants were split up into groups of seven to eight members, each with well-defined terms of reference. The groups had to: (1) understand the project as designed, then apply the SL framework and assess what might have changed if SL principles had been used; (2) analyse how the project evolved during implementation, then apply SL principles and discuss what difference this might have made to implementation; (3) examine project outcomes and consider whether the application of SL approaches would have resulted in substantially different outcomes; (4) suggest ways of redesigning the project in the light of SL approaches and identify constraints likely to emerge in implementing the redesigned project; and (5) draw out lessons regarding the value added by SL approaches and flag any issues needing further clarification.
At the end of the second day, each case study group reported back to the plenary group, which then prioritized the most important unresolved issues. New "issue groups" were formed to discuss these and report back to the plenary group.
UNRESOLVED ISSUES
1. What are the best entry points for SL approaches?
2. Do SL approaches add value for implementation?
3. If SL approaches help agencies understand the poor, do they help reach them?
4. Do SL approaches always need a policy dimension?
5. How much diagnosis and when?
6. Are SL approaches culture-bound?
7. Can SL approaches work in authoritarian regimes?
8. What do SL approaches imply for donor agencies?
Participants then broke up into agency-specific groups to discuss the implications of SL approaches for operations in their own agencies.
As a postscript to the Forum, after the closing session, an inter-agency managers' meeting endorsed recommendations from the Forum on the question: "Where do we go from here?
TABLE 1
Summary of case studies for the Forum COUNTRY
COUNTRY
PROJECT
DONOR/ AGENCY
SECTOR/ ENTRY POINTS
EVOLUTION
Bangladesh
INTERFISH
DFID
Bolivia
Upper Piraí
FAO/ Italy
Ethiopia
Soil & Water
Conservation in the Ethiopian
Highlands
WFP/
WB/
UNDP/
FAO
Honduras
Lempira Sur
Project
FAO/NL
Malawi
Malawi Sustainable
Livelihoods
Programme
UNDP
Mali
Segou Village
Development Fund
IFAD
Mongolia
Arhangai Rural Poverty Alleviation
Project
IFAD
Zambia
Improving
Household Food
Security & Nutrition in the Luapula Valley
FAO/
Belgian
Survival
Fund
^1 These were "Livelihoods approaches compared", by Diana Carney et al.; "Operationalizing household livelihood security", by Tim R. Frankenberger, Michael Drinkwater and Daniel Maxwell; "Sustainable livelihoods approaches at the policy level", by Anne M. Thomson; and "Institutions and sustainable livelihoods", by Jim Bingen.
<section>6</section>
lessons learned
WHAT ARE SL APPROACHES?
The need to clarify what SL approaches are emerged as a central concern of the Forum. There was consensus that SL approaches comprised two elements: the SL guiding principles and the SL framework. The tools and methods used to put sustainable livelihoods into practice are essential but not specific to SL approaches.
The SL guiding principles. These are a guide to the main concerns of sustainable livelihoods. They are the defining characteristics of development interventions that have been designed to address issues identified through the use of the SL framework. But they are only guiding principles. They neither prescribe solutions nor dictate methods, not least because the guiding principles themselves prioritize flexibility and adaptation to the diverse nature of local conditions. SL guiding principles^2 are to:
1. Be people centred:
2. Be holistic:
3. Be dynamic:
4. Use micro-macro links:
5. Aim for sustainability:
The SL framework. The SL framework is an analytical tool for understanding livelihoods systems and strategies and their interaction with policies and institutions. However, it needs to be made context-specific. This will often imply changing or adding elements to reflect local social, cultural, political and economic realities.
A wide range of diverse tools and methods may be used to design and implement projects that can contribute to achieving sustainable livelihoods. These methods, however, are not exclusive to SL approaches.
TABLE 2
Tools and methods useful for SL approaches
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS & METHODS
MONITORING & EVALUATION TOOLS & METHODS
CONSENSUS ON THE SL GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Participants acknowledged that reaching consensus on the guiding principles of SL approaches is a major strength:
HOW DO SL APPROACHES ADD VALUE TO OUR WORK?
Forum participants agreed that the use of the SL framework and the incorporation of the guiding principles into development policy, planning and implementation could add value in a number of ways:
1. SL approaches shift the focus from resources to people and from problems, constraints and needs to perceived strengths, opportunities, coping strategies, and local initiative.
2. SL approaches encourage early diagnosis and the establishment of feedback mechanisms within projects that can lead to a better identification and understanding of poverty and the development of diverse strategies for addressing it. (These strategies do not necessarily involve working exclusively with the poor.)
3. SL approaches require a more systematic assessment of the vulnerability and assets of people, which makes it easier to identify more appropriate entry points.
4. Applying the SL framework reveals how the inability to cope with shocks and stresses increases the vulnerability of the poor. Making the relationships between vulnerability and poverty explicit was held to be an extremely important contribution.
5. Use of the SL framework helps agencies focus on outcomes rather than outputs. Striving to achieve outputs reduces flexibility and may succeed at the cost of the sustainability of the processes. Participants acknowledged that working towards process outcomes rather than outputs could address both concerns.
6. The focus on synergy between different types of capital also adds value. Projects that strengthen human and social capital in synergy with physical, natural or financial capital are more likely to bring about sustainable outcomes.
7. SL approaches also improve the relevance of interventions with a poverty focus. This may involve partnership with organizations that were previously "invisible" to decision-makers.
8. The SL framework provides a valuable structure for promoting and integrating interdisciplinary teamwork; indeed, the guiding principles provide a common language, and the framework assists agencies in structuring information from different disciplines.
9. Providing essential information on how prevailing structures and processes affect people's livelihoods, SL approaches ensure that policy and institutional aspects are not neglected.
10. The use of SL approaches can encourage the design of open-ended, flexible development interventions. In fact, the guiding principles espouse a process of continual learning and analysis throughout the life of a project or a programme. This implies that any "diagnosis" emerging from SL approaches must necessarily be dynamic and iterative.
11. When dynamic and iterative diagnosis is built into a project, it increases that project's capacity to react and adapt to new needs and changing conditions and to tailor interventions to suit the poor.
12. These built-in, participatory feedback mechanisms can also contribute to improving the design and implementation of projects, making them more relevant to livelihood issues encountered at the local level. In several of the projects analysed during the Forum (Bolivia, Honduras, INTERFISH, Zambia), practitioners relied on such mechanisms to adjust the design of their projects and improve their implementation.
13. SL approaches add value to implementation when they bring about a continual process of demand-driven implementation, participatory feedback and implementation readjustment.
14. Since SL approaches are holistic and call for flexibility, they allow for a greater capacity to respond to contingencies.
15. SL approaches recognize the need for partnerships because people's livelihood strategies are multisectoral and no one agency can be an expert in all fields. This points to the need to identify the core competencies and comparative advantages of agencies. The emphasis on building new and innovative partnerships across projects, line agencies, NGOs, civil society,
the private sector and donor agencies was viewed as an important contribution of SL approaches.
OVERARCHING LESSONS
Participation and SL approaches. Participatory approaches are essential to operationalizing the guiding principles, but they need to be adapted, developed and used, as well as internalized and institutionalized by all stakeholders.
MAJOR PARTNERSHIP
PRINCIPLES (CARE)
and interests.
The participatory element of SL approaches, and the resulting focus on people's livelihoods, is a powerful contributor to sustainability. The first phase of the WFP project in Ethiopia was implemented under a coercive and authoritarian regime. Project interventions attempted to address land degradation, but activities were implemented through coercive "mass mobilization". With the fall of the Derg regime in 1991, communities started to revolt against the system. This led to widespread destruction of communal woodlots and physical conservation structures. The few community woodlots that were untouched were those that the communities had specifically requested and whose species composition they had selected.
Sustainability. Within the SL framework, sustainability must be looked at holistically, and it should concern:
Working at multiple levels. It is crucial to ensure that micro-level institutions/organizations influence the development of policy to secure an effective enabling environment, and that macro-level structures and processes support people to build on their own strengths.
Develop a shared vision of change. The poor have problems and weaknesses. They also have strengths and opportunities, and they often have clear aspirations of where they want to be in the future. It is important to help them to bring about this vision.
"Buy into" SL approaches. Policy-makers and implementers at all levels, as well as the private sector, must "buy into" SL principles and processes. Indications from several projects, including DELIVERI and Honduras, point to the crucial role that internal champions can play in facilitating this process.
MALI - HOW LACK OF INITIAL DIAGNOSIS LED TO INAPPROPRIATE ENTRY POINTS
The Mali Segou Village Development Fund Project largely bypassed the poorest households because insufficient attention was given at the project design stage to socio-economic differentiation within the project area or to the livelihood systems of the poor. The main entry point - animal traction - excluded the poorest households. Moreover, the project failed to reach women and youth because it selected village associations - which are composed of elderly male heads of extended household production units - as its institutional entry point. This was rectified in the course of the project's successive phases, as a result of evaluations.
Skills, attitudes and knowledge. The use of SL approaches requires new skills, attitudes and knowledge that need
to be introduced across organizations, agencies and staff at all levels.
OTHER LESSONS LEARNED: DIAGNOSIS AND DESIGN
Participatory diagnosis of livelihoods is essential prior to designing a project and selecting entry points. Projects that had failed to undertake a holistic analysis of livelihood systems prior to design often adopted strategies and entry points that were largely irrelevant to the local population, especially the poor. For instance, natural resource management (NRM) projects in Bolivia and Pakistan had to expend a lot of project staff time and resources on raising awareness of their NRM initiatives because these did not correspond to the communities' felt needs.
Inappropriate entry points. Agencies should be wary of committing themselves to a narrow or commodity-based institutional entry point unless communities have been consulted or a participatory analysis of livelihoods has been carried out. Institutional commitments can make it difficult to change the project's entry point once implementation has begun.
TABLE 3
Household typology - Bolivia case study
Parameter
URBAN-ORIENTED ("outstanding" HHs)
FARM-FOCUSED ("rich" and successful "middle-class" HHs)
MARGINAL ("poor" and impoverished "middle-class" HHs)
Location of house(s)
House(s) in Santa Cruz, Samaipata and the community
Houses in the community and in Samaipata
House in the community
Occupation
Professional or business people
Farmers working their own land
Day labourers or sharecroppers
Access to credit
Access to formal banking services and credit
Access to micro-credit
No access to credit
Labour use
Able to hire share-croppers or reciprocal exchange exchange labour
Able to participate in from reciprocal
Often excluded day-labourers labour
Farm size and type
Own over 20 ha of land with established orchards
Own 5-20 ha with established orchards
Landless or owning<5 ha of degraded land
Livestock ownership
Over 20 head of cattle
Fewer than 20 head of cattle (among Vallunos)
No cattle
Means of transport
Own truck or pick-up
Own pick-up or motorbike
No private transport
Education and literacy
Educated, with sons studying in town
Literate
Illiterate
Role in local politics
Influential in local politics
Active in self-help groups or community- based organizations
Do not participate in self-help groups or community- based organizations
Data produced from livelihood analyses should always be disaggregated by gender, age and socio-economic stratum. To ensure that project interventions address the concerns of the poor and build upon their strengths, it is essential that diagnostic studies start from a disaggregated analysis of the asset base and livelihood systems of different socio-economic strata, and develop a household typology^3. Different socio-economic categories within a community can have widely different livelihood strategies.
Importance and timing of diagnosis. The Forum consensus was that initial diagnosis, followed by continual reassessment in the light of changing experience, is essential for the following reasons:
The Forum consensus was that projects building on 10 to 15 years of experience - which includes analyses of livelihood systems and action research-cum-evaluation - should avoid overinvestment of time and resources in diagnosis. Instead, project planners should rely as much as possible on secondary data and pilot interventions, coupled with participatory process monitoring and adjustment during project implementation^4. Whereas, when entering a new area, a more substantial diagnostic process would be required up front. Diagnostic tools, however, must be adapted to the local and cultural context.
CULTURAL ADAPTATION OF DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS - PAKISTAN
Ensuring that the views and experiences of women in purdah were accounted for offered special challenges for PRA practitioners. Literacy among women in the country is low; most women have had no previous experience participating in meetings and little opportunity to review options and make informed decisions. The project therefore developed special PRA tools that were visual and interactive rather than abstract and reflective. Time and money were spent in designing a gender-specific set of tools to detail a Brahui woman's daily time profile. One of these tools featured a woman in Brahui dress and a series of pictures drawn by a local artist representing women's triple gender roles (productive, reproductive and community management). The tool became quite popular with women. They could identify themselves through the pictures, and as they went through their daily and seasonal routines, they got a sense of how much work they were doing. This augmented their feelings of
self-confidence. The project also used village-maintained photo books and a village-produced slide show for discussions. Allowing groups to select and design their own tools reinforces ownership of activities and development planning.
The holistic analysis may lead to one or more focused interventions. Once the holistic analysis is completed, a decision can be made on the scope of the entry point, e.g. how wide or narrow it should be, and within which sector, level or group it should lie. It is essential, however, that the needs of the poor be addressed.
SINGLE-SECTOR OR MULTISECTORAL ENTRY POINTS?
The DFID DELIVERI project in Indonesia is an example of an SL-type project with a single-sector entry point that worked on several levels within that sector. It aimed to make existing livestock services more client-centred and more responsive to the poor. It started work at subdistrict and community levels and gradually moved up, using the outcomes of pilot experiences at the grassroots level to influence policy-makers at higher administrative levels. By bringing decision-makers from the provincial level face to face with beneficiaries in pilot villages, the project was able to lobby effectively for policy and institutional change.
The UNDP Sustainable Livelihoods Project in Malawi went to the opposite extreme. Attempting to formulate a comprehensive action programme covering all relevant sectors, the project concluded that adoption of an SL approach did not mean designing an SL programme to cover all sectors, and that it was preferable to focus implementation on a few key leverage points within the livelihood system.
Initial entry points may begin by addressing a community's priorities in one sector, and take in other sectors as the programme matures. This allows sequential movement into areas that require more community awareness, such as projects or programmes related to natural resource management (NRM).
Projects or programmes should take advantage of opportunities arising from decentralization to overcome the problems of sectoral entry points. When all government services come under the authority of the district, project funds channelled to the district level or below (bypassing the central ministries) can be allocated to one or another sector on the basis of emerging demand from communities. Decentralized services need not be provided by the line ministries but may be contracted to a wider range of service providers such as the private sector, NGOs or other civil society organizations.
EXAMPLES OF PROJECTS THAT SUCCESSFULLY SHIFTED ENTRY POINTS
Bolivia: Despite its single-sector entry point, this project was able to meet needs outside the agriculture/NRM sector by linking communities with resources provided by donors active in other sectors.
Honduras: This project developed from a single-sector entry point that addressed a felt need and grew to address complementary needs in other sectors.
Pakistan: The initial entry point of this project - watershed management - was of little interest to the local population, but the project was able to shift the focus to fruit-trees and community infrastructure.
Zambia: This project's initial entry point of household food security was too narrow to ensure improvement of nutritional status. The project discovered that food-based activities must go hand in hand with interventions such as primary health care, providing access to clean water and sanitation, nutrition and health education and improved weaning and breastfeeding practices.
NRM projects may exclude certain vulnerable poor groups (e.g. landless, sharecroppers) by focusing on land-based interventions or activities. SL approaches can help in identifying alternative interventions that support the livelihood strategies of the poor. A possible strategy would be to identify those households that do not participate in project activities and, through participatory approaches, identify their members' needs and strengths. Additional initiatives that address those identified needs can then be introduced if they fall within the project's mandate. Alternatively, the needs of the poorest could be addressed indirectly through policy and institutional reform (employment creation, strengthening local institutions). For exa