<title>REPORT OF THE FIRST CONSULTATION ON AGRICULTURAL INFORMATION MANAGEMENT</title>
<section>1</section>
I. INTRODUCTION
A. CONVENING OF THE MEETING AND GENERAL AIMS
1. Attendance at this First Consultation on Agricultural Information Management (COAIM) was invited by the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in his circular letter (Ref. G / GIL-804) dated 13 March 2000, addressed to all the Member Nations of FAO, and to international and other institutions.
2. The general aims of the COAIM were to bring policy issues related to management and access to agricultural information to the attention of the inter-governmental process, and to establish a global framework for the normative work of the World Agricultural Information Centre (WAICENT), recognizing the key role that information and knowledge play in ensuring food security and sustainable development, and thereby meeting the objectives of the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
3. Additionally, the COAIM set out to discuss ways of improving the capacities of decision-makers, professionals and the public at large in member countries to access and use information essential for achieving sustainable agriculture development and food security. The COAIM covered key aspects of agricultural information management, capacity building and improving access to relevant information.
B. PARTICIPANTS
4. The First COAIM (Rome, 5-7 June 2000) was attended by 161 representatives of the 91 Member Nations of FAO. Among the participants were observers from one United Nations Member State, representatives from four United Nations specialized agencies, observers from 24 intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations having status with FAO and from seven institutes of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Countries and organizations represented at the session are shown in Appendix A.
<section>2</section>
II. OPENING OF THE CONSULTATION
A. INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT
5. The Consultation was opened by Mr Anton Mangstl, on behalf of Ms Carleen Gardner, the Assistant Director-General of the General Affairs and Information Department of FAO. Mr Mangstl then gave the floor to Ms Louise Fresco, Assistant Director-General of the Agriculture Department of FAO, who delivered the opening speech. In welcoming the participants Ms Fresco expressed her pleasure in opening this first COAIM, and in having been invited to launch this important initiative on information management which is central to FAO's work in achieving the aims of the World Food Summit.
6. Ms Fresco reported on the progress made since the Fourth AGRIS / CARIS^1 Technical Consultation held in June 1998. She informed the delegates of the significant progress made in improving access to agricultural information world-wide using the most up to date Internet technologies. She then went on to report on the progress achieved in modernizing the processing of AGRIS data generally, and in reorienting efforts towards producing better tools and systems. The successful transfer of all AGRIS processing functions to Rome has already brought a significant gain in both time and efficiency and will ultimately assist in enhancing information management capacities within the countries themselves.
7. Ms Fresco announced to the delegates the establishment of the Outreach Programme of WAICENT which will play a large part in developing and strengthening knowledge exchange and information systems available in member countries and the international community associated with agricultural development and food security. The Programme will also provide positive support to work in the decentralization of AGRIS.
8. Ms Fresco then presented a strategic view of agriculture in the 21^st century as an information-intensive sector of the global economy - moving away from an artisanal, extensive, traditional activity towards a more sophisticated, computerized sector of the economy. She described the agriculture of the future as entailing more efficient and sustainable production systems, making optimal use of resources such as water and managing land in a more intensive way. With time these changes will push agriculture into new domains where access to information is a necessity and not a luxury.
9. Ms Fresco went on to emphasize that in future food security and agricultural development will require a participatory process involving everyone: the government, the private sector, the academic community, farmer organizations and civil society in general. Information exchange will be an essential part of the institutional innovations that will be required for the participatory process to really work: to participate actively we must be better informed.
10. It was reiterated by the speaker that this first COAIM will launch policy dialogues on issues such as access to agricultural information, capacity building and standards. She urged the delegates to participate actively in the debates that would follow.
11. Ms Fresco closed her address by renewing a warm welcome to the participants and assuring them that FAO valued their time and advice. She was confident that their counsel during this Consultation would help to establish the COAIM as the mechanism for policy dialogue on agricultural information management.
B. ELECTION OF OFFICERS
12. Ms Neela Gangadharan, Alternate Permanent Representative from India, was elected as Chairperson of the meeting, Ms Pamela Andre, Director National Agricultural Library, USA, as Vice-Chairperson, and Mr. Humberto Molina Reyes, Alternate Representative from the Republic of Chile, as Rapporteur. Mr Francisco Perez-Trejo, (WAICENT Manager, GIL, FAO) acted as Secretary.
C. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE FOR THE SESSION
13. The Agenda and Timetable were approved with some minor modifications. The Agenda as adopted is set out in Appendix B and the List of Documents is given in Appendix C.
D. KEYNOTE ADDRESS
14. Mr Gorjestani, Chief Knowledge Officer, Africa Region, World Bank gave the Keynote Address, "Information and Knowledge for Empowerment". A summary of the presentation is given in Appendix D.
E. PRESENTATION OF WAICENT
15. The presentation of WAICENT started with a short video. Mr Perez-Trejo, WAICENT Manager, FAO, reminded the Consultation of the importance of information, which represents one of the main challenges for the Organization, and which is contained in the First Article of the Constitution of FAO. He gave a brief outline of current WAICENT activities and developments (http://waicent.fao.org), and described the ways in which WAICENT has improved access to FAO's wealth of information accumulated over the past 50 years, to become FAO's strategic programme on agricultural information management. WAICENT provides the platform for generating information and for developing standards; specialized tools such as the "Information Finder" have been elaborated to facilitate access in a thematic direction to the Organization's information.
16. The priorities for the period 2000-2006 were: (i) the Outreach Programme and capacity building among Member Nations; (ii) normative activities such as development of AGROVOC and support to the Codex Alimentarius; and (iii) contributions to activities such as the Plan of Action of the Food Summit, the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System (FIVIMS), and the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS).
17. The Consultation praised WAICENT for the progress made to date in the development and implementation of systems, and some delegations requested that certain issues be recognized and addressed. The Consultation acknowledged that the issue of information quality was paramount.
18. The Consultation agreed that there should be equal treatment with regards all official languages in all WAICENT activities. The Consultation agreed that the multilingual approach is of comparative advantage to FAO and requested that the Organization concentrate its efforts on the full implementation of the language policy in order to make available a greater proportion of the substantive information content in all the official languages, especially in Arabic and Chinese.
19. The Consultation recognized that the constraint of the "digital divide" included many aspects of organizational and personal culture, particularly for the older generation, that were not to be solved merely by the introduction of new systems and tools. It was agreed that FAO enhance as much as possible the two-way nature of information exchange with Members, to obtain maximum value from collaborative links. The need to strengthen the information exchange and management capacities of many developing countries was clearly acknowledged, and the new WAICENT Outreach Programme was seen as a highly appropriate mechanism for extending the Organizations support.
^1 AGRIS is the international information system for the agricultural sciences and technology, CARIS is the Current Agricultural Research Information System
<section>3</section>
III. PLENARY DISCUSSIONS ON
AGRICULTURAL INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
A. IMPROVING ACCESS TO AGRICULTURAL INFORMATION (COAIM 1 / 2)
20. Dr V P Sharma of the National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Hyderabad, made a short presentation entitled "Cyber Extension: Indian Initiatives for The Extension Approach in The New Millennium". Access to information and improved communication is a crucial requirement for sustainable agricultural development. He observed that modern communication technologies - when applied to conditions in rural areas - can help to improve communication, increase active participation and further the dissemination of information and sharing of knowledge and skills. He believes that "Cyber Extension" will be the major form of technology dissemination in the near future, allowing for the fact that the rural population still has difficulty in accessing crucial information in order to make timely decisions. Dr Sharma stressed that it is essential that information supply is demand-led rather than supply-driven.
21. Dr Sharma reiterated that the challenge is not only to improve the accessibility of communication technology to the rural population but also to improve its relevance to local development. The various national organizations in India have a very important role to play in packaging information on agricultural extension and rural development policies, schemes, programmes and working mechanisms at the grass-root level and hosting the same on their websites. He proposed that it is incumbent on the entire community involved in working with rural communities, including administrators, NGOs, trainers and scientists, to provide information access as widely as possible in the rural areas in order to "to reach the unreached".
22. The Secretariat then presented the key elements of the paper COAIM 1/2. The Consultation welcomed the analysis of issues and the general approach taken in the paper, and concurred that FAO's core area of expertise was in the gathering and dissemination of information content, rather than in the area of information technology. The Consultation stressed the importance of the fact that access to knowledge and information is critical for sustainable development, and for those components that are relevant to FAO: namely, agricultural productivity, food security, and sustainable development. It was acknowledged that the adoption of quality standards was of paramount importance in facilitating access to information. Some delegations pressed for more effective availability of FAO's experience and information management tools at the local level.
23. Many delegations emphasized the need for the full and fair implementation of the language policy of FAO, following on from the interventions made after the presentation of WAICENT; in particular, in the area of greater accessibility of WAICENT content in Arabic and Chinese. The Secretariat explained that the appropriate tools to ensure full implementation of this policy were still under development, but it was hoped that these tools would eventually reduce the need for extensive human intervention in full-text translations. The delegates stressed that improved language coverage is linked to the wider issue of the quality of access to information in WAICENT by Members.
24. The Consultation recognized the importance of the proposed decentralization of the WAICENT programme, particularly in the context of greater access to information at a variety of levels in and between Member Nations. The potential establishment of regional and sub-regional mirror sites for WAICENT was also regarded as a positive move. The Consultation agreed to place a high priority on improving access to agricultural information through WAICENT with Members, and other stakeholders, taking full advantage of the opportunities provided by the new generation of information and communication technologies.
25. Some delegations called upon the Organization to promote appropriate use of modern information and communication technologies in the context of those rural communities in many developing countries which lack adequate, or even basic, infrastructures. One delegation stressed that FAO's own information resources would only satisfy a small part of the requirement at the local level, and that national organizations themselves must be responsible for locally-derived content, and the eventual modification of internationally-sourced material to suit the needs of users. Some delegations suggested that it would be instrumental for FAO to work at the national level in support of development for information exchange through local channels, given the scale of the potential demand for collaboration. The Secretariat clarified that the WAICENT Outreach Programme would be a key platform for working with national programmes. In addition, it was felt that the impact on poverty and food
security would be enhanced by the effort to strengthen and improve knowledge exchange systems at the grassroots level. Some delegates emphasized the role of programmes such as the Special Programme on Food Security (SPFS) in facilitating the promulgation of WAICENT's experience. The Consultation recommended that special attention be given to the needs of small producers in the access to information. The decentralization of information systems constitutes one of the means of reaching this objective.
26. The Consultation recommended that FAO play a key role in co-ordinating agencies active in the agricultural sector in order to promote effective collaboration in capacity-building efforts with member countries, facilitate the advance towards the goal of sustainable agriculture, and ensure economically viable access to information and communication technologies. The Consultation called on the Organization to collect and document evidence of the successful introduction of new approaches and implementation of information and knowledge systems based on modern technologies. Evidence of the impact of information would have a significant bearing on the potential collaboration provided by Members.
27. The Consultation emphasized that future consultations should take on the role of facilitating an FAO-wide programme covering key aspects of access to information and knowledge, thus reflecting the inherent cross-sectoral nature of information management, with the principal task of encouraging and supporting the efforts of Member Nations, NGOs and other organizations.
B. STRENGTHENING INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT CAPACITIES THROUGH INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION ( COAIM 1 / 3 )
28. The Secretariat introduced the representative of the European Centre for Development Policy Management, Mr P Ballantyne, who presented the key elements of Paper COAIM 1/3. The Consultation congratulated the Secretariat on a concise and informative Paper, and recognized that international co-ordination and co-operation are key elements in the improvement of effectiveness in capacity building for information access. The Consultation noted with interest the excellent presentation made by Mr Woldemeskel, Head of MIS and Database Service in the Ministry of Agriculture of Ethiopia, on the development of a national agricultural information system in the Federal Republic of Ethiopia. The Consultation recommended that FAO promote co-ordination between development assistance agencies in the international community working in capacity building in the area of information management in agriculture, thereby avoiding duplication, bringing together complementary skills and sharing
experiences.
29. Some delegations also recognized the need for co-ordination of the many initiatives in the field of agricultural information and knowledge exchange based on new technologies, and suggested that FAO establish a mechanism for co-ordination with key international agencies, reporting back to Member Nations on relevant issues, so that roles and responsibilities are made clearer, synergies are achieved and duplication is minimized.
30. Several delegations emphasized the lack of skills and infrastructure in their governmental organizations, and highlighted the need for inputting resources in the form of financial assistance, technology and skilled manpower. Other delegations emphasized that allowance must be made for the fact that the speed of development varies between and within countries when planning information systems development. The Consultation agreed that decisions on the design and implementation of systems needed to be deliberated at the national or local level, taking into full account the needs of users including those at the grassroots level where appropriate. Some delegations suggested that in the area of capacity building, FAO should be able play the supporting role by acting as an intermediary, particularly between public and private sectors and through the provision of norms and standards.
31. Some delegations requested that the FAO Council examine the possibility of defining a sub-programme of capacity building and training in information generation and management. Some observer organizations suggested that FAO and other international agencies focus their attention primarily on influencing decision-makers, and only become involved directly in technical training in computing or information management skills when absolutely necessary.
32. Several delegations noted that the policy of decentralization of WAICENT would also be appropriate in the case of FAO's activities in capacity building of all stakeholders, including farmers, although it was recognized that WAICENT's resources in the field programme were limited. The Czech Republic highlighted the importance of the role of FAO National Committees for information management at the national level in Central and Eastern Europe.
33. Several delegations stressed that FAO should respond to clearly articulated needs, and that it is essential that the information supply is "demand-led" and not "supply driven". The mistakes of "supply-driven" research, with the production of unwanted outputs, should not be repeated. The Consultation recognized the importance of Impact Assessment (IA) in agricultural information management, and noted the outcomes of the workshop on this subject jointly organized by FAO and CTA, and recommended that these and other organizations work together to develop and promote the use of easy-to-apply IA frameworks and methodologies.
34. The Secretariat underlined that WAICENT's existing strategy in the medium term is focusing on three types of intervention: (i) strengthening capacities at the regional level, (ii) assessment of information needs as a continuing process, and (iii) working at the national level mainly through field projects and priority programmes such as the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems (FIVIMS) and the Special Programme on Food Security (SPFS). In order to implement this strategy, WAICENT is identifying key partners in the governmental, non-governmental and private sectors, and is also developing tools and applications to provide to Members that will maximize the impact of the experience that it has gathered. The Secretariat explained that the longer term strategy will focus on the normative role involving the continuing improvement and development of standards and procedures.
35. Finally, the Consultation highlighted the importance of international co-operation in strengthening capacities in the generation of information, as was expressed in the Paragraphs 24 and 25 of Document COAIM 1/4. In other respects, horizontal co-operation links should be promoted between Member Nations for the development of information systems.
C. STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR AGRICULTURAL INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (COAIM 1 / 4 )
36. The Secretariat presented the key elements of Paper COAIM 1 / 4. The paper was welcomed by the Consultation, which recognized the crucial importance of standards for addressing some of the key problems affecting access to agricultural information and data exchange on the Internet. This includes the implementation of international agreements on content management, classification schemes and agreed vocabularies.
37. Several Delegations reported on the numerous national and international initiatives in the area of standards in agricultural information. The Consultation recommended that FAO assume a leading role as a clearing-house for international agreed information management standards in the agricultural sector. The Consultation recommended that FAO, in collaboration with other stakeholders in the agricultural sector, co-ordinate and facilitate the promotion and adoption of such standards with Member Nations.
38. The Consultation noted with interest the proposals to adopt Standard Generalized Mark-up Language (SGML) and Extensible Mark-up Language (XML) as standards for document management, and many delegations were favourable to their adoption as standards. As a controlled vocabulary, AGROVOC was recognized as a very valuable tool for better information management and some delegations supported the adoption of AGROVOC as a standard. Given the importance of the multilingual approach and since it was agreed that FAO has a comparative advantage in this regard, the Consultation recommended that FAO maintain and develop AGROVOC further. Other Member Nations expressed the desire to see FAO providing a neutral forum, offering a framework of thesaurus, presenting the pros and cons of all available thesauri instead of promoting a single thesaurus. Some Delegations also emphasized that FAO should collaborate with other relevant international initiatives, such as the Global Forum on
Agricultural Research.
39. The needs for further development of standardization in other domains such as, for example, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), search interface ergonomics and publication of meta-data information, were also recognized by the Consultation.
40. The Japanese Delegation reported that Japan has adopted SGML as a standard for documentation, but that there were few cases where the standard was applied. They expressed their support for the use of the XML standards for documentation and offered to work with other countries in the region on the adoption and use of FAO standards to improve access to agricultural information. They informed the Consultation of their decision to produce the AGROVOC thesaurus in Japanese.
41. Some Intergovernmental Organizations reported on activities they had undertaken to disseminate and improve the use of AGROVOC as the standard controlled vocabulary in agriculture, at the national and regional levels.
42. The Spanish Delegation noted the importance of strengthening FAO's information programme by having it designated as a major programme of the Organization. The delegation noted that this would provide a cross-disciplinary, cross-departmental framework that is required to cover the normative role of WAICENT across all areas of Organization's work, particularly fisheries. This major programme would encompass two sub-programmes: a normative sub-programme and an operational sub-programme. The possible creation of this major programme should be presented and discussed at the FAO Council.
43. Some delegations requested a clear commitment from FAO on the development of an XML-based document processing toolbox by FAO, as a tool to, inter alia, enable AGRIS participating centres to move from the traditional "input data centre" concept to the "resources centre" concept, as part of the global decentralization trend. Many delegations considered that FAO's role should also include technical advice on standards using XML, in order to have a consistent approach that can be used across national programmes.
<section>4</section>
IV. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
A. OTHER BUSINESS
44. The Consultation offered to the Delegates a series of parallel sessions, including:
1. AGRIS / CARIS - Workshop
2. The Role of Information and Communication Technologies in Rural Development and Food Security - Workshop
3. Impact Assessment for Information System Development - Workshop
The results and recommendations of these workshops were presented by Chairpersons to the Plenary, and these are included in Appendix E.
B. DATE AND PLACE OF NEXT SESSION
The Consultation agreed to hold the next Consultation on Agricultural Information Management in Rome, in May / June 2002.
<section>5</section>
APPENDIX B
ANNEXE B
APÉNDICE B
LIST OF DELEGATES AND OBSERVERS
LISTE DES DÉLÉGUÉS ET OBSERVATEURS
LISTA DE DELEGADOS Y OBSERVADORES
ALBANIA - ALBANIE
Head of delegation
Ms. Shqiponja PRENÇE
Responsible Agricultural Documentation Center
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Tirana
Tel: +355 (42) 239 17
Fax: +355 (42) 239 17
E-mail: prenci@docmaf.tirana.al
ALGERIA - ALGÉRIE - ARGELIA -
Suppléant
M. Ahmed HACHEMI
Ambassade de la République algérienne
démocratique et populaire
Via Barnaba Oriani 26
00197 Rome
Tel: +39 06 8068 7620
Fax: +39 06 808 3436
ANGOLA
Chef de la délégation
Son Excellence Monsieur Boaventura DA SILVA CARDOSO
Ambassadeur et Représentant permanent près la FAO, FIDA et PAM
Ambassade de la République d'Angola
Via Filippo Bernardini, 21
00165 Rome
Tel: +39 06 39 366 902
Fax: +39 06 63 49 60
Suppléant
M. Kia Mateva KIALA
Conseiller et Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO, FIDA et PAM
Ambassade de la République d'Angola
Via Filippi Bernardini 21
00151 Rome
Tél: +39 06 6536458
Adjoint
M. David TUNGA
Directeur du Cabinet de la Sécurité Alimentaire
Ministère de l'Agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda
Tel: +244 2 323022/323161
Fax: 244 2 323724/324941
E-mail: gsafao@ebonet.net
M. Francisco Cipriano JÚNIOR
Chef du Département du Centre de la Documentation et diffusion techniques
Ministère de l'Agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda
Tél: +244 2 323022
Fax: +244 2 323724/324941
E-mail: gsafao@ebonet.net
ARGENTINA - ARGENTINE
Jefe de delegación
Sra. Doña Hilda GABARDINI
Representante Permanente Alterna, Encargada de Negocios
Representación Permanente de la República Argentina ante la FAO
Piazza dell'Esquilino 2
00185 Roma
Tel: +39 06 47 42 551
Fax: +39 06 48 19 787
AUSTRIA - AUTRICHE
Head of delegation
Mr. Hubert SCHLIEBER
Bundesanstalt für Agrarwirtschaft
Postfach 32
A-1133
Vienna
BANGLADESH
Head of delegation
Mr. Mohammad MEJBAHUDDIN
Economic Counsellor
Ministry of Finance
Embassy of People's Republic of Bangladesh
Via Antonio Bertoloni 14
00197 Rome
Tel: 39 06 808 3595
Fax: 39 06 808 4853
BELARUS - BÉLARUS - BELARÚS
Adviser
Mr. Dmitrij SIVUROU
Chief
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Kasinets St. 86-2
220108 Minsk
Tel: +375 17 2784381
Fax: + +375 17 2770066
E-mail: belal@mshp.minsk.by or belal@belal.minsk.by
BELGIUM - BELGIQUE - BÉLGICA
Représentant
M. Philippe ANNAERT
Bibliothécaire, Conseiller adjoint à la Bibliothèque Centrale
Ministère des Classes Moyennes et de l'Agriculture
Tél: +32 2 208 3366
Fax: +32 2 208 3364
E-mail: philippe.annaert@cmlag.fgov.be
Mme. Justine GENTILEDeuxiéme Secrétaire
Représentation permanente du Royaume de
Belgique auprès de la FAO Via Omero 8
00197 Rome
Conseiller
Mme. Apolena ROUBINKOVA
Ingénieur, Attachée
Faculté des Sciences Agronomiques de Gembloux
2 Passage des Dèportes
B-5030
Tél: +32 81 622 136
Fax: +31 81 6145 44
E-mail: roubinkova.a@fsagx.ac.be
BENIN - BÉNIN
Représentant
M. Imorou ADAM
Ingénieur du développement rural, Directeur de l'Agriculture
Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres et de la Cooperation
01 BP 58 Porto-Novo
Tél: +229 21 23 37
Fax: +229 21 44 13
M. Gaston Cossi DOSSOUHOUI
Ingénieur du développement rural, Directeur Technique
Office National d'Appui a Sécurité Alimentaire
03 BP 2544 Cotonou
Tél: +229 33 15 02
M. Nazaire Christophe EHOUMI
Ingénieur Statisticien-Economiste, Direction de la Programmation et de la Prospective
Ministère du Développement Rural
03 BP 2900 Cotonou
Tél: +229 30 02 89 / 30 19 55
M. Pierre Agnoun BASSO
Ingénieur du développement rural, Directeur de la Programmation du Suivi et de l'Evaluation
CARDER-Atacora
03 BP 32 Natitinguou
Tél: +229 82 20 80 / 82 20 06
BOLIVIA - BOLIVIE
Adjunto
Sra. Doña Maria Soledad PAREJA DELOS
Primer Secretario
Embajada de la República de Bolivia
Via Brenta 2a - Int. 28
00198 Roma
Tel: +39 06 884 1001
Fax: +39 06 884 0740
BRAZIL-BRÉSIL-BRASIL
Adjunto
Sr. João Mauricio CABRAL DeMELLO
Second Secretary of External Relations
Piazza Navona, 14
Embassy of Brazil
Rome, Italy
BULGARIA - BULGARIE
Head of delegation
H.E. Krassimir KOSTOV
Minister Plenipotentiary to FAO
Permanent Representation of the Republic of Bulgaria to FAO
Via Pietro Paolo Rubens 21
00197 Rome, Italy
Tel: +39 06 322 4640
Fax: +39 06 322 6122
BURUNDI
Chef de la délégation
M. Aimable MANIRAKIZA
Directeur du Département des Statistiques et Informations Agricoles
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage
Tél: +257 227250
Fax: +257 212820
CAMEROON - CAMEROUN - CAMERÚN
Suppléant
M. André MBALLA
Coordonnateur National du Système d'Alerte Rapide et d'Information sur les Marchés
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Yaoundé
Tél: +237 239749
E-mail: snar@rct.net
Adjoint
M. Victor NDONGO ETEME
Chef du Service de la Documentation et Archives
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Yaoundé
Fax: +237 239749
E-mail: mdongo_eteme@yahoo.fr
Conseiller
M. Thomas Ndive MOKAKE
Deuxième Conseiller
Ambassade de la République du Cameroun
Via Siracusa 4-6
00161 Rome, Italy
Tél: +39 06 44291285
Fax: +39 06 44291323
CANADA - CANADÁ
Head of delegation
Mrs. Hélène CARRIER
Assistant Director
Canadian Agriculture Library
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
930 Carling Avenue
Ottawa, Ontario KIA DC5
Tel: +1 613 759 7084
Fax: +1 613 759 6643
E-mail: carrierh@em.agr.ca
Alternate
Mr. John AFELE
Director, International Program for Africa
University of Guelph
OAC Dean's Office
Johnston Hall, Room 136
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1
Tel: +1 519 824 4120 ext. 6419
Fax: +1 519 824 0870
E-mail: jafele@uoguelph.ca
CHILE - CHILI
Jefe de delegación
Sr. Don Humberto MOLINA
Representante Alterno
Representación Permanente de la República de Chile ante la FAO
Via Po 23
00198 Roma
Tel: +39 06 8417 450/8417 414
Fax: +39 06 8583 3855
CHINA - CHINE -
Head of delegation
H.E. LIANG Qu
Minister of Plenipotentiary to FAO
Permanent Representation of People's Republic of China to FAO
Via della Caffarella 9
00198 Rome
Tel: +39 06 5137345
Fax: +39 06 5137344
E-mail: china.fao@agora.stm.it
Associate
Mr. WANG Zhanlu
Alternate Permanent Representative
Permanent Representation of People's Republic of China to FAO
Via della Caffarella 9
00198 Rome
Tel: +39 06 5137345
Fax: +39 06 5137344
E-mail: china.fao@agora.stm.it
Associate
Mr. CAO Qingbo
Deputy Director
Information Analysis Division
Information Center
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing
Tel: +86 10 6419 2296
Fax: +86 10 6419 2468
E-mail: caoqb@agri.gov.cn
COLOMBIA - COLOMBIE
Jefe de delegación
Sr. Jorge Mario DIAZ
Director General de Política Sectorial
Ministerio de Agricultura
Tel: +57 1 334 8592
E-mail: poli@colomsat.net.co
CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
CONGO, RÉPUBLIQUE DÉMOCRATIQUE DU
CONGO, REPÚBLICA DEMOCRÁTICA DEL
Représentant
Prof. Mpuza
Vice-Director
Cabinet Ministry of Agriculture
M. Ngonde Nsakala
Director
Service National des Statistiques
M. Bokisila Ndashao
Chef de Cellule d'Information sur la Sécurité Alimentaire
Ministry of Agriculture
COSTA RICA
Suplente
Sra. Doña Yolanda GAGO
Ministro Consejero
Representación Permanente de la República de Costa Rica ante la FAO
Via Bartolomeo Eustachio 22
00161 Roma
Tel: +39 06 44251046
Fax: + 39 06 44251048
E-mail: misfao@tiscalinet.it
CROATIA - CROATIE - CROACIA
Head of delegation
Igor Hit