<title>The state of food insecurity in the world 2000</title>
<section>1</section>
About this report
The state of food insecurity in the world, now in its second edition, reports on global and national efforts to reach the goal set by the 1996 World Food Summit: to reduce by half the number of undernourished people in the world by the year 2015.
The first chapter of this year's report, "Undernourishment around the world", updates last year`s estimate of the prevalence of chronically undernourished people in developing countries and adds prevalence estimates for countries in transition. In addition, it presents an important new dimension to these estimates of undernourishment: the depth of hunger experienced by the undernourished. Other highlights of this year's report include:
"Nutritional status and vulnerability" advances last year's discussion of malnutrition through the use of the body mass index and the study of women's special nutritional needs. It also illustrates cases of food insecurity through an examination of sample diets and the ongoing research into the causes of vulnerability in different livelihood groups.
"Dynamics of change" explores two diverse examples of how progress can be made in reducing food insecurity. These are the impact of agricultural research on higher-yielding cassava varieties in Africa and the dramatic success in reducing malnutrition among children under five years in Thailand.
The state of food insecurity in the world draws on FAO's ongoing work of monitoring the nutritional status of populations worldwide and analysing their degree of food insecurity and vulnerability. This work represents part of FAO's contribution to the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System (FIVIMS) initiative, which is being established at the global and national levels.
Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System
On behalf of members of the Inter-Agency Working Group (IAWG) on FIVIMS, it is my pleasure to associate the IAWG with this second edition of SOFI. This publication represents a substantial contribution to the objectives of FIVIMS, namely, to:
-increase global attention to problems of food insecurity;
-improve data quality and analysis through the development of new tools and capacity building in developing countries;
-promote effective and better directed action aimed at reducing food insecurity and poverty;
-promote donor collaboration on food security information systems at the global and country levels;
-improve access to information through networking and sharing.
Although IAWG-FIVIMS members are a diverse group, we are united by a shared commitment to reduce food insecurity and vulnerability and its multidimensional causes rooted in poverty. Development agencies and countries need solid information on who the food insecure are, where they are located, what their livelihood systems are, and why they are in this situation. With answers to these questions, development partners at all levels can combine their efforts to reduce food insecurity and poverty through better policies and better designed and targeted interventions.
Before the launching of FIVIMS in 1997, IAWG member institutions were already working to improve food security information systems around the world. We still are. Through FIVIMS, we are also increasing efforts within our institutions while reducing duplication and ensuring that our collective work is efficient and complementary. As part of the UN system reform process, we also aim to collaborate more effectively at the country level within the UN Development Assistance Framework. Despite the inevitable institutional challenges, FIVIMS is making significant progress based on solid technical fieldwork enhanced by new computational and communication technologies.
IAWG members congratulate the FAO team on this year's report. And we stand committed to making even more substantial contributions in the future to The state of food insecurity in the world.
Peter Matlon, UNDP, Chair, IAWG- FIVIMS
IAWG-FIVIMS membership
Australian Agency for International Development (AUSAID)
Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)
European Commission (EC)
German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs . (UNDESA)
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
World Bank (WB)
World Food Programme (WFP)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Administrative Committee on Coordination/Subcommittee
on Nutrition (ACC/SCN)
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR)
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)
Helen Keller International (HKI)
Save the Children Fund (SCF/UK)
World Resources Institute (WRI)
For more information, see the IAWG-FIVIMS Web site at www.fivims.org
<section>2</section>
Foreword
Towards the World Food Summit target
Within every society, rich and poor, there are children too hungry to concentrate in school, underweight mothers who give birth to sickly children and chronically hungry adults who lack the energy to raise their families above the subsistence level. Where hunger is widespread, it is also a basic development issue impeding national economic growth and keeping millions trapped in poverty.
The state of food insecurity in the world (SOFI) was created to track progress towards ending this profound obstacle to human rights, quality of life and dignity. It was spurred by the 1996 World Food Summit in Rome, where leaders of 186 countries pledged to reduce by half the number of hungry people in the world by 2015.
In this, the second edition, we introduce a new tool for measuring the severity of want: the depth of hunger. This is a measure of the per person food deficit of the undernourished population within each country. Measured in kilocalories, it aims to assess just how empty people's plates are each day.
Measurements of the depth of hunger demonstrate that undernourishment is far more debilitating in some places than in others. In the industrialized countries, hungry people lack 130kilocalories per day on average, while in five of the poorest countries, the daily food deficit is more than three times that, 450 kilocalories.
Most of the countries with the most extreme depth of hunger (more than 300 kilocalories per person per day) are located in Africa; others are found in the Near East (Afghanistan), the Caribbean (Haiti) and Asia (Bangladesh, Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Mongolia). Many of these countries face extraordinary obstacles such as conflict or recurrent natural disasters. They require special attention to lift them out of their current state of deep poverty and dire food insecurity.
SOFI 2000 also updates the estimate of the number of undernourished people. And I am disturbed to report that we find no significant change for the latest period, 1996-98, compared with the 1995-97 period reported last year.
We still estimate that 792 million people in 98 developing nations are not getting enough food to lead normal, healthy and active lives. Even in the industrialized nations and the countries in transition (those in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union) the number of undernourished remains the same: 34 million children, women and men. In a world of unprecedented wealth, these levels of need are disgraceful.
To realize the Summit target, we have to achieve a reduction of at least 20 million every year between now and 2015. The actual rate of decline, of slightly fewer than 8million per year since the early 1990s, is woefully inadequate. We cannot sit by and hope that hunger will decrease simply as a by-product of rising incomes and slower population growth. Under that "business as usual" scenario we would reduce global hunger by slightly less than one-third, not one-half.
Can we direct our efforts to get "on track" for reducing hunger by 50 percent? The World Food Summit goal is reachable, just as other seemingly impossible aims have been met, such as the eradication of polio or putting a person on the moon. What we need to do is adopt more urgent, targeted measures quickly.
Number of undernourished in the developing world: observed and projected ranges compared with the World Food Summit target
As in last year's edition, SOFI 2000 highlights short-term and long-term measures that together offer possible solutions to hunger:
We must address conflict, the cause of the deepest hunger in most of the poorest countries of the world. Conflict resolution and peacekeeping activities must be seen as vital tools in fighting hunger. Once peace is achieved, war-shattered economies must be rebuilt.
We must make the investment needed to build foundations for sustainable, longer-term economic growth and poverty reduction. Our story on Thailand shows how undernourishment was greatly reduced over 15 years as a result of economic growth and specific policies to reduce poverty and improve nutrition levels.
We must set priorities. Countries and their development partners must target the people who are suffering the deepest hunger. Safety nets - from cash transfers to school lunch programmes - must be in place to protect the most vulnerable.
We must orient agricultural research towards improvement of agricultural commodity production, which helps the poor in the cities as well as in the countryside. This is illustrated by our story on the research efforts that vastly increased cassava production in Ghana and Nigeria.
FAO and its partners will continue to monitor progress towards the goal of reducing chronic undernourishment by half by 2015. In this era of global abundance, why does the world continue to tolerate the daily hunger and deprivation of more than 800 million people? We must work together, and quickly. I am convinced we will see the day when FAO ceases to publish a report titled The state of food insecurity in the world because the world will have lived up to its promise to end hunger.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
FAO
<section>3</section>
Undernourishment around the world
Depth of hunger: how hungry are the hungry?
Meaningful action to end hunger requires knowledge of not just the number of hungry people around the world but also of the depth of their hunger.
Average food deficit of the undernourished
Knowing the number of kilocalories missing from the diets of undernourished people helps round out the picture of food deprivation in a country. Where the undernourished lack 400 kilocalories a day, the situation is more dire than in a country where the average shortage is 100 kilocalories. The greater the deficit, the greater the susceptibility to nutrition-related health risks. A weak, sickly person cannot fulfil his or her individual potential. A nation of weak, sickly people cannot advance.
The state of food insecurity in the world regularly reports on the latest estimates of the number and prevalence of chronically hungry people (see pages 8-9). This year the report goes one step further, calculating the food deficit of hungry people. This measurement indicates how deeply the dietary energy intake of undernourished people falls short of their minimum needs.
Improving the quantity and quality of diets: an example from China
When dietary intake is adequate, the variety of foods is generally greater, providing more energy and better nutrition.
Source: National Survey of Income and Expenditure of Urban Households, Government of China, 1990
The depth of hunger, or food deficit, is measured by comparing the average amount of dietary energy that undernourished people get from the foods they eat with the minimum amount of dietary energy they need to maintain body weight and undertake light activity. (See box on page11 for more details.)
The diets of most of the 800 million chronically hungry people lack 100-400 kilocalories per day. Most of these people are not dying of starvation. Often they are thin but not emaciated. The presence of chronic hunger is not always apparent because the body compensates for an inadequate diet by slowing down physical activity and, in the case of children, growth. In addition to increasing susceptibility to disease, chronic hunger means that children may be listless and unable to concentrate in school, mothers may give birth to underweight babies and adults may lack the energy to fulfil their potential.
In terms of sheer numbers, there are more chronically hungry people in Asia and the Pacific, but the depth of hunger is clearly the greatest in sub-Saharan Africa. There, in 46 percent of the countries, the undernourished have an average deficit of more than 300 kilocalories per person per day. By contrast, in only 16 percent of the countries in Asia and the Pacific do the undernourished suffer from average food deficits this high.
Where the average kilocalorie deficit is very high, many people's diets are deficient in everything, including the starchy staple foods (carbohydrate-rich maize, potatoes, rice, wheat and cassava) that provide mostly energy. But where the deficit is more moderate, people generally get enough of the staple foods. What they often lack is a variety of other foods that make up a nutrititious diet: legumes, meat, fish, oils, dairy products, vegetables and fruit that provide protein, fat and micronutrients as well as energy. Rounding out their diets is crucial to food security.
Lack of cash income is one of the most important factors hindering both urban and rural people from obtaining the diverse foods needed for an adequate diet. Even when poor rural families are helped to produce a greater variety of foods on their household plots, they will often sell these items rather than consume them because of their high market value. Thus, their food security improves only when overall household income rises to a level that permits them to afford the other foods they need.
Falling short
The depth of hunger is measured by the average dietary energy deficit of undernourished people - not of the population as a whole - expressed in kilocalories per person per day. The higher the number, the deeper the hunger.
Near East and North Africa
kcal
Afghanistan
Countries in transition
kcal
Yemen
Tajikistan
Iraq
Azerbaijan
Morocco
Kyrgyzstan
Algeria
Bulgaria
Egypt
Armenia
Iran
Georgia
Kuwait
Moldova Rep
Jordan
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Asia and Pacific
kcal
Lebanon
Croatia
Bangladesh
Syria
Estonia
Korea DPR
Saudi Arabia
Uzbekistan
Mongolia
United Arab Emirates
FYR Macedonia
India
Libya
Russian Fed
Lao PDR
Tunisia
Kazakhstan
Viet Nam
Slovakia
Cambodia
Sub-Saharan Africa
kcal
Ukraine
Pakistan
Somalia
Albania
Philippines
Mozambique
Latvia
Nepal
Burundi
Slovenia
Papua New Guinea
Liberia
Yugoslavia**
Sri Lanka
Congo, Dem Rep
Hungary
Thailand
Sierra Leone
Lithuania
China*
Eritrea
Belarus
Indonesia
Niger
Czech Rep
Myanmar
Ethiopia
Poland
China, Hong Kong SAR
Zambia
Romania
Malaysia
Zimbabwe
Korea, Rep
Chad
Developed countries
kcal
Rwanda
South Africa
Latin America and Caribbean
kcal
Angola
Sweden
Haiti
Guinea
Finland
Nicaragua
Central African Rep
Greece
Honduras
Madagascar
Italy
Brazil
Malawi
Netherlands
Dominican Rep
Tanzania
Switzerland
Guatemala
Burkina Faso
United States
Peru
Congo, Rep
Australia
Bolivia
Kenya
Austria
Guyana
Mali
Belgium
Panama
Lesotho
Canada
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
Denmark
Colombia
Cameroon
France
Paraguay
Namibia
Germany
Cuba
Togo
Iceland
Mexico
Botswana
Ireland
Venezuela
Gambia
Japan
El Salvador
Mauritania
Luxembourg
Jamaica
Senegal
New Zealand
Suriname
Sudan
Norway
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Spain
Ecuador
Benin
United Kingdom
Chile
Ghana
Israel
Uruguay
Nigeria
Malta
Argentina
Swaziland
Portugal
Mauritius
* Includes Taiwan Province of China
** Serbia and Montenegro
Gabon
Estimates and projections of hunger
Latest estimates indicate that 826 million people remained undernourished in 1996-98: 792 million people in the developing world and 34 million in the developed world. These figures represent no change from 1995-97, the previous reporting period. Information shown in the charts and figures reveals that the overall picture at regional level has also altered little.
Projected trends in undernourishment
percent of population
millions of people
Sub-Saharan Africa
Near East / North Africa
Latin America and the Caribbean
China* and India
Other Asia
Developing countries
Source: Agriculture: Towards 2015/30, Technical Interim Report, FAO, April 200
But short-term events are not necessarily indicative of long-term trends, and new projections for 2015 and 2030 show an improving course. The number of undernourished people in the developing world is expected to fall to around 580 million by 2015 - an improvement, but still far short of the World Food Summit goal of a reduction by half, to about 400 million people. Projections indicate that the 400 million figure will not be reached until 2030.
Number and proportion of undernourished, by region and subregion, 1996-98
The figures for 2015 indicate that the overall proportion of the developing countries' population that is undernourished will be half what it was in 1990-92, the base period for the World Food Summit target. But the number of undernourished people will still be around 70 percent of what it was in 1990-92.
If the goal were applied regionally, South and East Asia would be on track to approach it by 2015. Sub-Saharan Africa and the Near East would remain far from the target, and Latin America would be in between.
Total population and number of under-nourished, by region, 1996-98 (millions)
Overall, these outcomes would reflect the continuation of long-term declines in the prevalence of undernourishment in Asia, which began in 1969-71 in East Asia and a decade later in South Asia. In the world's two largest countries - China and India - slowing population growth and strong economic growth would bring significant increases in per capita food availability between 1996-98 and 2015.
For these two countries combined, the prevalence of undernourishment is projected to decline from 16 percent in 1996-98 to 7 percent in 2015. Together they represent more than one third of the world's population, so any change in their levels of undernourishment has a large effect on world averages.
Sub-Saharan Africa faces greater challenges. This region is home to most of the world's poorest countries, where prevalence of undernourishment is high and prospects for immediate and rapid economic growth limited. The central, southern and eastern parts of the continent are especially hard hit.
Number of undernourished, by region, 1996-98 (millions)
Proportion of population undernourished by prevalence category and region, 1996-98
Although the prevalence of undernourishment in sub-Saharan Africa is projected to decline from 34 percent of the population in 1996-98 to 22 percent in 2015, high population growth rates mean that the actual number of undernourished people could increase slightly between now and 2015 before beginning to decline. Some very poor countries in East Asia, the Caribbean and the Near East have similar characteristics and also have poor prospects for achieving the Summit target.
As explained further throughout this report, the countries and regions where progress is slow are caught in a trap of poverty and hunger that requires particular attention. But, as the successes achieved in other parts of the world demonstrate, a concerted, focused effort can make a difference and prove the projections wrong.
Proportion of population undernourished in developing countries, by prevalence category, 1990-92 and 1996-98
Food deprivation: prevalence and depth of hunger
To get the most accurate picture possible of how hungry people are, FAO has combined the estimates of both prevalence and depth of hunger (presented on pages 6-9) into five food deprivation groups. Shown by country on the map, the groups range from the least deprived (Group 1 - low prevalence of undernourishment in the population and low dietary energy deficit among the undernourished) to the most deprived (Group 5 - high prevalence of undernourishment and high energy deficit).
The 23 countries in Group 5 face the most pressing and difficult problems in feeding their people. Chronic instability and conflict, poor governance, erratic weather, endemic poverty, agricultural failure, population pressure and fragile ecosystems go hand in hand with deep, widespread and persistent hunger.
Degree of food deprivation: Charting hunger, 1996-98
Eighteen countries in sub-Saharan Africa, nearly half the African nations covered in this report, are in this group. So are Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Haiti, Mongolia and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
At the other extreme are the 52 countries in Group 1 - all of the industrialized countries, 11 countries in transition (see pages 12-13 for details) and 15 relatively high-income developing countries. Peace and economic prosperity characterize all these countries.
Extent of food deprivation, 1996-98
Combining prevalence and depth of hunger results in five food deprivation groups
The World Food Summit target is to reduce the overall number of undernourished people around the world. However, significant improvement could also be achieved by concentrating first on lessening the depth of hunger.
In this scenario, a country with higher prevalence of undernourishment and a daily dietary energy deficit of over 300 kilocalories per person would strive to reduce the depth of hunger as a top priority. This strategy might not permit a country to report an immediate decrease in the number of undernourished people, but it would mean the undernourished were not as hungry as they had been. Their susceptibility to nutrition-related health risks would therefore decline, and the country would be on the path to a sustainable reduction in hunger prevalence.
Estimating prevalence and depth of hunger
Here is a brief description of the method FAO uses to estimate the prevalence and depth of undernourishment:
Calculate the total number of calories available from local food production, trade and stocks.
Calculate an average minimum calorie requirement for the population, based on the number of calories needed by different age and gender groups and the proportion of the population represented by each group.
Divide the total number of calories available by the number of people in the country.
Factor in a coefficient for distribution to take account of inequality in access to food.
Combine the above information to construct the distribution of the food supply within the country and determine the percentage of the population whose food intake falls below the minimum requirement. This is the prevalence of undernourishment.
Multiply this percentage by the size of the population to obtain the number of undernourished people.
Divide the total calories available to the undernourished by the number of undernourished to obtain the average dietary energy intake per undernourished person.
Subtract the average dietary energy intake of undernourished people from their minimum energy requirement (expressed in kilocalories per person per day) to get the average dietary energy deficit of the undernourished. This is the depth of hunger.
Calculating food energy requirements
How much people need to eat each day - their daily dietary energy requirement - depends on their weight, height, age, sex and activity level.
The table gives examples of light, moderate and heavy activity levels and the amount of food energy required for such activities by men and women of differing body weight. The energy requirements for elderly people are somewhat less, and those for children are much less.
The prevalence and depth of hunger are calculated using the minimum daily energy requirements of the different sex and age groups in a population. The minimum requirement for each group is based on the lowest acceptable weight for the typical height of the group in a country and the light activity norm.
Physical activity norms for adults
Light activity: -Activity associated with sitting at a desk or behind a counter with reliance on automated appliances.
Moderate activity: -Continual light physical activity such as in light industry or during off-season farm work.
Heavy activity: -Heavy and occasionally strenuous work (e.g. agricultural production, mining or steel work).
Approximate daily energy requirement for adults
Light activity (kcal)
Moderate activity (kcal)
Heavy activity (kcal)
Men (height 1.71 m)*
lowest acceptable body weight (54 kg)
highest acceptable body weight (73 kg)
Women (height 1.59m)*
lowest acceptable body weight (47 kg)
highest acceptable body weight (63 kg)
* Requirements would be higher for taller people and lower for shorter people.
Norms based on Report of the Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation on Energy and Protein Requirements , 1985
Locating the hungry in countries in transition
Note on the estimates
The FAO estimate of the number of undernourished people is derived from available data on population, food production, trade and distribution of food or income within the population.
For many countries these data are weak. In the CIS the problem is further complicated by the difficulties associated with ongoing changes in data collection systems.
In the centrally planned system, data were obtained mainly from administrative records. To replace them, sample surveys must be implemented, but this work is still at an early stage. Therefore the estimates of the number and proportion of undernourished people in the CIS should be read with particular caution.
As the reliability of current data in many CIS countries is uncertain, experts working in the field supplement quantitative data with qualitative assessments. Field evidence supports the data, finding that a substantial number of people are living in hardship as a result of low purchasing power, lack of employment, dietary inadequacies and insufficent fuel, shelter, transport and health facilities.
Less than ten years after the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, undernourishment remains a persistent challenge in many of the successor countries now part of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). By contrast, the Eastern European and Baltic countries have largely managed to escape this problem.
These findings emerged from FAO's first estimates of the number and proportion of undernourished people in countries in transition. In nine of the 12 CIS countries, at least 5 percent of the population is undernourished. In four countries - Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Tajikistan - at least 20 percent of the population suffers from undernourishment. Only one country, Belarus, has a level of undernourishment comparable to levels found in the industrialized world (less than 2.5 percent of the population).
Commonwealth of Independent States
Seven CIS states - Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan - with a combined population of 53 million, are now classified by the United Nations as low- income food-deficit countries, with an annual gross national product of less than US$1 505 per capita.
A number of reasons are commonly cited to explain this difficult situation. Economic transition in the CIS countries has been accompanied by far-reaching political and administrative changes that have disrupted previous trade and exchange relations and led to serious foreign exchange shortages. In addition there has been a breakdown of agricultural production and marketing systems, spiralling inflation, temporary bread shortages and, in several instances, outright conflict. The gross domestic product has plummeted along with the purchasing power of large numbers of ordinary citizens. In most CIS countries, levels of production are now only a fraction of what they were in 1991, and levels of unemployment and underemployment are quite high, although often disguised because of work in the informal sector.
Vulnerability to food insecurity in CIS countries
Very high vulnerability
Azerbaijan
Tajikistan
Relatively high vulnerability
Armenia
Georgia
Kyrgyzstan
Intermediate vulnerability
Moldova, Rep
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Relatively low vulnerability
Kazakhstan
Russian Federation
Ukraine
Very low vulnerability
Belarus
But the data for Eastern Europe and the Baltic countries, where similar disruptions have occurred, illustrate that economic transition need not diminish food security. As of 1996-98, only five of the 12 Eastern European and three Baltic countries were experiencing undernourishment levels of more than 5 percent of the population, and in none were more than 20 percent undernourished.
The risk of undernourishment in the CIS countries has also fallen since 1995, although not as far as in Eastern Europe and the Baltic states. Agricultural market liberalization and privatization of agricultural production have led to improved food distribution in most of the countries. Control of grain and bread prices has largely been lifted, the role of private trade has increased and shortages have mostly disappeared. As a result, emergency food aid programmes have been terminated in most CIS countries. By 1997, the majority of farm commodities in most CIS countries were produced in the private sector. Private producers were marketing as much as 30-40 percent of their production, usually directly to consumers for cash payment.
Proportion of undernourished in countries in transition, by prevalence category, 1996-98
Focus: Azerbaijan
Focus: Georgia
Although food is available in both urban and rural markets, the purchasing power of the bulk of the country's 7.6 million inhabitants remains low. Costing on average US$68 per month for a family of five, food continues to account for around 70 percent of total expenditures among the most economically vulnerable.
Humanitarian assistance has been provided since the early 1990s. Nearly 500000 people (half of whom have fled the areas affected by political conflict with Armenia) still need this help. By now, most have sold any valuable possessions and have little margin of security left.
A survey of internally displaced families conducted in 1998 found that 30 percent showed some signs of malnutrition.
Source: Special Report: FAO/World Food Programme Crop and Food Supply Assessment Mission to Azerbaijan, December 1999
Rural incomes have remained practically stagnant despite rapid growth in the agriculture sector since 1995. Income disparity has increased greatly, and a large proportion of the country's population of 5.1 million remains poor. Expenditures on food absorb 60-70 percent of the average family budget.
The social safety net system remains relatively ineffective, with very low pensions and benefits and long arrears in payments. The elderly, disabled, unemployed and geographically isolated remain highly vulnerable to food insecurity.
Although there is no officially recognized acute malnutrition, a slow but clear increase of malnutrition among children is being observed, despite targeted distribution of supplementary food aid.
Source: Crop and Food Supply Situation in Georgia, FAO Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture, December 1999
<section>4</section>
Nutritional status and vulnerability
The spectrum of malnutrition
The spectrum of malnutrition encompasses the entire range of problems that can occur when dietary energy and/or nutrient intake are insufficient, excessive or simply imbalanced.
At one end of the energy malnutrition spectrum is the problem of undernourishment and undernutrition, often described in terms of macronutrients. Low dietary energy supply, wasting, stunting, underweight and low body mass index (BMI) are all used to identify the problem. This energy deficit leaves its victims prone to illness and early death; it also makes them listless and unable to concentrate.
At the other end of the spectrum is the problem of overnourishment, leading to overweight and obesity. A high BMI is one indicator of the problem. Already a well-known phenomenon in developed countries, obesity is increasing among new urban dwellers in the developing world. This issue has not been given much attention in developing countries because of the more com