FAO Fisheries Report No. 638, Supplement.
FIPP/R638 Suppl.
Papers presented at the ___________________________________________________________________________________ EXPERT CONSULTATION ON ECONOMIC INCENTIVES AND RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES Rome, 28 November-1 December 2000.
Papers presented at the EXPERT CONSULTATION ON ECONOMIC INCENTIVES AND RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES Rome, 28 November - 1 December 2000.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2001.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document contains the papers submitted by the FAO Secretariat and resource persons to the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries, held in Rome, Italy, from 28 November to 1 December 2000. Except for the document submitted by the FAO Secretariat, the views expressed in these papers are those of the author(s) and should not be attributed to FAO. The Report of the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries has been published as FAO Fisheries Report No. 638.
Distribution: Participants at the meeting All FAO Members FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fisheries Officers.
FAO. Papers presented at the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries. Rome, Italy, 28 November - 1 December 2000. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 638, Suppl. Rome, FAO. 2001. 89p. ABSTRACT This report contains five documents used during the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries, held in Rome, Italy, from 28 November to 1 December 2000. One of the five is a document prepared by the FAO Secretariat. It provides guidelines for the discussion during the Consultation. The other four documents were prepared by resource persons. One of these contains a thorough and exhaustive review of the concepts that have been used to define fishery subsidies. Another of the reports contains a review of the published assessment of the public sector subsidies to the fishery sector and their effect on fishery resource sustainability. The remaining two reports deal with fishery subsidies and trade. One reviews methodologies used by various parties in international disputes about the trade-distorting impact of subsidies to specific sub-sectors in the fishery sector. The last report reviews in general terms the impact of subsidies to the fishery sector on trade of fish and fish products.
v CONTENTS Page PAPER PRESENTED BY THE FAO SECRETARIAT SUBSIDIES AND THE FISHERIES SECTOR; FACILITATING THE INTERNATIONAL DISCUSSION PAPERS PRESENTED BY RESOURCE PERSONS SUBSIDIES FOR FISHERIES: A REVIEW OF CONCEPTS (by W.E. Schrank) ESTIMATING FISHERIES SUBSIDIES AND THEIR IMPACT ON SUSTAINABILITY OF FISH RESOURCES: DEALING WITH DYNAMICS, RISK AND UNCERTAINTY ( by J.C. Seijo) A REVIEW OF PUBLISHED ESTIMATES OF PUBLIC SECTOR SUBSIDIES TO THE FISHERY SECTOR AND THEIR IMPACT ON TRADE IN FISH AND FISH PRODUCTS (by B.M.H. Sharp) REVIEW OF METHODOLOGIES USED TO ASSESS TRADE-DISTORTING IMPACT OF SUBSIDIES TO THE FISHERY SECTOR (by B.M.H. Sharp) 1 3 9 11.
PAPER PRESENTED BY THE FAO SECRETARIAT.
3 SUBSIDIES AND THE FISHERIES SECTOR; FACILITATING THE INTERNATIONAL DISCUSSION.
PURPOSE.
The paper is addressed to the participants in the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries. The paper aims to give the background to the Expert Consultation and to briefly present the main issues to be discussed by the experts.
SUBSIDIES TO THE FISHERIES SECTOR; A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL DISCUSSION.
After reviewing subsidies in the agricultural sector during the 1980's the OECD attempted to do the same in the fisheries sector. The effort did not yield the expected results. The international fisheries community resumed its interest in subsidies about ten years ago, when FAO published1 information from which it could be concluded that subsidies to the fisheries sector were huge. The debate that followed involved many different participants reflecting a broad range of interests: governments, fisher organizations, and representatives of civil society, economists and other fishery scientists. The debate that has taken place on two levels: a "policy" level and a "technical" or social science dominated level. Representatives of the different groups of participants have participated in both debates. In fact these debates have been conducted simultaneously ­ the one influencing the other. 2.1 The policy discussion.
The discussion has taken place mainly in fora such as APEC, the WTO (Commission on Trade and Environment), OECD and, to a lesser extent, in FAO. It has also been brought up for consideration in meetings organized by groups such as the WWF. Initially government representatives were most concerned with trade distortion and, they argued their case against subsidies referring to macro-economic policies. It was mainly those from academia who pointed out that subsidies, by stimulating effort, also could negatively affect living aquatic resources. This argument became part of the more general debate on trade and environment. Representatives of civil society have been concerned predominantly about the preservation and conservation of aquatic species. As is natural, representatives of fishers have expressed views reflecting their direct interest in the industry. The various thesis proposals/purposes that have dominated the policy discussion so far can be summarized as follows: · · · · · affirming the view that subsidies are bad for the sustainability of wild aquatic resources and the cause of excess fishing capacity; affirming the view that subsidies are trade distorting; affirming the view that subsidies are no more than one of the many factors that could cause unsustainability of wild aquatic resources and excess fishing capacity; affirming the view that subsidies could contribute to the preservation of social, anthropologic and environmental values; and, generating consensus that more analysis should be undertaken on the effects of fishery subsidies thereby providing a base for the control, reduction or banning of certain subsidies.
The discussion has progressed slowly. At the beginning of 2000 it would seem fair to say that there is a consensus that:.
SOFA 1992. Special chapter.
4 · · · · · · the annual volume of subsidies to the sector are not as large now as they may have been at the beginning of the 1990s subsidies are not uniform in their effects; effects can be positive or negative; the effects of any one subsidy will depend on the circumstances in which it is used; it may be useful to recognize that there are several categories of subsidies; and, it is unlikely that there will be a general consensus on eliminating all types of subsidies in all situations.
Also there seems to be a tacit understanding that progress will be slow until more facts are provided. In particular more accurate information is needed on the magnitude of the impact of fishery subsidies on trade and on resources sustainability. This seems reasonable. The parties are unlikely to agree on a common approach to subsidies until they have such information. A first step is to identify reliable methodologies for measuring such impacts for the various categories of subsidies. In fact the choice of categories should possibly take into account the methodologies that can be developed for measuring impact. Once categories and methodologies have been identified there should also be some agreement on which categories of subsidies it is most urgent to study. These are all issues that will benefit from being reviewed in technical discussions. 2.2 The technical discussion.
The technical discussion has been much more low-key. It has focused on: · · · what is and what is not a fisheries subsidy; what are the impacts of físhery subsidies on trade what are the impacts of fishery subsidies on wild aquatic resources.
The discussion has been conducted more in academic environments and technical journals than in public policy fora. The definition of subsidies in fisheries. So far the discussion has not led to a commonly agreed definition of subsidies even amongst the economists and fishery scientists involved. There is an urgent need to find a definition of the subsidy concept that meets three tests. First. It should be applicable to all those various forms of interventions by the public sector in favor of the fishery/aquaculture sector and are susceptible to being labeled as subsidies. Second. It should also have a high likelihood of being accepted by those who are involved in the political debate about fishery subsidies. Third It should be designed in such a fashion that it be possible to measure effects of subsidies on trade and resources. The effects of subsidies on trade of fish and fish products. Most economists and other scientists that have considered this issue agree that subsidies affect trade. The magnitude of the effects has not been studied. Cost-effective, agreed, methodologies for measuring the impact of subsidies on trade are needed. These methodologies need to be adapted to the various categories of subsidies. The effects of subsidies on fishery resources sustainability. Investigations of the effects on fishery resources have not come very far. There are no studies that provide well documented, quantitative information about the effects of subsidies on wild aquatic resources. Effects remain conjectural. Nevertheless there is agreement amongst knowledgeable observers, that subsidies, by stimulating fishing effort, can constitute a threat to wild aquatic resources. Simultaneously many economists and fishery scientists agree that in those situations where management is effective and stocks are healthy, subsidies to the.
5 particular fishery do not have adverse effects on resources. Effective management in this context translates as the ability to effectively limit effort. To say that subsidies have no effect is the same as saying that the effect of subsidies is a function of the effectiveness of management. However, in this context some parties point out that while this is true, so far effective fisheries management is the exception rather than the rule. Also in respect of effects on resources there is a need to develop cost-effective methods of establishing the consequences of subsidies. 2.3 Conclusion.
The international political debate about subsidies to the fisheries sector is likely to progress when there is an agreement on exactly how subsidies impact the sector, both positively and negatively. Thus the next step in the technical discussion/investigations could usefully aim to: · · · ·.
arrive at a consensus definition of subsidies and how to categorize them; rank the categories according to the possible magnitude of effects; identify methods to measure the effects of subsidies on trade and resources, by category of subsidy; and, estimate the cost of applying these methods ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE EXPERT CONSULTATION.
A number of issues ­ framed as questions - will be examined by the Expert Consultation. These issues have been selected because it is believed that their resolution by technical experts will be of use in the ongoing policy discussion. But, the Expert Consultation has no means to force its solutions on the policy makers. The solutions must therefore be such that they have likelihood to be accepted by the various participants in the policy discussion. Preferably solutions should be shown to be sound, practical and economically feasible and presented in a non-technical language. It seems plausible ­ because of lack of time and/or information - that the Expert Consultation will not find answers to all the issues described below. When a solution, or answer, cannot be found, the Consultation is expected to identify the activities that it considers must be carried out in order to find the answers/solutions. 3.1 The search for an operational definition of subsidies.
Before considering the text of the definition, it would probably be useful to agree on what characteristics need to attach to the definition. Those characteristics depend upon the future analytical work to be done in respect of subsidies and their effects on the fisheries sector. It is suggested that the essential characteristics for the definition be: · · · · that it remove the pejorative connotation associated with the term "subsidy" that it permit the volume of subsidies to be measured that it be flexible enough to include the incorporation of new economic policy instruments; and, that it be consistent with subsidies as presently understood in international agreements that deal with subsidies.
When considering the precise text of a definition it is suggested that the Expert Consultation consider first the definition proposed by Schrank. It reads as follows: Subsidies should be broadly defined as any government actions that are anticipated to affect the profits of the firm in the short-, medium-, or long-term.
6 3.2 Which are the most appropriate, operational categories of subsidies?.
The reason to break down subsidies into categories is that this will facilitate the analysis needed to establish the impact ­ positive or negative ­ of subsidies. The Expert Consultation is asked to confront this question because the assembled experts are expected to have a view on which types of categories are important (and those are the ones on which future work is likely to be concentrated) and also have an appreciation of the processes through which various types of subsidies influence trade and/or the status of living aquatic resources. For analytical purposes it would seem reasonable to group together those subsidies that have similar mechanisms or procedures for influencing trade and/or living aquatic resources. Also in this instance it would seem useful for the Expert Consultation to take Schrank's list of categories of subsidies as a starting point for the discussions. The categories are: a. b. c. d. e. direct government payments to, or on behalf of, the industry; tax waivers and deferrals; government fishery loans; loan guarantees and insurance; implicit payments to, or charges against, the fishing industry; general programs that affect fisheries;.
Schrank provides (FI:EIRF/2000/Inf.3; pages 31 to 33) a large number of examples under these categories. It is proposed that the first issues to be considered in the Expert Consultation be: Are the five categories adequate? Should there be fewer or more? Will it be useful to break down the categories further? 3.3 How do we best measure the volume of subsidies?.
The experts under this agenda item are asked to agree on the most adequate unit of measurement to use when estimating the volume of subsidies provided to the sector over a particular period. The method of measurement should be specified for each category of subsidies. 3.4 How do we best measure the impacts of subsidies on trade in fish?.
This question essentially breaks down into four tasks. First. Agree on a qualitative description of the process through which trade is influenced by subsidies. Such a description should be made for each of the subsidy categories. Second. Identify ways of measuring the magnitude of the impact. Third. Identify those categories (or single types) of subsidies that are likely to have the most pronounced effects on trade. Fourth. Assess the resources needed to apply the methods of measurement. 3.5 How do we best measure the impacts of subsidies on living aquatic resources?.
Also this question breaks down into four tasks. First. Agree on a qualitative description of the process through which the status of living aquatic resources is influenced by subsidies. Such a description should be made for each of the subsidy categories. Second. Identify ways of measuring the magnitude of the impact. Third. Identify those categories (or single types) of subsidies that are likely to have the most pronounced effects on living aquatic resources. Fourth. Assess the resources needed to apply the methods of measurement.
7 3.6 What are the next steps in resolving technical issues linked to the assessment of the role of subsidies in fisheries?.
This question in effect will be repeated under each of the above agenda items, in the case that the Consultation does not arrive at a complete response to the questions raised.
PAPERS PRESENTED BY RESOURCE PERSONS.
11 SUBSIDIES FOR FISHERIES: A REVIEW OF CONCEPTS by William E. Schrank Professor Department of Economics Memorial University St. John's, Newfoundland Canada A1C 5S7 Tel. 709-576-1957 Fax: 709-738-1305 E-mail: wschrank@morgan.ucs.mun.ca "My own starting point was also an attempt to define subsidies. But in the course of doing so, I came to the conclusion that the concept of a subsidy is just too elusive" Hendrik S. Houthakker Harvard University (JEC, 1972, 7) EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Despite the fact that "subsidy" is a common word in everyday language and despite the fact that subsidies are endemic in fisheries, the word is somewhat less than useful for analytical purposes in the management of fisheries because the word means different things to different people. Views of subsidies are determined as much by self interest, politics, goals concerning the fishery and social perspectives as by any objective criteria. Although fisheries subsidies have existed for a very long time, it is only over the past decade that fisheries subsidies been subject to much scrutiny. They are under increasing scrutiny primarily because of the recognition that many of the world's commercial fish stocks are endangered, and that the existence of certain subsidies encourages the overcapacity and overfishing that is endangering the stocks. The discussion of subsidies must therefore be placed in context. The relevant context, presented in Section II, is set by the concatenation of four factors: the expansion of world fishery harvests since 1950, the expansion of national jurisdiction over fisheries in the mid-1970s, our present inability to accurately predict fish populations, and our failure to systematically monitor the economic state of fisheries. The range of opinion about what subsidies are is enormous. A general survey of concepts of subsidies is presented in Section III, while Section IV presents a survey of the literature of fisheries subsidies. Some people would restrict the concept of subsidies to government expenditures, or to any actions that affect government finance, or to a range of government actions that do not necessarily affect government finance at all. Some would limit discussion of subsidies to activities that impinge on international trade, others would expand the concept to concerns with domestic, as well as international, markets. Some would limit the concept of subsidies to government policies that have negative economic effects, while others would not. Some would limit the term to government policies that only affect a single industry or group of industries, while others would place no such restriction. Some would rely heavily on the intentions of the government in adopting a subsidy; others consider such subjective considerations to be irrelevant. A few would banish the word entirely. Since the question of the utility of subsidies plays an important role in the analysis of government policy, the amorphous nature of the term "subsidy" leads to conflicts over what is meant by the word. These conflicts, in turn, distract from the more useful questions of what role a certain government action plays in the economy and whether or not this role, in each specific case, is desirable. The purpose of this paper is to provide an operational framework for dealing with fisheries subsidies, a framework that will prove useful to those who have to deal with the issue of subsidies at the government level.
12 This paper, in Section V, argues for a broad definition of subsidies. Such an approach has the effect of enveloping the myriad of concepts that appears in the literature, and provides a framework which avoids the value connotation that often confuses and impedes analysis. In short, the conclusion of the paper is that subsidies should be broadly defined as any government actions that are anticipated to affect the profits of a firm in the short-, medium-, or long-term. Subsidies can then be positive (increasing profits) or negative (decreasing profits). They can affect international trade or be strictly domestic. They can be good or bad, constructive or destructive. They may have the intended effect of a government action, or different effects. They can increase or decrease government revenues, or they can have no effect on government revenues. With a broad definition, the focus of discussion can shift to the analysis of the effects of the subsidy, and the analyst, policy maker, or public can then judge the effects of the subsidy and determine whether the subsidy should be maintained, increased, decreased, or eliminated entirely. Section VI closes the paper with a consideration of the problems that might be encountered in trying to reach a consensus on the meaning of the word subsidies and on whether particular subsidies are desirable or not. Since views of subsidies are largely determined by the subjective judgements and goals of individuals, differences of opinion will always exist. Progress in the ability to accurately forecast fish populations and in developing a more inclusive analysis of the economic state of fisheries would help to eliminate differences that rest on factual bases. As long as the interpretation of facts is unclear, consensus on appropriate actions regarding subsidies will be difficult or impossible to obtain. Even without disagreement on facts, subjective considerations based on alternative objectives and goals will lead different parties to different conclusions concerning what actions should be taken. Nonetheless, the operational approach to subsidies taken in this paper should provide a framework for facilitating useful discussions of fisheries subsidies I. INTRODUCTION.
Fisheries subsidies are endemic, playing a major role in many of the fisheries of the world. Yet the concept of subsidies is a slippery one with many divergent opinions as to what constitutes a subsidy. Views of subsidies are determined as much by self interest, politics, goals concerning the fishery and social perspectives as by any objective criteria. While fisheries subsidies have existed for a very long time, it is only in the past decade that they have, in themselves, been subject to much scrutiny. Our starting point, in Section II, is to present a brief historical overview of the state of fisheries, fisheries science, and fisheries economics in order to provide a context for the current concern with subsidies. The overview focuses on the concatenation of four factors: the expansion of world fishery harvests since 1950, the expansion of national jurisdiction over fisheries in the mid-1970s, our inability accurately to predict fish populations, and our failure to monitor the economic state of fisheries. In Section III we present a survey of concepts of subsidies, and in Section IV we continue the survey, but with a focus on fishery subsidies. What is clear from these surveys is that different authors mean very different things when they refer to subsidies. Since the question of the utility of subsidies plays an important role in the analysis of government policy, the amorphous nature of the term "subsidy" leads to conflicts over what is meant by the word. These conflicts, in turn, distract from the more useful questions of what role a certain government action plays in the economy and whether or not this role, in each specific case, is desirable. Discussions of the role of subsidies tend to fuzziness because participants are often meaning different things when they use the word. As we shall see, occasionally the word subsidy is banished entirely. In Section V, we synthesize the discussion of concepts and propose an approach to subsidies intended to be operational, useful to those who deal with subsidies in the development of government policy. The proposal removes any value connotation from the term "subsidies," for the purpose of laying the groundwork for a more objective, value-neutral approach to government economic policies in fisheries. The paper closes with a discussion of the search for consensus and consideration of the question of whether agreement on the definition of subsidies is possible. In short, the goal of this paper is to synthesize selected portions of the literature on subsidies, to draw conclusions suggesting how subsidies can be viewed most usefully, and to suggest actions necessary in the international sphere to encourage acceptance of a standard concept of subsidies.
13 II. BACKGROUND.
The last half of the twentieth century saw an enormous increase in marine fish harvesting. From 1950 to 1990, the reported world catch of marine fish and shellfish rose fourfold, from 17 million metric tons (Mmt) to 85 Mmt (FAO, FISHSTAT). Among the many causes were improved technology (FAO, 1992, 4); increasing demand (Montfort, 1994; Westlund, 1995); and the decision in the Soviet Union to replace meat with fish for animal protein (Mikhailov, 1962, cited in FAO, 1992, 11). Shortly after the start of this period of expansion, the first English language economic explanation of the tendency of open-access fisheries to deplete fish stocks appeared (Gordon, 1954). In the following year, Scott (1955) offered the suggestion that the solution to the problem described by Gordon lay in the privatization of the fishery commons. While much progress has been made during the ensuing half century in our understanding of the economics of fisheries, there has been a gaping failure in a rather mundane area: there has been little sustained economic analysis of the viability of the world's fisheries. A significant cause has been the absence of suitable data. The FAO is the international coordinator and publisher of fishery statistics, yet the emphasis for the harvesting sector has been on the gathering and publishing of landings statistics in volume terms. In this area the FAO has done a superb job, with continuous series now existing from 1950 to the present. But, despite the occasional pleas of economists (A.D. Scott in FAO, 1962, 22-31; Schrank, Hannesson and Pontecorvo, 1995), the FAO has been hesitant to enter the arena of economic statistics in the harvesting sector. The reasons are many. The FAO does not gather its statistics itself, but relies on the cooperation of the countries of the world to supply the numbers. Adding catch revenue and cost data to the FAO database would require that the individual countries gather these data. The usual response to the suggestion that they gather such data is that the cost would be prohibitive. A further reason for the reluctance of countries to gather economic data is that such figures are often considered to be industrial secrets. Moreover, the release of such data might show that the industry is being subsidized, opening the industry to countervailing duty attacks from its fish product trading partners. The FAO diplomatically notes that "fisheries cost and price information is not a high priority for most States, at present, largely because the value of such information is not readily evident to administrators (FAO, 1992, 18)." Fisheries biology in aid of the fishing industry has a much longer history than does the economic analysis. In a study of the history of fisheries science to 1955, Smith (1994) dated the origin of sustained research in direct aid of the fishing industry to an 1864 decision of the Norwegian government to hire Georg Sars to investigate the reasons for fluctuations in the Lofoten cod fishery. Smith emphasized, however, that while much progress in fisheries biology had been made, up to a half century ago it remained virtually impossible to predict future fish populations. Prediction of recruitment today, fifty years later, still appears to be largely beyond the capability of science. While much progress has been made in both the economic and biological modeling of fisheries, certain critical empirical realities of the biology and economics of fisheries remain elusive. Besides the growth of fishery production, our inability accurately to predict recruitment, and the lack of economic monitoring, there is a fourth crucial characteristic of the world's marine fisheries. The mid1970s saw a major change in the law of the sea, with coastal states extending their jurisdiction over fisheries.1 Most fishing occurred within the new coastal zones2 so the anticipated results were that foreign distant water fleets would be displaced, domestic catches would rise, international trade in fish products would increase dramatically, and the coastal states would manage their fishery resources for sustainability (Robinson, 1980). The first three anticipations were realized.3.
By September 1, 1777, 68 coastal states had extended their fisheries control zone beyond 12 miles, 51 of them to 200 nautical miles from shore (Eckert, 1979, 129). 2 Eckert (1979, 116) states that 90% of the world's catch was taken within 200 miles of shore. 3 For the increase in international trade, see FAO (1992, 29); for the decline in the activities of distant water fleets, see FAO (1999, 7).
14 At the time of the adoption of the 200 mile fisheries control zones, for instance, such coastal states as the United States and Canada adopted nationalistic policies whereby domestic fleets replaced the distant water fleets of foreign nations. The overriding national policies were concerned with domestic fisheries development presumably within a conservation framework.1 Policies were invoked to aid in this substitution process. Among the mechanisms adopted were subsidies to encourage the desired development of the domestic fishery. In Canada, for instance, there were government sponsored loans for the building of small fishing boats, grants for boat building and grants for the building or expansion of fish processing plants (Crowley et al., 1993). In the United States, there were tax shelters to protect current income of fishermen and fishing vessel owners from taxation while encouraging future fleet expansion or replacement (the Capital Construction Fund) and loans on favorable terms (the Financial Obligation Guarantee program).2 This is not to suggest that all of these policies were adopted only at this time, or even only for the fishery, but that these subsidies were used for the economic development of the domestic fisheries. The sustainability of the fish stocks was merely assumed. But this was a poor assumption and the fourth expectation from the expansion of fisheries jurisdiction, that fish stocks would be sustained through improved management, was not achieved. Were the expected sustainability results achieved, catches of the traditional commercial species would have stabilized, subject only to natural fluctuations. This, however, is not what happened. Catches of many of the world's major traditional commercial species, for instance Atlantic cod, haddock, saithe, and Atlantic herring, peaked around 1970 (Stamatopolous, 1993; Grainger and Garcia, 1996). By 1990, there were serious depletions, among the most notable that of Barents Sea cod (OECD, 1993, 27).3 But the worst was yet to come. The year 1992 marked the collapse and closure of one of the world's great fisheries, the northern cod fishery of Newfoundland. This fishery, which supplied more than 10% of the world's cod as recently as 1988,4 and which was instrumental in the early exploration and development of North America (Innis, 1954), remained closed at least until the year 2000, and at that time, eight years after the initial closure, showed little sign of stock recovery ( Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2000). This was only the most dramatic and complete closure. Other total or partial closures, and quota reductions also occurred at about this time.5 In addition to the total collapse of the northern cod, 1992 was also a watershed in that an unequivocal and dramatic warning on the state of the world's marine fisheries was issued in that year, and was heard. The FAO (1992) noted that, while demand for fish products might continue to expand, global catches were near their limit, many stocks were overfished (FAO, 1992, 7) and the economics of fisheries were awry, with uneconomic fisheries being supported by subsidies estimated for 1989 at US$22,000,000,000 ($22B) to cover operating losses alone (FAO, 1992, 21). This figure rose to $54B when capital costs were included (FAO, 1992, 60). Twenty years after the expansion of national jurisdiction, the 