ISSN 0429-9345.
Promotion of sustainable commercial aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa.
Volume 1: Policy framework.
FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER.
FAO/20044 ­ Photo by H. Zhang FAO/18558 ­ Photo by R. Faidutti FAO/13504 ­ Photo by I. de Borhegyi Shrimp drawn by Juan Varela.
by Neil Ridler Visiting Scientist, Professor of Economics The University of New Brunswick New Brunswick, Canada and Nathanael Hishamunda Fishery Planning Analyst Fishery Policy and Planning Division FAO Fisheries Department Rome, Italy.
IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE PAPER.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104567-4.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT As a part of its efforts to contribute to alleviation of food insecurity, hunger and poverty, the FAO Fisheries Department is promoting sustainable commercial aquaculture. The goal is to assist developing countries, with emphasis on sub-Saharan Africa, to develop and implement policies that encourage the emergence of private entrepreneurship in aquaculture. It is within this framework that this document was prepared. Background information was obtained from reports on studies of commercial farming commissioned in Côte d'Ivoire, Nigeria, Malawi, Zambia, Mozambique, Madagascar, Costa Rica and Honduras, which were conducted by the Department and led by the Fishery Policy and Development Planning Service (FIPP). Available literature on commercial aquaculture from elsewhere was also used.
FOREWORD This report is the first of two volumes that will examine policies to promote commercial aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa. In addition to discussing the concept of sustainable commercial aquaculture, its benefits and pitfalls and prerequisites for its development, the report provides a general survey of promotional policies intended to give impetus to aquaculture. Some of these policies can be applied also in subSaharan Africa. FAO is pleased to present these policies as an overall guide to decision-makers. Professor Neil Ridler, a visiting scientist of the University of New Brunswick, Canada, and Nathanael Hishamunda of the FAO, Fishery Development Planning Service, prepared the report. I would like to recognize their invaluable efforts. FAO staff members: Annick Van Houtte, John Moehl, Mathias Halwart, Audun Lem, and Alhaji Jallow contributed precious advice and useful comments. Ulf Wijkström Chief, Fishery Development Planning Service FAO Fisheries Department.
Distribution: FAO Members Other interested nations and national and international organizations FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional and Sub-regional offices.
Ridler, N.; Hishamunda, N. Promotion of sustainable commercial aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa. Volume.
Policy framework. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 408/1. Rome, FAO. 2001. 67p. ABSTRACT The aim of this paper is to examine policies to promote commercial aquaculture, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Commercial aquaculture is defined as the rearing of aquatic organisms with the goal of maximizing profit. Commercial aquaculture contributes to food security, directly by producing food fish, and indirectly by generating employment and income for the purchase of food. It can also contribute to a country's balance of trade as an export, or as an import substitute, and can be a source of tax revenues and a stimulus to technological advances. Commercial aquaculture may also bolster the development of isolated regions, thereby discouraging outward migration. Since it depends on private rather than public funds, it can be sustainable; its sustainability depends on adequate use of resources rather than tax revenues. However, some forms of commercial aquaculture, especially coastal shrimp farming, can cause environmental costs and social conflicts. For commercial aquaculture to develop, macroeconomic conditions, and cultural and political attitudes must favour entrepreneurship. Cultivation practices must also be environmentally friendly. In sub-Saharan Africa, stabilization or decline of the capture fisheries, growing shortage of fish for domestic consumption, opportunities for exports, suitable land and water, and cheap labour combine to produce prospects for commercial aquaculture development. However, the sector is generally very small in some countries, or has not taken off. It is hampered by difficult access to credit, shortages and high cost of feed, lack of good quality seed, and a low flow of domestic and foreign capital to fuel investments in the sector. A mix of good governance, openness to trade, macroeconomic growth policies, emphasis on private investment as a source of wealth, guaranteed land security, tax exemptions and tax holidays, loan guarantees, debt-equity swaps, promotion of large farms, producer associations, strategic planning, and existence of transparent regulatory procedures are key ingredients in attracting investors to commercial aquaculture and in positively influencing long-term development of the sector in sub-Saharan Africa.
PART I. THE CONTEXT OF COMMERCIAL AQUACULTURE.
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION Justification and Objective of the Study FAO's latest studies on future demand for, and supply of, fish and fishery products predict a sizeable increase in demand for fish. The majority of this increase will result from expected economic development, population growth and changes in food habits (Ye, 1999). Supply from capture fisheries is expected to remain constant, or even to decline (FAO, 2000). Indeed, fish supply from the capture fisheries in most countries is believed to have reached or be close to the maximum sustainable yield. This suggests that an increase in aquaculture fish supply could help reduce the expected shortage of fish and the consequent relative price increases, thereby making fish available to a wider range of consumers. Aquaculture can also provide jobs, which generate income for the purchase of food and other commodities, thereby increasing food security and contributing to alleviation of hunger. Experts agree that, with existing resources and technological advances, fish output from aquaculture can be sustainably expanded. Africa is well situated to be a part of this expansion. In terms of resources, Africa possesses vast inland waterways, with the larger bodies covering 520 000 km2. About 43% of continental Africa is assessed as having the potential for farming tilapia, African catfish and carp. Almost 15% of that area is the "most suitable", with possible yields of up to 2.0 crops/year for Nile tilapia and 1.7 crops/year for African catfish. Nearly 23% of the land area in southern Africa is suitable for commercial tilapia and African catfish farming, with less than 5% being used (Kaptesky, 1994; Nath and Aguilar-Manjarrez, 1998). In addition, most countries in Africa have relatively cheap labour. Yet, in 1998, Africa, which is home to about 12% of the world population produced an estimated 185 817 tons of fish, crustaceans and molluscs, contributing only about 0.6% of world output (FAO, 1998). Experience in Asia where about 89% of aquaculture output was produced, and elsewhere demonstrates that aquaculture developed because it was mostly commercially oriented and benefited from enabling environment. Enabling environment consisted of sound government policies. The overall goal of this study is to survey policies which were used to promote commercial aquaculture in different countries. The specific objective is to examine policies that could be used to promote commercial aquaculture in countries where it has not started, and to consolidate this activity where it exists but has not yet been firmly established. Special emphasis is placed on sub-Saharan Africa. Methodological Framework Information reported in this document came from two sources. Studies were commissioned in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. Countries in which the studies took place include Côte d' Ivoire, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, and Zambia in Africa, and Costa Rica and Honduras in Latin America. In 1998, farmed fish from these six sub-Saharan African countries accounted for more than three-quarters of output from the Region1 (FAO,.
Throughout the text, "Region" refers to sub-Saharan Africa.
2 1998). The studies in Africa were aimed at gaining a thorough understanding of the socioeconomic, marketing, policy, legal, regulatory and institutional aspects of commercial aquaculture. In Latin America, the goal was to learn from non-African experiences and to examine which of these experiences could be applied in Africa. Economic, political and policy factors that were conducive to the development of the aquaculture industry in these Latin American countries were analysed. To provide a bottom-up participatory process to policy formulation, a consultant was recruited for each study to interview farmers and other stakeholders. Most of the consultants were nationals of the country studied. Survey instruments were elaborated to collect information. Because, in some countries, there is no database to confirm the total number of farms, sampling techniques had to be rudimentary. Moreover, budgetary restraints precluded exhaustive surveys. However, the surveys generally covered more than one region in each country, and a random sample of sustainable commercial farms within each region selected. Farmer interviews identified constraints, markets and potential policies in addition to collecting technical and financial data. Farmers were asked what would prevent them from expanding their operations and what constraints faced new entrants into the industry. Attempts were made to clarify market demand and other factors necessary for successful commercial aquaculture. Farmers were asked to suggest policies that would promote the industry. Only farms with a commercial or business orientation and which appeared "sustainable" were included in the survey. Sustainability required that a number of criteria be met. To be sustainable, a farm must be financially independent, be socially acceptable and be environmentally neutral. Thus, sustainability according to the criteria above, depends in part on the time frame. Short-run appearances of sustainability may be deceptive if negative economic, environmental or social impacts take time to materialise. In order to take into account the time dimension, it was assumed that only farms which have operated for at least three years without direct government or other financial grant have indicated sustainability. Such a period is clearly arbitrary, but only farms which met that condition were included in the national surveys. To get an objective perspective of the industry and its constraints, other sources of information were considered desirable. Bankers, fish retailers and government officials were also interviewed. All were encouraged to give their suggestions about policies that might promote the industry. Three species were the focus of the study, although the analysis and results can be extended to other species. The three species were tilapia2, catfish and shrimp. In 1998, they accounted for more than half of the aquaculture fish supply produced in sub-Saharan Africa. About the Report The findings of the study are contained in four reports: (1) A policy framework for the promotion of commercial aquaculture in sub-Saharan Africa, (2) An analysis of economic feasibility of commercial aquaculture in countries surveyed including policy implications for the promotion of the sector, (3) A report describing markets and trade mechanisms of farmed.
All genera (Oreochromis, Sarotherodon, Tilapia).
3 fish, and (4) A study of the legal framework within which commercial aquaculture could develop in sub-Saharan Africa. This Fisheries Technical Paper is the first of the two volumes of the report on policy framework for the promotion of commercial aquaculture in subSaharan Africa. This first volume is a general survey of promotional policies that have been implemented in several countries. The second volume will focus exclusively on sub-Saharan countries. The report proceeds as follows. The first part discusses the concept of sustainable commercial aquaculture, the advantages and disadvantages of commercial aquaculture, and prerequisites for the development of commercial aquaculture. The second part presents policies to promote sustainable commercial aquaculture. These policies are discussed in terms of non-sector specific, sector-specific at the macro level, and sector-specific policies at the farm level. They are summarised as an overall guide to decision-makers. A short conclusion is presented at the end of the report.
4 CHAPTER 2 CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABLE COMMERCIAL AQUACULTURE This text uses the FAO definition of aquaculture as the "farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs and crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated. This study focuses on commercial aquaculture, especially commercial fish and crustacean (shrimp) farming. Although many definitions are possible, this study defines commercial aquaculture as those fish farming operations whose goal is to maximise profits, where profits are revenues minus costs (perhaps discounted). Such operations may in fact not be profitable in the short run, but their behaviour is determined by the profit-maximising goal, and if unprofitable they will minimise losses. Commercial aquaculture is not an alternative to rural aquaculture3 but rather a complement. If we view aquaculture systems as a continuum of economic activities from those exclusively oriented towards self-consumption to those that are exclusively oriented towards sale, one could argue that commercial aquaculture would be those operations whose output is exclusively for sale while the other extreme would be rural aquaculture, in which case rural aquaculture would mean subsistence aquaculture. Those farms which fall within the two extremes would be either rural or commercial depending on, inter-alia, the proportion of output sold or consumed. Yet, in rural aquaculture systems, producers may sell4 all their fish and make some profits. They often perceive fish as a cash crop with which to purchase more desirable products, but the goal of rural aquaculture is less to maximise profits than utility and to disperse risks through crop diversification. Thus, though the producer's marketing and consumption behaviour is an important factor, the distinction between commercial and noncommercial aquaculture as used in this document does not hinge on whether fish is sold. It relies primarily on the existence or absence of a business orientation, and on how factors of production such as labour will be paid (Harrison, 1997)5.
Like commercial aquaculture, there is no universally accepted definition of rural aquaculture. Broadly speaking, rural aquaculture refers to the "poorest of the poor " aquaculture (very low cost/very low output) whereby most, if not, all of the output is consumed by the producer, and to the "less poor" aquaculture (low/medium cost, low/medium output) whereby most of the output is sold for economic profit (Martinez Espinosa, Manuel in FAO Aquaculture NewsLetter, November 1992, No. 2, pp. 6-10). Rural aquaculture, artisanal aquaculture and smallscale aquaculture are often used interchangeably. What is meant by rural aquaculture is again explained in Table.
The produce from rural aquaculture is mainly intended for domestic consumption; large commercial farms are essentially export-oriented although there may also be domestic sales as with the dominant farm in Jamaica, Aquaculture Jamaica Ltd. The distinction between commercial operations, which maximise profits, and non-commercial farms which maximise utility, is not new. It has been used to explain the "dualistic" structure of agriculture (Ellis, 1988). This study expands it to aquaculture.
5 While non-commercial farms will be primarily family farms relying on the household for labour, commercial farms will tend to hire labour6. The source of hired labour may vary. Larger aquaculture operations tend to attract labour from distant areas, whereas medium-sized farms depend more on local labour (Mulluk and Bailey, 1996). Perhaps because they have collateral, commercial farms can access institutional credit for capital purchase. Owners may also possess capital of their own to provide as equity, obviating the need for bank credit. On the other hand, non-commercial farms often have to rely on equity from family and friends (with its attendant high opportunity cost), or credit from informal moneylenders. Thus, commercial farms tend to have a lower cost of capital than non-commercial farms. Therefore, commercial farms will tend to have a higher wage to capital cost ratio than non-commercial farms. Hence, where there is substitutability of inputs, production techniques on commercial farms will be more capital and less labour-intensive than on non-commercial farms. In addition, because of greater capital intensity, commercial farms (particularly intensive industrial operations) will have higher output-land ratios or output-water ratios, or yields than non-commercial farms (SEMARNAP, 1999). Different technologies and goals will determine a farm's location. Not relying much on purchased inputs, non-commercial farms can locate in rural areas; the output that is not consumed by the family will be sold to neighbours, often on the farm site. Commercial farms, on the other hand, must both acquire production inputs, generally important quantities, and sell their produce off the farm. These procurement and distribution requirements will require a site where roads are adequate and provide easy access to a good number of buyers if the produce is for domestic consumption. In many cases, this implies an urban or peri-urban location. For large-scale industrial operations that are fully integrated, both back-wards to feed and seed production and forward to processing and marketing, and produce for export, a rural and even isolated location is possible. It may even be preferable, because of lower production costs or better water quality. Shrimp that is produced in Madagascar is rated the best in the world in part because most farms are located in isolated areas where the farming environment is still unpolluted. The isolated location is also one of the means to minimise risks of diseases and theft. In addition, it may provide more liberty in the layout of infrastructure. The above differentiation of the two aquaculture operations is compatible with classifications from a bio-technical perspective. On the one hand, non-commercial farms will tend to use extensive or semi-intensive aquaculture technologies (Ling et al., 1999). On the other hand, commercial farms may range from enterprises applying semi-intensive techniques (in the case of tilapia, cultivation using both fertilisers and pelleted feed) to operations using intensive techniques (no fertiliser and only feed) (Pillay, 1997). Large industrial farms have better understanding and control of production technologies (Little, 1998). Table 1 summarises the principal distinctive features of commercial and non-commercial (rural) aquaculture. Indicators of sustainable aquaculture are at the forefront of the literature. They include economic, social as well as environmental factors (Barg and Phillips, 1997; Tisdell, 1995).
Employment of hired labour does not preclude the use of family labour. A survey of shrimp farms in Thailand showed that a typical commercial farm had 1-2 family members in addition to permanent and part-time employees (Patmasiriwat, 1997).
6 That is, to be sustainable, commercial aquaculture must offer the prospect of adequate returns. This means that, not only should returns be positive, but also, they should be higher or at least comparable to those from similar activities. If no profits are generated, the farm will either close or have to rely on subsidies, which are a drain on government budgets. If profits are generated but are not at least equivalent to those from similar activities, farmers will have an incentive to leave the industry for better opportunities. The requirement that farms be profitable excludes farms which, because donor-funded, aim to maximise sales or output regardless of costs. Such farms often have not been sustainable once funds are withdrawn (Soma et al., 1999). Hence, aquaculture must be self-sufficient financially. Second, the level of returns must be stable. That is, mortality rates and prices of inputs and outputs must not be too volatile. This is due to risk aversion behaviour of fish farmers and of potential creditors. Third, the farmed species and the methods of cultivation must be acceptable and meet general cultural, gender and social norms. This would suggest that the sector's benefits should accrue to a wide socio-economic spectrum and not be retained exclusively by a small elite. In extreme cases, profitable aquaculture has caused jealousy and led to social upheaval (Pillay, 1996). Similarly, the development of the sector has to co-exist with other activities, such as commercial fisheries. Religious concerns may also impede aquaculture. During the 1960s and 1970s, certain Indian states did not allow the stocking of fish in communal ponds because the Arya Samaj movement considered the harvesting of fish a sin. Attempts to do so actually led to violence (Bhatta, 1999). Fourth, aquaculture operations must be environmentally friendly over a long-time horizon. Sustainable development requires intergenerational equity. That is, the potential wellbeing of future generations is at least as high as the present. Intergenerational equity necessitates that both natural and man-made assets are at least maintained over time.
7 Table.
Some of the principal characteristics of non-commercial and commercial farms.
Commercial farms Main characteristics Main Goal Main Location Main Market Inputs Main Labour Capital Seed Fertiliser Feed Pond/System Size Dependence to others' hatcheries Main beneficiaries Non-commercial farms Maximise family utility; risk diversification Rural/Suburban/Urban Domestic (Family/Rural) Medium7 Maximise profits Suburban/Urban/Rural Domestic (Middle income/Urban) Paid /Local area Debt and Equity Others' Hatcheries Organic Wastes/supplement Larger ponds Medium to high Owner, traders, urban consumers, local population Transporters Seed, feed, credit Large Maximise profits Suburban/Urban/Rural Exports; Domestic Urban.
Unpaid family labour Equity Mostly external None/organic None/wastes Small ponds Low to medium Family.
Paid/Local and distant areas Equity and Debt Own Hatcheries None or limited (inorganic) Balanced Larger ponds Low Shareholders, processors, governments, contract farmers, local population Co-users of inputs Costs of inputs, environmental quality control Low.
Some other stakeholders Main constraints.
Fish seed traders Seed and feed.
Average Employment per unit of land/water (L/N) Average CapitalLabour Ratio (K/L) Average OutputLabour Ratio (O/L) Average Wages Average Yield per unit of land/water (O/N).
Low Low Low (imputed) Low.
Average Average Average Average.
High High High High.
The size classification of farm will vary according to countries. In Zimbabwe, 3- 5 hectare farms represent medium-sized operations (Machena, 1999). In Jamaica, 1-4 ha tilapia farms are small; 5-20 ha operations are medium and 21 ha and above farms are large (Hanley, in press). This classification is adapted from Little (1998). In Madagascar, shrimp farms below 50 ha are classified as small (Hishamunda, 2000).
CHAPTER 3 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF COMMERCIAL AQUACULTURE Discussion of costs and benefits of commercial aquaculture provides insight as to why governments might recommend policies for the promotion of commercial aquaculture. Experience in Asia and elsewhere has demonstrated the benefits of commercial aquaculture but also the pitfalls. By providing protein in the form of fish, commercial aquaculture can directly contribute to hunger alleviation and urban food security. Fish is an important item in the African diet: Africa is second only to Asia in terms of fish contribution to total animal protein consumption. While Africa has the lowest per capita food fish supply (7 kg in 1997) and the lowest contribution of aquaculture to per capita supply, food fish in 1997 provided 17.2 % of total animal protein, compared to 24.6% for Asia, 7.3% for South America and a world average of 16.5% (FAO, 1999d). Countries in sub-Sahara Africa where fish provided more than 60% of total animal protein in 1997 were; Equatorial Guinea (62%), Gambia (62%), Ghana (63%), and Sierra Leone (63%). Thus, in large parts of Africa, commercial aquaculture has a market composed of consumers already accustomed to eating fish. The explanation for the dependence on fish as a source of protein is affordability. In much of Africa, fish tend to be less expensive than other sources of animal protein. A survey in Zimbabwe indicated that while consumers prefer chicken and beef to fish, the latter's lower price ensures that it is the main source of animal protein, with meat too expensive for most consumers (Sen, 1995). This finding suggests that, for the majority of the population, fish has a lower income elasticity of demand than meat, with vegetables and beans (rather than meat) as substitutes for fish (Delgado and McKenna, 1997). There is however a wealthier segment of the population, for whom taste is as important as price, and which is willing to pay for higher value fish such as bream or trout (Sen, 1995). Commercial aquaculture also contributes to urban food security by providing employment, and therefore, income with which food can be purchased. In Chile, commercial salmon farming employs 30 000 people most of whom are in the isolated southern urban regions of the country (Infante, 1999). World-wide, commercial shrimp farming emplo ys about one person per ton of produce, or approximately one million (Globefish, 1999). Employment is even larger if multiplier effects are added. Indirectly, commercial aquaculture generates jobs in secondary industries. A crude estimate of the employment multiplier for salmon farming is that one indirect job is created for every two employed directly in the sector. Of the 30,000 jobs attributed to salmon farming in Chile, one-third are in ancillary activities (Infante, 1999). In shrimp culture in Sri Lanka, an estimate is one indirect job for each direct job (Siriwardena, 1999). An estimate of the employment multiplier in aquaculture in the United States is that direct jobs in production and processing account for only 10% of the total (Dicks et al.,1996). The distribution, retail and service sector account for two-thirds of all jobs, with an additional 22% in forward linked activities. The overall industry economic multiplier effect of aquaculture on the total economy was estimated at 3.3 (Dicks et al.,1996). Hishamunda (2000c) estimated the job multiplier effect of shrimp farming in Madagascar at.
Jobs in commercial aquaculture are relatively well paid. Due to their profit-maximising behaviour, commercial farms will have the incentive to employ and conserve labour only if it is justified by the extra output. They pay hired labour the value of its marginal physical product. Because hired workers compete among each other to maintain their jobs and/or.
9 secure higher salaries, the output-labour ratio, or labour productivity, will tend to be higher on commercial farms. Therefore, wages on commercial farms will exceed the imputed wage or value of average physical product of non-commercial farms. It is the output-labour ratio that drives living standards and ultimately poverty alleviation. In salmon farming this outputlabour ratio has been rising over time, which reduces the employment impact of additional output, but increases wages of those employed. A survey in Asia found that wages on shrimp farms were two or three times higher than the rural minimum wage (Patmasiriwat, 1997). In the Ivory Coast, both output-labour and output-land ratios in aquaculture appear to be higher than in rice farming, indicating that aquaculture offers the potential for higher wages and incomes, and a reduction of poverty (Oswald et al.,1996). Similarly, in Thailand, the fact that most intensive shrimp farmers had been rice farmers or fishermen, suggests that returns are higher in shrimp culture than in some alternative occupations (Phillips, 1997). A survey in southern Thailand placed shrimp farming as second only to trading as a source of income (Boonchuwong, 1994). In addition to beneficial impacts on labour absorption and labour productivity, commercial aquaculture contributes to national fiscal balance. On the income side, if successful, commercial aquaculture will pay taxes, thereby contributing to government revenues. In turn, tax revenues can fund social infrastructure such as health care and education, hence alleviating poverty. Evidence suggests that economic growth and poverty alleviation are circular and mutually reinforcing (Sachs, 1998). On the expenditure side, commercial aquaculture has the advantage of relying on private assets rather than public aid8. In a context of fiscal restraint, this independence from public funds gives the sector autonomy and increases chances of sustainable development of the sector. Moreover, the private sector incurs the risks and will bear the financial cost if there is default. Commercial aquaculture can also be a source of hard currency. The value of 1995 Asian farmed shrimp exports exceeded $5.2 billion. French Polynesia earns more foreign exchange from its cultured black pearl than from tourism (Tanaka, 1997). Chile earned more than $700 million in foreign exchange from exports of farmed salmon in 1998. In Honduras, shrimp exports are the third largest export, earning more than US$150 million a year. In Madagascar where the shrimp farming industry just took off and only a fraction (about 2%) of the potential is developed, export of farmed shrimp brought about $49.2 million into the economy in 1999 (Hishamunda, 2000c). However, these may not be net exports, the appropriate indicator of a sector's contribution to foreign exchange. In those countries where machinery (i.e. aerators) and inputs (i.e. feed) are imported, foreign exchange costs of these imports should be deducted from gross export earnings. Feed alone accounts for 50-60% of the total cost of production of shrimp; so, when not only feed but also aerators, pumps and generators are imported as in Sri Lanka and most sub-Saharan African countries, these costs should be deducted. Net foreign exchange earnings from shrimp culture in Sri Lanka between 19921996 were three-quarters of the total foreign exchange earned (Siriwarena, 1999). A survey of fourteen Asian countries revealed that earning foreign exchange was second only to employment generation as a rationale for aquaculture (FAO-NACA, 1997). Even if consumed domestically, the output from commercial aquaculture may replace imported fish and thus save foreign exchange.
Non-commercial farms can also rely on the private investment, but many depend on some forms of public assistance for financial survival.
10 Commercial aquaculture may also generate other positive externalities. When located in isolated rural areas, it may bring about improved infrastructure, promote the development of small communities and discourage youth from migrating to cities. Madagascar's shrimp farming companies built roads, schools, clinic