FAO Fisheries Circular No. 952.
FIRI/C952 ISSN 0429-9329.
CONSEQUENCES OF BIOMANIPULATION FOR FISH AND FISHERIES.
Eddy H.R.R. Lammens Institute for Inland Water Management and Waste Water Treatment Lelystad The Netherlands.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS ROME, 2001.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This report is written in cooperation with most of the colleagues mentioned in the description of the specific case studies, who were kind enough to provide additional information to that obtained from the literature. In particular, the assistance of the following persons is gratefully acknowledged: Helene Annadotter, John Beaver, Jürgen Benndorf, Stephen Carpenter, Ryszard Goldyn, Mark Hanson, Jukka Horppila, Harry Hosper, Erik Jeppesen, Peter Kasprzak, Arnfinn Langeland, Marie-Louise Meijer, Terry Noonan Martin Perrow, Andrzej Prejs, Helge Reinertsen, Ilkka Sammalkorpi, Joe Shapiro, and Ellen van Donk. Dr. Tomi Petr, Toowooomba, Australia, and Mr. Gerd Marmulla, Fishery Resources Officer, FAO/FIRI, made valuable suggestions for the finalization of the draft. The bibliographic references are as presented by the author. Comments are welcome and should be sent to the Chief, FAO Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI), Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
iv Lammens, E.H.R.R. Consequences of biomanipulation for fish and fisheries. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 952. Rome, FAO. 2001. 23p.
The main goal of biomanipulation by fish reduction is not a change in the fish community but a change in the aquatic ecosystem. Fish reduction is a method to push the system in another state, usually a shift from algae domination to macrophyte domination. Intensive fish removal is done by one of the following methods: seining (the Netherlands, Germany, UK), trawling (Sweden, Finland), use of rotenone (Norway, USA, Poland) and stocking of piscivorous fish (USA, Germany). If circumstances allow it (reservoir, ponds) draining is combined with seining (the Netherlands, UK, Poland). The intensity and duration of fishing differs per case, but is quite important for the way the system changes. Fishing may be combined with stocking of predatory fish, mainly pike and pikeperch (or walleye). Stocking is only successful when piscivore catch restriction is introduced (catch limit per day; high minimum size; careful handling of piscivores such as using barbless hooks). If the measure is successful the fish community develops into a different direction with usually a lower biomass but more diverse community. The dominance of bream and/or roach in most European waters becomes less pronounced and makes way for species associated with macrophytes such as tench and rudd. Generally commercial fishermen are pleased with biomanipulation because it increases their income. The extra income comes from the reduction fishery itself, which is usually also done by commercial fishermen. In many biomanipulated lakes commercial fishery is absent and it is sometimes necessary to educate people how to use seines and/or trawl or other fishing methods because skilled people are not always available. Anglers fish on most of the lakes and, if wellorganized, they are powerful enough to stop or change biomanipulation plans. Usually it is the local, provincial or national governments who initiate biomanipulation for restoration purposes and if anglers associations own the fishing rights they have to negotiate with them. In the north-western Europe and the USA biomanipulation results in improved fishing conditions for anglers, especially when predatory fish are stocked. In the central and eastern Europe fishing conditions are valued differently and the objective for biomanipulation and lake restoration may differ from that of the other European countries. Biomanipulation should be considered in relation to the whole ecosystem and is only one of the options for restoration. Using fish for biomanipulation may require a continual, sustained removal effort and may be efficient only when applied in tandem with other nutrient control and reduction mechanisms.
INTRODUCTION.
The use of biomanipulation as tool for water management started in the 1970s in small lakes and because of its success it was also applied in large lakes in the 1990s. Shapiro and Wright (1984) originally defined biomanipulation as "the deliberate exploitation of the interactions between the components of the aquatic ecosystem in order to reduce the algal biomass". It was known from work by Hrbácek et al. (1961) and Brooks & Dodson (1965) that planktivorous fish affect the zooplankton community and indirectly influence the phytoplankton community. Until the 1980s ecosystem thinking was largely in terms of bottom-up effects in the food chain, particularly as in the 1970s the phosphates were found to play a major role in the process of eutrophication. Lake and reservoir managers concluded that the only way back was the reduction of the phosphate loads. In the 1980s it became clear that the functioning of ecosystems was not a simple one-way up the food chain but a more complex web of interactions with feed backs because of top-down effects. It was hypothesized that between certain limits of P-loads the ecosystem could have alternative stable conditions (Jeppesen et al., 1991; Scheffer, 1993): either a high biomass of algae, high turbidity and large fish biomass, or a low biomass of algae, large abundance of macrophytes, clear water, and a different fish community, but not necessarily a low biomass (Fig. 1).
Figure.
Schematic representation of a shallow lake in vegetation dominated clear state (upper left) and in a turbid phytoplankton dominated state in which submerged plants are largely absent (lower right) and an intermediate stage with two alternative states (from Madgwick, 1999, p. 319, figure 4, with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers).
2 Although it was clear that the P-load had to be reduced it was obvious that biomanipulation was a practical additional tool in water management bringing a water body more quickly in the alternative stable state. Considering the most important interactions in lakes and reservoirs (Fig. 2) nutrients, fish and water depth are the only variables which can be controlled by the water manager.
Figure.
Interactions in shallow, eutrophic lakes with a key role of the submerged vegetation (from Scheffer, 1998, p. 259, figure 5.33, with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers). In most European countries eutrophication resulted in a change in fish community from a highly varied community with pike (Esox lucius) and/or perch (Perca fluviatilis) as main predators to one dominated by roach (Rutilus rutilus) and/or bream (Abramis brama) and mainly pikeperch (Stizostedion lucioperca) as predator (Lammens, 1986). This shift to more pikeperch replacing perch and pike was advantageous for the commercial fishery. The conditions for eel (Anguilla anguilla) are not sufficiently known, but probably they improved by eutrophication. For anglers the fishing shifted from a variety of species including tench (Tinca tinca), crucian carp (Carassius carassius), rudd (Scardinius erythrophtalmus) and pike to mainly bream, roach and pikeperch. Restoring the lakes and reservoirs to the former mesotrophic conditions will change the catch and the way of fishing of commercial fishermen and anglers just because the water bodies return to the old situation or to an alternative state. This document reviews different applications of biomanipulation in lakes and reservoirs of Europe and North America and how these have affected the fish populations and the fishing conditions of commercial fishermen and anglers.
METHODS OF FISH REMOVAL.
Biomanipulation with regard to fish always involves methods to remove fish. Fish may be removed by nets or poison or by stocking predatory fish. These techniques may be combined but the extent and the period of time in which they are applied may differ considerably. As this measure results in a drastic change in the fish community the water manager first has to consult the owner of the fishing rights and has to agree on a fishery plan. 2.1 Fishery Techniques.
The fishery techniques usually used are: · draining or pumping out: if a water body is only a few hectares and connected to drainage system the most efficient way of fishing is draining or pumping out the water and removing the concentrated fish with seines. This technique has been used in lake Zwemlust, Maltanski reservoir and Great Linford and the fishstock was completely removed. seining: the most common way of fishing used to reduce the fish stock (Fig. 3). In most European countries this technique is applied when the fish stock has to be reduced by more than 50%. In the Netherlands seines up to 600 meter long, pulled by winches, are used in the larger lakes such as Breukeleveen (180 ha), Wolderwijd (3000 ha), the Frisian lakes (100-2000 ha), and Haussee (136 ha).
Figure.
A seine as it was used at the beginning of the 20th century (from Dorleijn, 1987, p. 85, with kind permission from Stichting voor bevolkingsonderzoek in de drooggelegde Zuiderzeepolders).
4 · trawling: trawling is mainly applied in the Scandinavian countries in large lakes (Fig. 4). As it is less effective than seining, the fishing has to be continued for several years (e.g. Finjasjøn, Vesajärvi, Koyliönjärvi, Tuusulanjärvi and Enäjärvi).
Figure.
Trawl as used in shallow lakes in the beginning of this century (from Dorleijn, 1982, p. 83, with kind permission from Stichting voor bevolkingsonderzoek in de drooggelegde Zuiderzeepolders).
5 · combined fishing with gill-nets, seines, fykes, and electro-fishing: if there are many hiding places and seines and trawls are difficult to use passive methods may be effective during the periods when fish are locally active, especially during the spawning time when adult fish are concentrated in their spawning grounds. Fykenets and electro-fishing are quite efficient. In winter when young fish are concentrated in ditches and harbours and adult fish in the deeper places seines in combination with echo-sounding are most effective (Noorddiep, Bleiswijk, Wirbel, Danish lakes, Ormsby). gill-nets: gill-nets may be used for `fine-tuning' the pike or pikeperch population in order to control the number of large individuals which would control the young of the same species. The fishery is intended to remove individuals > 60 cm to increase the survival chances of the size-group of 10-25 cm, and has been applied in Frisian lakes. poisoning: the most commonly used poison is rotenone (Norwegian lakes, American lakes, Poland). This method is not allowed to be used in the United Kingdom. Although it is quite effective and the side-effects are difficult to demonstrate, there is a general aversion from the public to apply it. Intensity of Fishing.
Rapid reduction A rapid and drastic (> 75% of total biomass) reduction is preferred because the effect is immediate and chances of success are quite high. Especially when dealing with large benthivorous and planktivorous fish with long lifespan the chances for lasting effect will be high. If the fish reduction is successful the large Daphnia populations recover quickly and bottom sediments are much less resuspended by the feeding activity of benthivorous fish. Already in the first spring following the measure a clear-water phase occurs and may last the whole summer. For the development of vegetation this is necessary. If technically feasible and if vegetation is wanted this measure is recommended. A rapid reduction can only efficiently be done if the lake is small (< 100 ha) and isolated. Poisoning, draining or seining may remove the fish stock completely in a few days and if the lake is isolated the new fish stock has to be developed by restocking (Zwemlust). Slow reduction When the lake is large (> 100 ha) or difficult to fish, or fishing meets with a lot of public resistance, rapid reduction is usually not possible and the fish reduction programme may last for several years (Haussee, Finjasjøn, Vesajärvi, Koyliönjärvi, Tuusulanjärvi and Enäjärvi, Frisian lakes, Wolderwijd, Ormsby). On a yearly basis the reduction of the fish varies between 25% and 75% and only the predatory fish is returned. In these cases the fish community becomes `rejuvenated' and fast growing fish are favoured to develop. Particularly for predatory fish these conditions are good. In Finland almost 100 lakes are biomanipulated in such a way and in most cases both the water quality manager and fishermen are pleased with the measure.
6 2.3 Stocking Piscivorous Fish.
If the fishery is too expensive, technically not feasible or just not wanted, an alternative is stocking with piscivorous fish to reduce the planktivorous and benthivorous fish (Bautzen reservoir, Lake Mendota). Chances for success are lower or less immediate because it takes time for the population to develop and the reduction of the planktivorous population may be too inefficient for the recovery of the Daphnia populations. If the lake is very large and/or vegetation is not particularly wanted such a stocking programme may be an option. An advantage of stocking of piscivorous fish is that it is appreciated by anglers and that they will cooperate in such a programme. The stocking may involve young, juvenile and adult piscivorous fish. Pike and pikeperch/or walleye (Stizostedion vitreum) are most easy to breed and most commonly used for stocking. Also in combination with a reduction fishery stocking is often additionally applied, for example, in Zwemlust, Wolderwijd, Noorddiep, Bleiswijk, Haussee, Wirbel, Danish lakes. Only in Lake Mendota and Bautzen See stocking was the main measure. In these lakes particularly anglers were pleased with this measure as their catches increased strongly and therefore the number and size of fish which were allowed to be removed had to be restricted. It is known that the mortality among fish smaller than 10 cm is very high and that stocking is most effective when the predatory fish is larger than 10 cm (Bautzen reservoir), but the cost to raise the fish to a size of >10 cm is usually too high to be attractive.
CASE STUDIES.
These are limited to the reasonably well documented experiments with good results. They are based on literature information, which in all cases has been supplemented by additional information about the fishery obtained directly from the authors. 3.1 3.1.1 The Netherlands Lake Zwemlust.
Lake Zwemlust was the first lake in the Netherlands to be biomanipulated. The lake is only 1.5 ha, 1.5 meter deep and it suffered from high algal biomass and regular algal scum of Microcystis (Van Donk et al., 1989, 1998). The fish community was dominated by a high biomass (ca. 1000 kg ha-1) of poorly growing bream. The lake was used as swimming pool and only one fisherman exploited the eel population. The provincial water board decided to use biomanipulation as a restoration measure and paid all costs. The reduction was 100% because the lake was drained and the concentrated fish could easily be removed by seining. The fisherman received all eel and glass-eel were stocked after refilling the lake as compensation. In the first year after the measure the lake was stocked with 1500 pike of 4 cm and 140 adult rudd as a new start for the new fish community. The lake became clear and after one year aquatic macrophyte vegetation developed and the fish community reached a few hundred kg ha-1. Because the new fish community was adapted to the vegetation and clear water conditions the new fish community did not pose threat to revert the system to the old situation. The biomanipulation also did not cause a threat to the fisherman, who was compensated. Angling was not allowed. As the lake was a swimming pool the success of the measure was evaluated according to the number of visitors before and after the measure. A cost-benefit analysis showed that the restoration of the pond was economically viable as the income from the extra number of visitors compensated for the costs incurred by the whole operation. 3.1.2 Lake Breukeleveen.
Lake Breukeleveen was the first large lake in the Netherlands to be biomanipulated. The lake has a surface area of 180 ha, it is 1.5 meter deep and it suffered from a high turbidity because of resuspended sediment and a high algal biomass, mainly consisting of filamentous cyanobacteria (Van Donk et al., 1990). The fish community was dominated by poorly growing bream and some pikeperch and roach (ca. 150 kg ha-1). The pikeperch and eel stocks were exploited by one fisherman and some anglers, but the fisherman had the fishing rights and issued licenses for fishing. Other important recreation was sailing. The provincial water board decided to apply biomanipulation as a restoration measure and paid all costs. The fish was removed by seining, the seine being 550 meter long. The fisherman cooperated as he was paid for the job and received all the pikeperch. The fish stocks were reduced by 60% and the following summer the stock increased to its original size both by natural growth and by immigration, because the fish barrier did not function well. The experiment was a failure, with the fisherman having a nice profit but the local community paying the costs.
8 3.1.3 Lake Wolderwijd.
Lake Wolderwijd is the largest biomanipulated lake in the Netherlands. The lake covers 2650 ha, mean depth is 1.5 m. The lake suffered from high algal biomass consisting of mainly filamentous bluegreen Planktothrix agardhii (Meijer and Hosper, 1997). Prior to biomanipulation the fish community was dominated by bream and roach (205 kg ha-1). The lake is used for sailing, bathing and fishing. A commercial fisherman exploited the eel population and anglers fished for bream and roach. The water manager decided to use biomanipulation as a restoration measure and paid all costs. Using seining, the fish stocks were reduced by 75%. As the fishing rights for all fish except eel belonged to the anglers, they were financially compensated for the fish loss. The commercial fisherman cooperated in the fish reduction programme. In the first year after the seining the lake was stocked with 217 pike fingerlings ha-1. In spring 1991 the lake cleared as a result of grazing by Daphnia galeata. The clear-water phase lasted for six weeks. Macrophytes did not respond as expected and most of the young pike died. However, from 1991 the submerged vegetation gradually developed and in 1999 more than 50% of the lake was covered with stonewort (Chara). Initially there was some recovery of fish, but as soon as the stonewort started to develop the fish biomass started decreasing, eventually reaching 50 kg ha-1. The number of species increased from 10 to 22. An evaluation of cost-benefit should not only consider the fishery, but also an increase in visits made by birds and recreating people, which resulted from the biomanipulation and restoration of the aquatic habitat. 3.1.4 Lake Noorddiep and Lake Bleiswijkse Zoom.
Biomanipulation measures in the Netherlands are usually a combination of a drastic fish stock reduction and an introduction of pike fingerlings. In Noorddiep and Bleiswijkse Zoom these measures resulted in a clear-water state and the development of macrophytes (Meijer et al., 1994, 1995). After the measures the fish community developed differently because of the new physical and biological conditions. Results from the biomanipulation of lake Noorddiep and lake Bleiswijkse Zoom showed that the fish community became more diverse. Bream and carp became less dominant and were partly replaced by roach and perch. The importance of the main predator pikeperch was strongly reduced as it was replaced by pike and perch. The share of piscivorous fish in the total fish stock increased. The recruitment of young-of-the-year was similar or even higher in the clear overgrown areas than in the turbid water before the measures, but the recruitment of young-of-the-year to older fish differed between the species. Predation by pike and perch could not control the young-of-the-year cyprinids, but their predation may have contributed to the shift from bream to roach, because of selective predation on bream in the open water, while roach was hiding in the vegetation. The macrophytes provide new refugia and feeding conditions that favour roach and perch, but offer relatively poor survival conditions for bream and carp. 3.1.5 Frisian Lakes.
The Frisian lakes are an interconnected system of lakes with a surface area of ca 10,000 ha, mean depth 2 m. They suffer from high algal biomass represented mainly by the filamentous bluegreen Planktothrix agardhii. Prior to biomanipulation, the fish community was dominated by bream, ruffe, smelt and roach with pikeperch as main predator (Lammens 1986, 1999). The total biomass amounted to 180 kg ha-1. The lake is mainly used for sailing and fishing. About 30 commercial fishermen exploit the eel.
9 population and anglers fish for pikeperch and bream. The anglers and commercial fishermen decided to start a fishery programme for a period of 5 years in order to increase the catches of eel for the fishermen and the catches of pikeperch by anglers. Part of the bream population was yearly removed to improve the food condition for eel. Pikeperch > 60 cm was removed to improve the survival chances of pikeperch < 20 cm and to keep the pikeperch population young. It was a biomanipulation experiment with a different goal than water management. The annual seining removed 25-30% of the bream stocks. The pikeperch > 60 cm was caught both with gill-nets and seines. Pikeperch was sold and used to finance the whole operation. During the fishery experiment the water quality improved as clear-water phases occurred more frequently and lasted longer and aquatic vegetation started to colonize the lakes. The fish community changed only with respect to size composition and year classes: the average age and size of most fish species decreased, but the total biomass hardly changed. Considering the positive results for both anglers and commercial fishermen, and the improvement of water quality the benefits exceeded the costs. 3.2 3.2.1 Germany Bautzen Reservoir.
Bautzen Reservoir was the first large biomanipulation project in Germany. The lake covers 533 ha, is 7.4 m deep and it regularly suffered from algal scum formed by Microcystis (Benndorf et al., 1988; Benndorf, 1995). The fish were dominated by planktivores and benthivores (ca. 200 kg ha-1), with only few predatory fish. The reservoir was fished mainly by anglers. The university of Dresden decided to start a long-term biomanipulation experiment and the anglers assisted with the stocking of the predatory fish (pikeperch, pike and eel) and accepted the catch restrictions for piscivores. The programme was financed by research funds and by the angler association. The response of the lake was slow and in the first years the total fish biomass and the water quality hardly changed. After ten years the predatory fish stock increased by more than 50% and the total fish biomass dropped to ca. 100 kg ha-1. Pike showed the highest increase in biomass as the conditions for this fish gradually improved, but pikeperch and eel stocks also eventually stabilized at a higher biomass. The anglers were initially sceptical, but quite pleased with this project as the fishing conditions considerably improved. It is difficult to make a sound cost-benefit analysis as the lake is only used for recreation. A cost-benefit analysis considering both the benefits for anglers, for recreation in general and enhancement of the scientific knowledge would probably show beneficial results of the biomanipulation approach. Plans are made for a new project in Saidenbach (drinking water) reservoir. 3.2.2 Lake Haussee.
Haussee was another large biomanipulation project in Germany (Kasprzak et al., 1995). The lake covers 136 ha and has a mean depth of 6.9 m. The lake suffered from algal blooms although the P-load was reduced to 0.1 g m-2 yr-1. Initially the fish community was dominated by planktivorous and benthivorous fish, mainly roach and bream (ca. 400 kg ha-1), with only a few predatory fish. The lake was fished by anglers and commercial fishermen. The Department of Limnology of the Academy of Sciences (of the former East Germany) started a long-term biomanipulation experiment and the anglers and commercial fishermen actively cooperated in the programme. The biomanipulation was a combination of fish reduction by seine fishing, which removed.
10 ca. 25% of the total biomass, and stocking of predatory fish (pikeperch, pike, eel, catfish and perch). The programme was mainly paid by the water manager. The response of the lake was slow. In the first years the total fish biomass hardly changed and the water quality improved only slightly. But after 10 years the predatory fish increased to more than 20% of the total, while the total fish biomass dropped to ca. 100 kg ha-1. Aquatic macrophyte vegetation started to develop in 1995. Although the anglers and commercial fishermen were sceptical in the beginning, particularly because of the fishery restrictions, after a few years they became more enthusiastic with the increase of predatory fish. 3.3 3.3.1 Poland Maltanski Reservoir.
Maltanski Reservoir (Goldyn et al., 1994, 1997) is the largest restoration project in Poland. The lake covers 64 ha, with a mean depth of 3.1 m. The reservoir had a high fish biomass of 438 kg ha-1, mainly bream, roach and perch, with 45 kg ha-1 of the total represented by pike and pikeperch. The reservoir suffered from high algal biomass, mainly filamentous cyanobacteria. Recreation activities on the reservoir included canoe tracking and to meet the international standards for canoe tracking transparency had to be improved. The reservoir was drained, all fish were harvested, sediments were removed and waste water sources were diverted. The reservoir was refilled in 1990. In the two following years some pike were stocked. Only in the first year there was a clear effect on water quality. In the second year cyanobacteria (particularly Planktothrix agardhii) formed a strong water bloom. Therefore the water manager decided to repeat the draining and fish removal at the end of 1992. 398 kg ha-1 was removed of which only 10 kg were pike and pikeperch. In this second phase (1993-1996) predatory fish stocking was intensified, but the effect was more or less similar to the first experiment. The aquatic macrophytes did not develop and therefore the fish stocks returned to the old situation. The easy immigration of fish from the river Cybina accelerated this process. In both experiments the commercial fishermen participated by fishing. Anglers had mixed feelings as angling was banned in the second period. 3.3.2 Lake Wirbel.
Lake Wirbel is a small lake of only 11 ha, 2 meter deep and regular algal scum (Prejs, 1997). The fish community was dominated by roach and bream. Some 10-15 kg ha-1 yr1 was caught by anglers. The university of Warsaw decided to use biomanipulation as an experimental restoration measure for 6 years and paid for the costs. The programme started with the introduction of pike during the first 3 years, together with a simultaneous reduction of large bream and roach. As this was not effective rotenone was used and all fish were removed. Following the fish removal the water quality improved. The effect was persistent for three years when repeated stockings of pike fry and fishing were used to control immigration and reproduction of planktivores. After the stocking and fishing terminated the lake quickly reversed to the old situation as no vegetation developed. The experiment showed the importance of the development of vegetation for the stabilization of the new situation.
11 3.4 3.4.1 Sweden Lake Finjasjøn.
Finjasjøn was the first large lake in Sweden to be biomanipulated. The lake covers about 1000 ha, is 4 meter deep and it suffered from high algal biomass in summer and from toxic algal scum of Microcystis (Annadotter et al., 1999). The fish stocks were dominated by a high biomass (ca. 400 kg ha-1) of roach and bream. The lake was mainly used as a drinking water reservoir and for recreation. The municipality of Finjasjøn decided to use biomanipulation as a restoration measure when it became clear that removal of the mud had no effect on the blooms of toxic cyanobacteria. The municipality paid all costs. The reduction fishery was performed by trawling over a period of several years. Two boats were built and fishermen were paid to do the job. After two years the lake became clear and vegetation started to develop. The fish community was reduced to ca. 50 kg ha-1 and consisted of roach, perch and pike. The development of the vegetation stabilized the lake. In the beginning there was resistance of the anglers, but soon they changed their attitude because the angling conditions improved with better fish growth rates. As water quality improved in the rehabilitated lake this offered better opportunities for recreation. The success of the measures could be evaluated taking into consideration lesser costs needed for water purification for drinking purposes and the increased number of visitors. 3.5 3.5.1 Finland Lake Vesijärvi, Enonselkä.
The Enonselkä basin of Lake Vesijärvi was subjected to a large-scale (2600 ha) biomanipulation trial in Finland (Horppila and Kairesalo 1990; Horppila 1998). The fish removal lasted five years (1989-1993) and there was also a large scale stocking of pikeperch (1987-1994), brown trout (Salmo trutta) (1987-1992) and salmon (Salmo salar) (1992-1994). The lake suffered from summer blooms of blue-green algae (Aphanizomenon, Microcystis). High biomass of roach was considered to play an important role in maintaining high algal productivity and biomass in the lake water. The fish community was dominated by a high biomass of roach (180 kg ha-1 in 1989) and smelt (75 kg ha-1). The municipality decided to use biomanipulation as a restoration measure and paid all costs. In a period of 5 years in total 423 kg ha-1 were removed. The roach biomass was reduced to ca. 50 kg ha-1 and smelt to 12 kg ha-1 by trawling. Professional fishermen from the larger Lake Päijänne were paid for fishing. Water transparency increased, nutrient concentrations decreased, blooms of cyanobacteria vanished and submerged macrophytes recovered since 1990. Fishery was stimulated after the biomanipulation as evident from increased catches of pikeperch, salmonids and crayfish. In the waters of the City of Lahti (1100 ha) 1000 gill-net licenses are sold annually. The cost of the project was 2.4 million $ and the estimated increase on land value on the shores of the lake was 6.8 million. 3.5.2 Lake Vesijärvi, Paimela Bay.
Paimela Bay (390 ha) is part of Lake Vesijärvi and had the same problems with cyanophyta as the Enonselkä basin. The municipality and state paid the costs to reduce the fish biomass in order to improve the water quality. The total catch of fish removal with seine and fykenets was 445 kg ha-1 (95 % cyprinids) in four years (1992-.
12 1995) (Sammalkorpi et al., 1995; Turunen, 1997). Water transparency increased, nutrient concentrations decreased, blooms of cyanobacteria vanished, and submerged macrophytes recovered since 1994. There was no commercial or recreational fishing in the lake and a commercial fisherman was paid for seine fishing and advising on the use of fykenets. 3.5.3 Lake Koyliönjärvi.
Lake Koyliönjärvi is a large, highly eutrophic lake (1250 ha) and because of increasing blooms of (sometimes toxic) cyanobacteria 