Cover page picture courtesy of Dr. Melba Reantaso, NACA, Bangkok, Thailand.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or of the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104603-4.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Co-ordinator, Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), Suraswadi Building, Department of Fisheries, Kasetsart University Campus, Ladyao, Jatujak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand, or the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
FAO and NACA 2001.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This document presents the Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. The Manual of Procedures provides background material and detailed technical procedures to assist countries and territories in the Asia Region in implementing the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. The Technical Guidelines, and the associated Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy (BCIS), (see FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. 402) are the result of an extensive consultative process, undertaken between 1998-2000, involving input from governmentdesignated National Co-ordinators (NCs), Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), FAO, Office international des pizooties (OIE), and regional and international specialists. The Technical Guidelines were unanimously endorsed at the Final Workshop of the FAO/NACA TCP RAS 6714 (A) and 9605 (A) "Assistance for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals" held in Beijing, PR China, from 27 to 30 June 2000.
Distribution Aquatic animal health personnel Ministries and Directorates of Fisheries Ministries and Directorates of Animal Production and Veterinary Services FAO Fishery Regional and Sub-Regional Officers FAO Fisheries Department NACA.
FAO/NACA. Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 402, Suppl.
Rome, FAO. 2001. 106p. ABSTRACT The Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals provides background material and detailed technical procedures to assist countries and territories in the Asia Region in implementing the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. The Technical Guidelines and their associated implementation plan, the Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy (BCIS), (see FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. No. 402) provide expert guidance for national and regional efforts in reducing the risks of disease due to transboundary movement of live aquatic animals. The Technical Guidelines were initiated due to increased recognition that disease emergence is often linked to live aquatic animal movements, and that the associated economic losses, including impacts on rural livelihoods and national efforts in poverty alleviation and food security, are highly significant. New trade agreements and requirements generated by the World Trade Organization (WTO) further reinforced the necessity for improved live aquatic animal health management. Recognizing the need for a region-wide approach to aquatic animal health management, the national governments of countries of the Asia Region requested FAO, through NACA, to assist production of a set of technical guidelines that could be used to improve and harmonize aquatic animal health management strategies for responsible trans-boundary movement of live aquatic animals. An FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) Project - "Assistance for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals" was launched by NACA in 1998, with the participation of 21 countries from throughout the region. This programme complemented FAO's efforts in assisting member countries to implement the relevant provisions in Article 9 Aquaculture Development - of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF), at both the national and regional levels. A set of Guiding Principles, formulated by a group of aquatic animal health experts at the Regional Workshop held in 1996 in Bangkok, formed the basis for an extensive consultative process, between 1998-2000, involving input from government-designated National Co-ordinators (NCs), the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), FAO, the Office international des pizooties (OIE), and regional and international specialists. The Technical Guidelines were unanimously endorsed at the Final Project Workshop on Asia Regional Health Management for the Responsible Transboundary Movement of Live Aquatic Animals, held in Beijing, China, from 27 to 30 June 2000. Recognizing the crucial importance of implementation of the Technical Guidelines, the participants prepared a detailed implementation strategy, the Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy (BCIS), focussing on National Strategies and with support through regional and international co-operation. The NCs gave unanimous endorsement of the Technical Guidelines, in principle, as providing valuable guidance for national and regional efforts in reducing the risks of disease due to the trans-boundary movement of live aquatic animals, and the workshop participants unanimously approved the associated implementation strategy. Implementation of the Technical Guidelines will contribute to securing and increasing income of aquaculturists in Asia by minimizing the disease risks associated with transboundary movement of aquatic animal pathogens. They will also contribute to regional efforts to improve rural livelihoods, within the broader framework of responsible management, environmental sustainability and protection of aquatic biodiversity. (Key words: Asia, Aquaculture, Health Management, Aquatic animal diseases, Quarantine, Health Certification, Guidelines).
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) are pleased to present this document entitled the Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals. The Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals (hereafter referred to as the "Technical Guidelines") and their associated implementation plan, the Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy (BCIS), (see FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. No. 402) were developed by representatives from 21 Asian governments1, scientists and experts on aquatic animal health2,3, as well as by representatives from several national, regional and international agencies and organizations4. The Technical Guidelines provide valuable guidance for national and regional efforts in reducing the risks of disease due to trans-boundary movement of live aquatic animals. Their implementation will contribute to securing and increasing income of aquaculturists in Asia by minimizing the disease risks associated with trans-boundary movement of aquatic animal pathogens. In many countries in Asia, aquaculture and capture fisheries provide a mainstay of rural food security and livelihoods, and implementation of the Technical Guidelines will contribute to regional efforts to improve rural livelihoods, within the broader framework of responsible management, environmental sustainability and protection of aquatic biodiversity. An FAO Technical Co-operation Programme (TCP) Project (TCP/RAS 6714 (A) and 9065 (A) "Assistance for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals") was launched by NACA in 1998, with the participation of 21 countries from throughout the region. This program complemented FAO's efforts in assisting member countries to implement the relevant provisions in Article 9 - Aquaculture Development - of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF), at both the national and regional levels. A set of Guiding Principles, formulated by a group of aquatic animal health experts at the Regional Workshop held in 1996 in Bangkok, formed the basis for an extensive consultative process, between 19982000, involving input from government-designated National Co-ordinators (NCs), NACA, FAO, OIE, and regional and international specialists. Based on reports from these workshops, as well as intersessional activities co-ordinated by FAO and NACA, the final Technical Guidelines were presented and discussed at the Final Project Workshop on Asia Regional Health Management for the Responsible Trans-boundary Movement of Live Aquatic Animals, held in Beijing, China, 27 to 30 June 2000. The Technical Guidelines were reviewed and discussed by the participants of this meeting, which included the NCs, FAO, NACA, OIE (Representatives of the Fish Disease Commission and Regional Representation in Tokyo), and many regional and international aquatic animal health management specialists. The NCs gave unanimous agreement and endorsement of the Technical Guidelines, in principle, as providing valuable guidance for national and regional efforts in reducing the risks of disease due to the trans-boundary movement of live aquatic animals. Recognizing the crucial importance of implementation of the Technical Guidelines, the participants prepared a detailed implementation strategy, the Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy (BCIS), focussing on National Strategies and with support through.
For the purpose of this Manual of Procedures, the term "country" covers an entity that may be a nation, a region of a country or a government. 2 See Annex I for the list of National Co-ordinators who represented the participating countries during drafting of the Manual of Procedures. 3 See Annex II for the list of Regional Working Group (RWG) and Technical Support Services (TSS) members who assisted with the Manual of Procedures. 4See Annex III for the list of agencies and organizations that participated in the development of the Manual of Procedures.
regional and international co-operation. This comprehensive implementation strategy was unanimously adopted by the workshop participants. In addition to the Manual of Procedures, the Technical Guidelines are also supported by the Asia Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Diseases. The Diagnostic Guide, which will be published in late2001, was prepared to support regional countries in diagnosis of aquatic animal disease. The countries that participated in the development of the Technical Guidelines and BCIS, and the associated Manual of Procedures and Diagnostic Guide are Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China P.R., China Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Korea (D.P.R.), Korea (R.O.), Lao (P.D.R.), Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam. FAO and NACA extend special thanks to all the governments, agencies, and organizations that took part in this significant, and sometimes daunting, endeavor, as well as to all the individuals who generously contributed time, effort and expertise to the compilation of this document and other information produced during the process. Ichiro Nomura Assistant Director-General Fisheries Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Fax: + 39 06 570-53020 E-mail: ichiro.nomura@fao.org or fi-enquires@fao.org Website: http://www.fao.org/fi/default.asp.
Pedro Bueno Co-ordinator Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) Department of Fisheries Kasetsart University Campus, Ladyao, Jatujak Bangkok 10900, Thailand Fax: (662) 561-1727 E-mail: Pedro.Bueno@enaca.org Website: http://enaca.org.
Movement 1 of live aquatic animals is a necessity for development of aquaculture on both a subsistence and commercial level. However, such movements increase the probability of introducing new pathogens, which can have dire consequences on aquaculture, capture fisheries and related resources, as well as the livelihoods which depend on them. In order to minimize or avoid the risk of pathogen transfer via aquatic animal movements, it is essential that the individuals and organizations involved in such activities appreciate, and participate in, the overall health management process.
The adverse social, economic and environmental impacts that have resulted from the irresponsible or ill-considered movement of live aquatic animals and their products have led to global recognition of the need for health management protocols to protect aquaculture, fisheries resources and the aquatic environment. In many cases, these impacts have been a direct result of the absence of effective national and regional health management strategies. However, formulation of effective quarantine measures3, health certification and guidelines applicable on an international scale is complicated. A wide range of social, economic and environmental circumstances have to be considered, along with the range of aquatic animal species involved and their pathogens and diseases. In addition, differing reasons for moving live aquatic animals and products impose a further set of variables to the process. Nevertheless, the serious impacts of u restricted regional and international movement of n aquatic animals merit international recognition - a fact clearly reflected in the International Aquatic Animal Health Code and the Diagnostic Manual of Aquatic Animal Diseases of the Office international des epizooties 4, which provide guidelines and recommendations for reducing the risk of spreading specific pathogens considered relevant to international trade of aquatic animals. Since present international protocols are not always applicable to the disease concerns of aquatic food production and trade in the Asia Region, the need for effective health management protocols that focus on the species and disease problems of this region has been recognized for many years. A regional, as opposed to national, approach is considered appropriate, since many countries in the region share social, economic, industrial, environmental, biological and geographical characteristics. A regionally adopted health management program will facilitate trade, and protect aquatic p oduction (subsistence and r commercial) and the environment upon which they depend, from preventable disease incursions. A joint FAO/NACA Asia-Regional Programme on Aquatic Animal Health Management was undertaken to review the need for better health management to support safe movement of live aquatic animals and the applicability of existing international codes on aquatic animal health management, quarantine and health certification, including those of the OIE, the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC), and the International Council for Exploration of the Sea (ICES) to Asian circumstances.
used in this document are defined in Section 3, Definitions, of the Manual of Procedures . For the purpose of this document, the health management process is defined (see the Manual of Procedures , Section 3) as "aquatic animal health management in its broadest sense, encompassing pre- border (exporter), border and post -border (importer) activities, as well as relevant national and regional capacity-building requirements (infrastructure and specialised expertise) for addressing health management activities, and implementation of effective national and regional policies and regulatory frameworks required to reduce the risk of disease spread through movement (intra- and international) of live aquatic animals." 3 Measures developed as a result of risk analysis to reduce the disease risks associated with the transfer of disease agents with live aquatic animal movements. This usually refers to trans boundary movements, with pre-border, border, and post-border health management processes, however, such activities are equally applicable to intranational movement of live aquatic animals. 4 see OIE. 2000a. International Aquatic Animal Health Code. 3rd edn. Office International des Epizooties, Paris, 153 p.; and OIE. 2000b. Diagnostic Manual for Aquatic Animal Diseases. 3rd edn, Office International des Epizooties, Paris, 237 p.
This review highlighted the fact that the disease risks associated with pathogen transfer in the Asia Region can only be reduced through a broader appro ach to aquatic animal health management than currently outlined in disease-specific codes of practice (e.g., the OIE code) or in codes and protocols developed specifically for northern hemisphere countries (e.g., the ICES and EIFAC codes)5. In addition, it underlined the need for pre-border (exporter), border and post-border (importer) involvement in the program, to ensure co-operative health management of aquatic animal movement. With the support of an FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) implemented by NACA, the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals is a document that was compiled by a group of aquatic animal health experts within and outside the region to assist the development of effective health management procedures for safe movement of live aquatic animals within and between countries in the region. This companion document, the Manual of Procedures for the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals, provides background material and detailed technical procedures to assist countries and territories in the Asia Region in implementing the Technical Guidelines.
5 see Humphrey, J.D., J.R. Arthur, R.P. Subasinghe and M.J. Phillips. 1997. Aquatic Animal Quarantine and Health Certification in A sia. Proceedings of the Regional Workshop on Health and Quarantine Guidelines for the Responsible Movement (Introduction and Transfer of Aquatic Organisms), Bangkok Thailand, 28 January 1996. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. No. 373, 153 p.
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
Ac ronyms and abbreviations appearing in the Manual of Procedures stand for the following organizations, programs, titles, diseases and pathogens: AAHRI AAPQIS ACIAR ADB ADG AFFA AG APEC AQIS ASEAN AVA BCIS BFRI BFAR BKD CA CAQ CBD C CRF CEFAS CIDA CITES COFI CPE CSIRO CVO DFID DFO DIAS EIFAC ERM ETF EU EUS FAO FDC FHMC FQS GAA GATT GLP ICAR ICES ICLARM IFC IFRTO ITC Aquatic Animal Health Research Institute Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research Asian Development Bank Asia Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Diseases (Department of) Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry ­ Australia Advisory Group on Aquatic Animal Health Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service Association of Southeast-Asian Nations Agri- Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Philippines Bacterial Kidney Disease C o m p e t e n t Authority Centres for Agriculture Quarantine of Indonesia Convention on Biological Diversity Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science of the United Kingdom Canadian International Development Agency Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora Committee on Fisheries of FAO Cytopathological effect Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation of Australia Chief Veterinary Officer Department for International Development (United Kingdom) Department of Fisheries and Oceans of Canada Database on Introduced Species European Inland Fishery Advisory Commission Enteric Redmouth Disease Emergency Task Force European Union Epizootic Ulcerative Syndrome Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fish Disease Commission (of OIE) Fish Health Management Committee of Australia Fisheries Quarantine Service of BFAR Global Aquaculture Alliance General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Good Laboratory Practices Indian Council of Agricultural Research International Council for the Exploration of the Sea International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management Iranian Fisheries Company Iranian Fisheries and Training Organization Introduction and Transfers Committee.
IVO IHN IRA IPN ISA JFA LIFDC MAFF MOFARD MOU MRC LEC NACA NC NBFGR NEC NFEC NFRDI NICA NIWA NORAD OIE PPD QA RIA 1 RRC RWG SAARC SEAADCP SEAFDEC -A Q D SPS SVC TSS TCP UNCED VHS WB WSSV WTO YHD.
Iranian Veterinary Organization Infectious Haematopoetic Necrosis Import Risk Analysis Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis Infectious Salmon Anaemia J a p anese Fishery Agency Low-Income Food-Deficit Country Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development of Sri Lanka Memorandum of Understanding Mekong River Commission Local Emergency Committee Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific National Co-ordinator National Bureau of Fish Genetics Research of India National Emergency Committee National Fisheries Extension Centre of China PR National Fisheries Research and Development Institute of Korea RO National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture of Thailand National Institute for Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd of New Zealand Norwegian Agency for Development Office international des çpizooties (the World Organization for Animal Health) Primary Production Department of Singapore Quality Assurance Research Institute for Aquaculture No. 1 of Vietnam R e g i o n a l Resource Center R e g i o n a l Working Group South Asia Association for Regional Co-operation Southeast Asia Aquatic Disease Control Project Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center ­ Aquaculture Department WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Spring Viremia of Carp Technical Support Services Technical Co-operation Programme United Nations Conference on Environment and Development Viral Haemorrhagic Septicaemia W o r l d Bank White Spot Syndrome Virus W o rld Trade Organization Yellow Head Disease.
Movement1 of live aquatic animals is a necessity for development of aquaculture on both a subsistence and commercial level. However, such movements increase the probability of introducing new pathogens, which can have dire consequences on aquaculture, capture fisheries and related resources, as well as the livelihoods which depend on them. In order to minimize or avoid the risk of pathogen transfer via aquatic animal movements, it is essential that the individuals and organizations involved in such activities appreciate, and participate in, the overall health management process2. The adverse social, economic and environmental impacts that have resulted from the irresponsible or ill-considered movement of live aquatic animals and their products have led to global recognition of the need for health management protocols to protect aquaculture, fisheries resources and the aquatic environment. In many cases, these impacts have been a direct result of the absence of effective national and regional health management strategies. However, formulation of effective quarantine measures3, health certification and guidelines applicable on an international scale is complicated. A wide range of social, economic and environmental circumstances have to be considered, along with the range of aquatic animal species involved and their pathogens and diseases. In addition, differing reasons for moving live aquatic animals and products impose a further set of variables to the process. Nevertheless, the serious impacts of unrestricted regional and international movement of aquatic animals merit international recognition - a fact clearly reflected in the International Aquatic Animal Health Code and the Diagnostic Manual of Aquatic Animal Diseases of the Office international des epizooties4, which provide guidelines and recommendations for reducing the risk of spreading specific pathogens considered relevant to international trade of aquatic animals. Since present international protocols are not always applicable to the disease concerns of aquatic food production and trade in the Asia Region, the need for effective health management protocols that focus on the species and disease problems of this region has been recognized for many years. A regional, as opposed to national, approach is considered appropriate, since many countries in the region share social, economic, industrial, environmental, biological and geographical characteristics. A regionally adopted health management program will facilitate trade, and protect aquatic production (subsistence and commercial) and the environment upon which they depend, from preventable disease incursions. A joint FAO/NACA Asia-Regional Programme on Aquatic Animal Health Management was undertaken to review the need for better health management to support safe movement of live aquatic animals and the applicability of existing international codes on aquatic animal health management, quarantine and health certification, including those of the OIE, the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC), and the International Council for Exploration of the Sea (I CES) to Asian circumstances.
Ter ms used in t his document are defined in Section 3, Definitions, of t he Manual of Procedures. For the purpose of this document, the healt h management process is defined (see the Manual of Procedures, Section 3) as "aquatic animal health management in it s broadest sense, encompassing pre-bor der (exporter), border and post-border (import er) activities, as well as relevant national and regional capacity-building requirement s (infrastructure and specialised expert ise) for addressing healt h management activities, and implement at ion of eff ective national and regional policies and regulatory frameworks required t o r educe the risk of disease spread through movement (intra- and int ernational) of live aquatic animals." 3 Measures devel oped as a r esul t of r isk anal ysis t o reduce t he di sease risks associated w it h the transfer of di sease agents wit h live aquatic animal movements. This usually ref ers to trans-boundary movement s, with pre-border, border, and post-border health management processes, however, such activities are equally applicable to int ranational movement of live aquatic animals. 4 see OIE. 2000a. I nter nati onal Aquati c Ani mal H eal th Code. 3rd edn. Of fi ce International des Epiz oot ies, Pari s, 153 p.; and O IE. 2000b. D iagnostic Manual for Aquatic Animal Diseases. 3rd edn, Of fice I nternat ional des Epizooties, Paris, 237 p.
This review highlighted the fact that the disease risks associated with pathogen transfer in the Asia Region can only be reduced through a broader approach to aquatic animal health management than currently outlined in disease-specific codes of practice (e.g., the OI E code) or in codes and protocols developed specifically for northern hemisphere countries (e.g., the ICES and EIFAC codes)5. In addition, it underlined the need for pre-border (exporter), border and post-border (importer) involvement in the program, to ensure co-operative health management of aquatic animal movement. With the support of an FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) implemented by NACA, the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management f or the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals is a document that was compiled by a group of aquatic animal health experts within and outside the region to assist the development of effective health management procedures for safe movement of live aquatic animals within and between countries in the region. This companion document, the Manual of Procedures f or the Implementation of the Asia Regional Technical Guidelines on Health Management f or the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals, provides background material and detailed technical procedures to assist countries and territories in the Asia Region in implementing the Technical Guidelines.
see Humphrey, J.D. , J.R. Arthur , R. P. Subasinghe and M. J. Phillips. 1997. Aquatic Animal Quarantine and Health Cert ification in Asia. Proceedings of t he Regional Workshop on H ealth and Quarantine G uidelines f or the Responsible M ovement (Introduction and Transfer of Aquatic O rganisms), Bangkok Thailand, 28 January 1996. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. No. 373, 153 p.
A CRON YMS A ND A BB REV IA TIONS.
Acronyms and abbreviations appearing in the Manual of Procedures stand for the following organizations, programs, titles, diseases and pathogens: AAHRI AAPQIS ACIAR ADB ADG AFFA AG APEC AQIS ASEAN AVA BCIS BFRI BFAR BKD CA CAQ CBD CCRF CEFAS CIDA CITES COFI CPE CSIRO CVO DFID DFO DIAS EIFAC ERM ETF EU EUS FAO FDC FHMC FQS GAA GATT GLP ICAR ICES ICLARM IFC IFRTO ITC Aquatic Animal Health Research Institute Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research Asian Development Bank Asia Diagnostic Guide to Aquatic Animal Diseases (Department of) Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry ­ Australia Advisory Group on Aquatic Animal Health Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service Association of Southeast-Asian Nations Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Philippines Bacterial Kidney Disease Competent Authority Centres for Agriculture Quarantine of Indonesia Convention on Biological Diversity Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science of the United Kingdom Canadian International Development Agency Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora Committee on Fisheries of FAO Cytopathological effect Commonwealth Scientific and I ndustrial Research Organisation of Australia Chief Veterinary Officer Department for International Development (United Kingdom) Department of Fisheries and Oceans of Canada Database on Introduced Species European Inland Fishery Advisory Commission Enteric Redmouth Disease Emergency Task Force European Union Epizootic Ulcerative Syndrome Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fish Disease Commission (of OIE) Fish Health Management Committee of Australia Fisheries Quarantine Service of BFAR Global Aquaculture Alliance General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Good Laboratory Practices Indian Council of Agricultural Research International Council for the Exploration of the Sea International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management Iranian Fisheries Company Iranian Fisheries and Training Organization Introduction and Transfers Committee.
IVO IHN IRA IPN ISA JFA LIFDC MAFF MOFARD MOU MRC LEC NACA NC NBFGR NEC NFEC NFRDI NICA NIWA NORAD OIE PPD QA RIA 1 RRC RWG SAARC SEAADCP SEAFDEC -AQD SPS SVC TSS TCP UNCED VHS WB WSSV WTO YHD.
Iranian Veterinary Organization Infectious Haematopoetic Necrosis Import Risk Analysis Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis Infectious Salmon Anaemia Japanese Fishery Agency Low-Income Food-Deficit Country Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development of Sri Lanka Memorandum of Understanding Mekong River Commission Local Emergency Committee Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific National Co-ordinator National Bureau of Fish Genetics Research of I ndia National Emergency Committee National Fisheries Extension Centre of China PR National Fisheries Research and Development Institute of Korea RO National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture of Thailand National Institute for Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd of New Zealand Norwegian Agency for Development Office international d