EARTHBIRD SERIES:.
FUTURE FORESTS.
C A R TO O N M AG A Z I N E.
Teacher's Guide.
We created this guide to give teachers and club leaders great ideas on how to use the Future Forests Cartoon Magazine.
It has many fun ideas for teaching young people.
Because it is young people who can do most for future forests.
O ve r v i ew.
INTRODUCTION C O N T E N T S OF THE FUTURE FORESTS T E A C H E R ' S GUIDE.
The Future Forests Teacher's Guide contains simple explanations of teaching tools and activities for young people, so that it is easy to follow whether you have been teaching for many years or you are working for the first time with young people. It is designed for your use to help young people get actively involved in learning about forests and their community. By using this guide, you will help them learn to participate in planning for the future of their forests and ensuring that they are used wisely. This guide will help you to lead young people in activities that teach skills, generate knowledge about forests and help them to be active in their community.
INTRODUCTION Contents of the Future Forests Teacher's Guide OBJECTIVES AND GUIDE OVERVIEW FUTURE FORESTS TEACHING APPROACH TEACHER'S TOOLS.
F U T U R E FORESTS ACTIVITIES.
UNIT A Activity 1 Activity 2 Activity 3 Why Forests and Trees Are Important GROUP DISCUSSION AND DRAWING PEN PAL CORRESPONDENCE REVIEWING OUR FOREST.
UNIT BU Issues and Challenges Affecting Forests and the Environment Activity 4 MIND MAPPING UNIT C Activity 5 Activity 6 Activity 7 Activity 8 Planning Together for the Future SUSTAINABILITY GAME TRANSECT WALK COMMUNITY MAPPING PRESENTATION.
UNIT D Taking Action Activity 9 PLANNING YOUR OWN ACTIVITY.
A D D I T I O N A L FUTURE FORESTS TEACHING RESOURCES.
TEACHER'S RESOURCE The Future Forests Poster Poster Activity POSTER QUESTIONS AND DRAWINGS TEACHER'S RESOURCE Future Forests English Language Supplement.
O B J E C T I V E S AND GUIDE OVERVIEW.
THE OBJECTIVES OF THE FUTURE FORESTS TEACHER'S GUIDE.
The overall objective of the Future Forests Cartoon Magazine and Teacher's Guide is to involve young people in activities so that they learn skills and gain knowledge that will help them use their forests and trees more wisely. With your help and leadership, the activities presented in this guide provide young people with the opportunity to develop the skills and gain the knowledge that they need to participate in making decisions about how to use their forests and trees wisely. This Teacher's Guide is meant to accompany the Future Forests Magazine. The Future Forests Magazine attempts to introduce messages about the impor tance of forests, threats to forests and why young people should work together to use forests wisely. The Future Forests Teacher's Guide has the following objectives: the messages of the Future Forests Teacher's Guide.
young people to understand how the messages in the Future Forests Magazine are important in their own community.
young people the skills they needed to use their forests wisely.
young people to act and to get involved in using their forests wisely.
students practical skills that will enable them to continue learning after they leave school.
More information about the skills and messages taught by the Future Forests Teacher's Guide is provided in the following pages.
HOW TO USE THE FUTURE FORESTS TEACHER'S GUIDE.
Future Forests Teacher's Guide contains simple explanations of activities and teaching tools so that anyone can use it, whether you have been teaching for many years or whether it is your first time working with a group of young people. Below, we provide six basic steps for using the Future Forests guide. We encourage you to use it in the manner that best suits you, your teaching style and your group of young people. The Future Forests Teacher's Guide contains activities that reinforce the key messages of the Future Forests Magazine and help students and teachers to consider these issues in the context of their community. By doing these activities young people learn about their forests and how they can get involved in using them wisely. The final activities in the guide provide your group of young people with opportunities to do get involved in ensuring that forests are used wisely.
The following six steps will help you prepare to do the Future Forests activities with your group of young people.
Read the Future Forests Teacher's Guide by yourself. To familiarize yourself with the teacher's tools and activities in the Future Forests Teacher's Guide, you should first read it by yourself. This will help you to choose the tools that you might like to use and to plan a schedule for doing the activities with your group. Introduce the Future Forests Magazine to your group of young people. Explain to them the objectives of the Future Forests Magazine and the activities they will be doing. Form teams with your group of young people. Because many of the activities require teams, you might want to organize your young people into teams before doing the activities, so that they can practise working together before starting. You can find information on working in teams in the Teacher's Tools provided in the Introduction. Read the Future Forests Magazine with your group of young people. Depending on your teaching style and your schedule, you can read the entire magazine with your group, or read it with them a few pages at a time. It is important, however, to have your young people read the suggested readings that you will find listed at the beginning of each Unit of the Future Forests Teacher's Guide prior to doing the activities for that Unit. You can use the suggested reading tools from the Teacher's Tools provided in the Introduction in order to make readings fun and interesting and to use reading time to build team skills. Discuss the magazine with your group of young people. Prior to doing the activities, it is a good idea to reinforce the readings by discussing them with your group. You can use the suggested discussion tools from the Teacher's Tools provided in this Introduction in order to make discussions fun and interesting and to use discussion time to build team skills. Do the activities with your group of young people. All the activities are accompanied by stepby-step instructions. As you plan each activity, you might like to consult the checklists and tools in the Teacher's Tools provided in the Introduction.
HOW IS THE FUTURE FORESTS TEACHER'S GUIDE ORGANIZED?.
The Future Forests Teacher's Guide consists of an introduction, activities and information about additional Future Forests teaching resources.
Future Forests Introduction The Introduction introduces the objectives of the Future Forests Teacher's Guide, the skills and messages taught by the Future Forests Teacher's Guide and the Future Forests teaching strategies. The introduction also provides basic instructions on how to use the Future Forests Teacher's Guide, as well as tools for teachers to use when working with teams and when leading group readings, discussions and evaluations. Future Forests Activities In the Future Forests Teacher's Guide you will find activities to use with your group of young people. The activities are divided into four units: UNIT A Why Forests and Trees Are Important UNIT B Issues and Challenges Affecting Forests and the Environment UNIT C Planning Together for the Future UNIT D Taking Action Additional Future Forests Teaching Resources Also provided in the Future Forests Teacher's Guide is information about the other Future Forests materials that are available, these include the Future Forests Poster and the Future Forests English Language Supplement.
SKILLS AND MESSAGES TAUGHT BY THE FUTURE FORESTS TEACHER'S GUIDE.
The Future Forests Teacher's Guide reinforces the messages taught by the magazine and helps to develop skills needed for using forests wisely, which means to use forests without using them up. The Future Forests Magazine essentially provides information about three different issues: Why forests are impor tant; threats to forests; and how and young people can work together to ensure that forests can and that threats to forests do not endanger their future availability. To be successful, the Future Forests Teacher's Guide, goes beyond providing information about forests and why they are important. The Future Forest Teacher's Guide does three things: it provides activities that reinforce the key messages and invites students and teachers to consider these issues in the context of their community; it provides them with activities that encourages them to take action and provide them with opportunities to do so and lastly, it tries to give students practical skills that will enable them to continue learning after they leave school, to have a sustainable livelihood, and to live sustainable lives. The following list demonstrates the types of skills your group of young people will need if they are to par ticipate in making good decisions about their environment and use their forests wisely.
The ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing. This includes the ability to: debate communicate negotiate interviewing and observation skills presentation skills language skills The ability to think about systems. This includes the ability to: organize information make connections between causes and effects think holistically solve problems The ability to think in time, to forecast, to think ahead, and to plan. This includes the ability to: visualize the future solve problems plan and set goals The ability to think critically about value issues. This includes the ability to: appreciate the opinions of others formulate ones own opinion compare and contrast ideas and opinions and to rank ideas.
The ability to separate number, quantity, quality, and value. This includes the ability to: organize information solve problems prioritise rank sor t group ideas and concepts present the information and ideas once organized The capacity to move from awareness to knowledge to action. This includes the ability to: gather information solve problems analyze set goals organize monitor progress evaluate plan The ability to work co-operatively with other people. This includes the ability to: work in groups delegate tasks make decisions in a group share and divide tasks share information and to learn from and teach one another solve problems The capacity to use these processes: knowing, inquiring, acting, judging, imagining, connecting, valuing, and choosing. This includes the ability to: assess ones own knowledge set learning goals learn on one's own learn from experiences.
On the following pages you will find a table that will help you to understand which activities teach which of these skills.
O U T L I N E OF THE TEACHER'S GUIDE.
WHY FORESTS AND TREES ARE IMPORTANT.
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES AFFECTING FORESTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT The ability to work co-operatively with other people. The ability to think about systems. The ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing.
Skills taught in this unit Readings in this unit Messages in this unit Unit activities 6.
The ability to work co-operatively with other people. The ability to think in time, to forecast, to think ahead, and to plan. The ability to separate number, quantity, quality, and value. The ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing. THE FOREST CALLS Magazine pages 2-3 FORESTS ARE FUTURISTIC Magazine pages 4-5 FORESTS HERE AND FORESTS THERE Magazine pages 6-7.
WOODY'S WORRIES Magazine pages 8-11.
will need forests in the future. Forests are important for the future as well as the present everywhere in the world. Forests are part of everyday life. Forests and trees are important for young people. There are many different types of forest: all forests are valuable. Forests and trees are important to people all over the world. Forests and trees are important to city dwellers as well as people in rural areas.
are many pressures on the forests and problems for the future; forests are in danger. Forests and trees are linked with the welfare of people in numerous ways. Forests and trees play many important roles (some of which are not immediately apparent). Our dependence on trees and forests puts pressure on them. The environment must be healthy if it is to supply the resources we need. Forests and trees are important to city dwellers as well as people in rural areas. There are different ways of managing forests and trees.
Activity 1 GROUP DISCUSSION AND DRAWING Activity 2 PEN PAL CORRESPONDENCE Activity 3 REVIEWING OUR FOREST.
Activity 4 MIND MAPPING.
PLANNING TOGETHER FOR THE FUTURE.
TAKING ACTION.
Skills taught in this unit.
The ability to think critically about value issues. The ability to work co-operatively with other people. The ability to think about systems The ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing.
The capacity to move from awareness to knowledge to action. The ability to work co-operatively with other people.
Readings in this unit.
TEAMWORK FOR FORESTS Magazine pages 12-17.
LET'S GET STARTED Magazine pages 18-21 GET CONNECTED! Magazine pages 22-23.
can be solved if we work together and use teamwork. All of us have a part to play in the management of forests. Forests need to be used wisely so that they are available in the future. Everyone has a part in planning for the wise use of forests. Everyone is responsible for using forests wisely. Good plans are flexible and change as needs and uses change. Forests and the environment are important to young people.
are many things that we can do to make a difference.
Messages in this unit.
Activity 5 SUSTAINABILITY GAME Activity 6 TRANSECT WALK Activity 7 COMMUNITY MAPPING Activity 8 PRESENTATION.
Activity 9 PLANNING YOUR OWN ACTIVITY.
Unit activities 7.
F U T U R E FORESTS TEACHING APPROACH.
USING THE FUTURE FORESTS TEACHER'S GUIDE TO TEACH.
Each of us has our own way of instructing or explaining ideas or things to young people. Whether you are a teacher with years of experience in a classroom, a youth leader or a parent, you will have developed your own teaching skills through your experience with young people. This guide aims to help you use your experience and skills to encourage young people to learn about forests, to get involved and to think and make decisions on their own. The Future Forests Teacher's Guide contains simple explanations about activities and teaching tools so that you will have an easy time using it, whether you have been teaching for many years or it is your first time working with a group of young people. This guide is not an instruction manual ­ you know your community and your group of young people better than we do ­ but rather a plan of activities that will help build the skills and experiences that young people need in order to get involved in using their forests wisely. Although we provide information and suggest strategies that you might find useful and interesting, we encourage you to do the activities in the way you think best suits you and your group. The information includes tips and ideas that you may find useful for leading your young people in learning by doing and working in teams. Depending on your interest and your experience, you can use as many or as few of these tips and ideas for learning by doing and working in teams as you like. We encourage you, however, to read the following information and consider how these strategies might be useful in working with your particular group of young people.
FUTURE FORESTS STRATEGIES: LEARNING BY DOING.
The goal of Future Forests is to encourage young people to become active in helping their environment, which means that much of the learning involves young people taking part in activities, or learning by doing. Star ting out slowly at first, the activities get young people out of their seats and involved in their community. We call this strategy learning by doing, or active learning. You may already be using active learning with your young people. We encourage it because it helps to encourage young people's involvement and participation in their community. Involvement and participation are the principal goals of Future Forests.
Getting young people involved. What does this mean? Why do it? By getting involved, young people have new experiences. These experiences teach them not only how to do things, but show them that they can do things. Young people learn that they can take responsibility, make real decisions and set priorities.
Getting involved and being active are very good ways of learning the important social skills that young people need to be successful in life. Involvement helps young people to learn the skills of debate, communication, negotiation and individual and group decision-making. And learning these skills represents the first step towards learning how individual, group, and even national politics work. Through getting involved, young people are encouraged to become active in making good decisions about how they use their forests and trees, rather than just using them without considering the consequences of their actions. Young people who have experience of participating in activities in a safe environment will be better prepared to participate in decision-making when they are adults and become more involved in wider society. When young people have learning experiences related to their own communities and their own lives, they will participate more fully and demonstrate more commitment to learning.
FUTURE FORESTS STRATEGIES: WORKING WITH TEAMS.
What is a team? A team can be made up of as few as two people. Generally the largest recommended team has six members, because in smaller teams each member participates more, and smaller teams can work more quickly. If your group of young people is large, you may have to use teams that have more than six members. Don't worry, for larger teams do have other advantages. For example, they generate more ideas and often deal better with complex ideas. Why work with teams? Teamwork can be fun and rewarding, and will help teach your young people to work together. It can help to enhance and improve learning. Working together is also an important skill that young people need to learn in order to use their forests wisely. Preparing to work with teams Teamwork takes practice. Most of the activities in the Future Forests Teacher's Guide not only suggest that you split your group into teams, but in fact depend on your group of young people to work together to complete them. However, putting young people in teams without first preparing them is a bit like asking somebody to do a job without giving them any instructions. This information provided in the following pages helps you to give your young people instructions and guidance for teamwork. You might want to use the suggestions provided to get your teams into practice before you start the activities. You can also try using several games or other activities of your own with your teams to accustom them to working together.
T E A C H E R ' S TOOLS.
TIPS AND A CHECKLIST FOR WORKING WITH TEAMS.
Because many of the activities require teams, you should organize your group of young people into teams before doing the activities, so that they can practise working together before starting. The following tips and checklist will help you.
Tips for choosing members of a team Here are some general guidelines for forming teams with your group of young people: teams containing young people of different or mixed abilities and learning styles are best letting young people select their own teams is generally not successful, although young people may provide you with their opinions when you are choosing teams teams that stay together for longer periods (four to six weeks) form stronger bonds, develop more complex collaborative skills and can perform more complex tasks teams should remain together long enough to feel successful the best policy is to trust your instincts ­ you know your young people best working in teams in a crowded classroom with many desks can be quite difficult, you might want to move your class outside, they will have more room to move around and interact.
Here is a checklist of things to help you work with your teams.
C H E C K L I S T FOR WORKING WITH TEAMS.
Noise control. Develop and practise a Quiet or Zero-Noise signal. For example, when you.
put up your hand, everyone stops talking and listens to you. The closer young people are seated to one another, the quieter their voices can be. Practise "arm's length voices" ­ when working together, young people should use voices that cannot be heard farther away than an arm's length. Ask young people to remember that if only one person in a team is speaking at a time, larger teams should result in fewer voices, therefore less noise. Ask young people to think up their own solutions to noise.
Monitoring. Circulate among your teams and observe their progress. Monitor discussions to.
check for understanding and to be aware of individuals who are not participating.
Roles. Structure tasks through roles. Have team leaders, recorders, reporters, timekeepers,.
Individual responsibility. Call on individuals within each team to demonstrate a skill or.
respond to questions: this ensures that they continue to feel responsible to learn personally and do not always rely on other team members.
Deadlines and tasks. When assigning tasks to your teams, give them a specific amount of.
time within which to finish each task.
Instructions. Show, don't tell, instructions to your teams. Try to model the steps in a task or.
activity for the each of the teams. Ask team members to try explaining to each other instructions for tasks that you have given them. This makes sure they understand prior to starting the task.
Questions. Answer team questions only. Only answer questions that nobody in the team.
knows the answer to. Team members should try to help each other with individual questions: this will encourage team members to rely on one another.
GROUP OR TEAM DECISION MAKING TOOLS.
Many of the activities require your group of young people to make team or group decisions. The following two tools are fun ways for your teams to make decisions together.
Agreement circles Have your young people stand in a circle. Those who agree with the issue or idea being discussed then step into the centre. Fist-to-Five Make a statement and ask your young people to show how much they agree or disagree with the statement. Those who strongly agree hold up five fingers. A fist announces zero agreement. One finger announces strong disagreement. Two fingers signal an inclination toward disagreement, three fingers indicate medium support and four fingers indicate support but not necessarily strong support.
GROUP OR TEAM READING TOOLS.
Reading the Future Forests Magazine can be more fun and interesting if you use the team reading tools that are provided below. Using these tools can also help your young people to practise working together as a team.
Paired reading Two young people sit next to each other, each (if possible) with his or her own copy of the text. They take turns reading paragraphs from the text. Round-robin reading In teams of three or four, young people take turns reading paragraphs from the text. Read-N-Quiz Use one of the two tools above, but after a person reads a selection, he or she asks the group a quiz question about the content. The person to his or her left has the first chance to answer without looking at the book. Other team members may offer help or add to the discussion as needed. Think-Pair-Share Individuals read the material silently, but at the end of each reading Think-Pair-Share (described at the end of the Group Discussion Tools provided below) to discuss a question about the lesson.
GROUP OR TEAM DISCUSSION TOOLS.
Many of the activities suggested in this guide involve discussing forests and trees with your group. To help you to incorporate learning by doing and teamwork into discussions in the activities, you can use the tools and tips below. We also suggest that you review the relevant Future Forests Magazine reading by discussing it with your young people prior to the corresponding activity.
Here is a checklist of things to help you lead discussions with your teams. C H E C K L I S T FOR LEADING DISCUSSIONS.
Ask questions and then wait at least three seconds after asking to allow the young person.
time to respond.
Ask follow-up questions, for example: Why? Do the rest of you agree? Can you elaborate?.
Can you tell me more? Can you give me an example?.
Withhold judgement. Respond to student answers in a non-judgmental fashion.  To promote active listening, ask your young people to summarize or explain in their own.
words what you have told them, or what other members of the group have said during the discussion, for example: Could you please summarize the point?.
Survey the group, for example: How many people agree with this point of view? Hands up.  Ask the young people to call on others in the group for answers, for example ask one of.
them to choose another to respond to a question.
Ask the young people to explain their thinking. Ask them to describe how they arrived at.
their answers.
Ask different young people to answer, and avoid only asking those with raised hands.
Three-step interview Young people form pairs, with one member interviewing the other about an announced topic, for example "Why are forests important to you?" Give the interviewers three minutes to gather information. When the time is up, interviewers switch roles and become interviewees. Then have two pairs join to form teams of four persons. Each of the pairs take turns telling the other what their pair had to say. This tool can be used as practice for working in teams, and also for opinions, questions, predictions, evaluations, sharing book reports, etc. Round-table answering A round-table approach can be used to get team members to work together to prepare multiple answers to questions. Young people sit in teams of three or more, with one piece of paper and one pencil. The teacher asks a question that has multiple answers, for example "What do we use trees for?" Each team member writes one answer on the paper, then passes the paper and pencil clockwise to the next person. Give the teams five minutes to write their answers. When the time is up, everybody sees which teams have given the most answers. Ask teams to consider ways they could work together better to give more and better answers. Round-robin answering This is like round-table answering, except that team members share their answers orally, generating responses around the table. You can also use this activity for fun, for example asking the group to name all the animals it can think of. Think-Pair-Share This is a four-step discussion exercise that helps young people to learn to listen while a question is being asked. Young people first LISTEN to the question, then THINK of a response without raising hands, then make a PAIR with another team member to discuss their responses, and then SHARE their responses with the whole team. Setting time limits for the discussion helps it move smoothly.Young people are able to rehearse responses mentally and verbally, and each of them has an opportunity to speak. Both young people and teachers have increased opportunities to think and become involved in group discussion.
GROUP OR TEAM EVALUATION TOOL.
Another practical issue that you will have to deal with while working with your group of young people is evaluation of the student learning that occurs. There are no tests provided with the Future Forests Teacher's Guide, but you can use the KWL Chart (what we Know; what we Want to know; what we have Learned) to evaluate how much your young people have learned. This evaluation tool can be used at the beginning and end of each unit or activity to help you gauge your young people's progress and to assess learning after the lesson. This tool can also be used to help young people to remember what they already know before starting a new lesson unit and to increase excitement about a new topic. You will need chart paper or a blackboard.
On a large sheet of chart paper or a blackboard, sketch a KWL chart (see below). Explain or review the meaning of each letter (K for what we Know, W for what we Want to know, and L for what we have Learned). Introduce a topic that you would like to evaluate and ask the group to list what they already Know about that particular topic. Record the ideas in the K column ­ the first column of the chart. Encourage every person in the group to give a response. When the K column is full, repeat the listing process for the W column: what they Want to know about this particular topic. Allow thinking time as necessary between responses. Ask for clarification of the meaning of ideas that don't seem to fit. When the lesson is completed, get the young people to reflect on what they have Learned by having them list items in the L column.
Example of a what a KWL chart might look like for the Future Forests Magazine Unit "Why Forests and Trees Are Important".
WHAT WE KNOW.
WHAT WE WANT TO KNOW WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED.
we use trees for firewood we use trees for building houses.
what else do we use trees and forests for?.
paper is made from trees ink can be made from leaves trees protect rivers and lakes glue can be made from trees medicines can be made from trees trees are important for people all over the world forests give plants and animals a place to live trees are even important in deserts trees are even important in cities and towns, they provide shade trees can provide food trees can help protect crops and fuel.
Future Forests Activities.
U N I T A WHY FORESTS AND TREES ARE IMPORTANT.
This unit will help your young people to learn why trees and forests are important to them. It contains the three activities listed below. Before doing each exercise, you might want to read or re-read the relevant readings of the Future Forests Magazine and discuss them with your group. When making the readings and discussing them with your group, you can use the reading and discussion tools provided in the Introduction of the Future Forests Teacher's Guide.
MESSAGES THAT YOUR GROUP SHOULD LEARN IN UNIT A.
Everyone will need forests in the future. Forests are important for the future as well as the present every where in the world. Forests are part of everyday life. Forests and trees are important for young people. There are many different types of forest: all forests are valuable. Forests and trees are important to people all over the world. Forests and trees are important to city dwellers as well as those in rural areas.
READINGS FROM THE FUTURE FORESTS MAGAZINE FOR UNIT A.
The Forest Calls pages 2-3 Forests Are Futuristic pages 4-5 Forests Here and Forests There pages 6-7.
ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT A.
Activity 1: GROUP DISCUSSION AND DRAWING This activity helps your young people to begin thinking about how trees and forests are important to them. Activity 2: PEN PAL CORRESPONDENCE This activity helps your young people to begin thinking about how trees and forests will continue to be impor tant to them throughout their lives. Activity 3: REVIEWING OUR FORESTS This activity helps your young people begin to think about and compare how trees and forests are impor tant to themselves and to people all over the world.
