FAO Fisheries Report No.656.
ISSN XX10-13XX.
Report of the.
NINETEENTH SESSION OF THE COORDINATING WORKING PARTY ON FISHERY STATISTICS Nouméa, New Caledonia, 10-13 July 2001.
FAO Fisheries Report Nº 656.
Report of the Nineteenth Session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics.
Nouméa, New Caledonia, 10-13 July 2001.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2001.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104668-9.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2001.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document is the report of the Nineteenth Session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP), held in Nouméa, New Caledonia, from 10 to 13 July 2001.
FAO. Report of the nineteenth session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics. Nouméa, New Caledonia, 10-13 July 2001. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 656. Rome, FAO. 2001. 91p.
ABSTRACT The report of the nineteenth session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP), Nouméa, New Caledonia, 10-13 July 2001, is presented. Topics discussed were: changes in membership of CWP; review of recommendations from CWP-18; reports of intersessional meetings; Meeting of Agencies Participating in FIGIS/FIRMs (9 July 2001); reports on intersessional developments in Agency programmes in fishery statistics; STATLANT issues; elasmobranch statistics; data implications of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing and Agency catch certification schemes; discard data availability and dissemination; integration of fishery statistics and joint dissemination; charging and dissemination policies for supply of data; record of vessels fishing on the high sea (Compliance Agreement); statistical classifications, i.e. fishing-related activities (e.g. ISIC), vessels (e.g. ISSCFV), species (e.g. ISSCAAP and ASFIS); coordination of descriptions of national statistical methodologies; role of the CWP in relation to statistical development; and Handbook of Fishery Statistics ­ completion and revisions.
Distribution: FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fishery Officer FAO Member Countries CWP Members Participants.
v CONTENTS Page.
1 OPENING OF THE SESSION AND ADOPTION OF AGENDA (Agenda item 1).
The Nineteenth Session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP) was held at the office of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Nouméa, New Caledonia from 10 to 13 July 2001. Nineteen experts representing the following member organizations participated in CWP-19: · Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT); · Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); · Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC); · Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC); · International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT); · International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES); · Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO); · Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC); and · Statistical Office of the European Communities (EU/Eurostat). An expert from the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and a national expert from New Caledonia participated at the invitation of SPC. National experts from Indonesia and the Philippines participated as nominees of FAO. The list of Participants is given in Appendix.
2. The Chairperson of the Eighteenth Session, Mr David Cross of Eurostat, opened the Nineteenth Session and invited Mr Yves Corbel, Deputy Director of SPC, to address the meeting. Mr Corbel welcomed participants to Nouméa and SPC. He noted the long history of the CWP with its origin in the Atlantic and its recent extension to other oceans. He pointed out that SPC was the first non-Atlantic agency to join the CWP and the first to host a CWP session. Mr Corbel outlined the current role of the Oceanic Fisheries Programme of SPC and how this was likely to remain important under the new Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) when the Commission becomes operational in the next few years. He said that there are major issues facing the new Commission including by-catches, IUU fishing, flag-of-convenience vessels and VMS and noted that these had also become issues for CWP. He said that with its geographic and subject areas expanding, CWP had a challenging future. He wished the meeting well and declared the Nineteenth Session of CWP open. Mr Corbel's Opening Statement is given Appendix.
3. Following some modifications, the Agenda was adopted and the revised agenda is shown in Appendix.
The documents provided to the Session are listed in Appendix 4 and the acronyms used in the Report are listed in Appendix.
APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON (Agenda item 2).
Mr Tim Lawson (SPC) was unanimously elected Chairperson and Mr David Cross (Eurostat) was unanimously elected Vice-Chairperson for the Nineteenth Session of CWP and the following intersessional period. NAFO expressed appreciation to Mr Cross's active role since the Eighteenth Session and this was endorsed by the participants.
Various participants were appointed rapporteurs for different agenda items.
2 CHANGES IN MEMBERSHIP OF THE CWP (Agenda item 3; Document CWP/18/3).
The Secretary reported that IATTC had been admitted to CWP in 2000, bringing the number of participating organizations to twelve, or an increase of four since the CWP was reconstituted in 1995. He also noted that the South-East Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) had expressed interest in becoming a participating organization of CWP. The Chairperson expressed the view that SEAFDEC participation in CWP would be very welcome. REVIEW OF RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CWP-18 (Agenda item 4; Document CWP/18/4).
Follow-up to recommendations and other items requiring action from CWP-18 was reviewed, and the main actions are described in Appendix.
Progress had been made in following up on most CWP-18 recommendations. However, no progress had been made on recommendations in paragraphs 162 and 163 of the CWP-18 Report and it was agreed by CWP19 to reiterate these, as follows:.
Despite trends in the opposite direction, CWP recommended that efforts should be pursued with classification maintenance agencies to make trade classifications for fishery commodities more detailed, especially for species of little volume of trade, but for which there are conservation concerns.
Although some of the possible reasons for discrepancies among fishery trade data of CWP agencies were identified, CWP recommended that Eurostat, FAO and OECD should investigate the causes of discrepancies in published data and should attempt to eliminate these discrepancies or, where the differences were due to the use of differing concepts in the compilation of the data, provide adequate documentation in the publications explaining the concepts used. REPORTS OF INTERSESSIONAL MEETINGS (Agenda item 5; Documents CWP/19/2(A-D)) CWP WG on Publication of Integrated Catch Statistics for the Atlantic 10. As recommended at CWP-18 an intersessional meeting of the Working Group on Publication of Integrated Catch Statistics for the Atlantic was held at ICES Headquarters in February 2000 and the report was published (see CWP-19/2(A)). That meeting endorsed the proposal for the compilation and publication of an integrated data-file for the Atlantic using FISHSTAT Plus software and established the principles to be used in the production of the file (see paragraphs 140 to 144). CWP WG on Precautionary Approach Terminology 11. The Atlantic RFBs (ICCAT, ICES, NAFO) and FAO met at ICES Headquarters in Copenhagen, Denmark, in February 2000 to explore possibilities for agreement on the concepts and terminology to be used in application of the Precautionary Approach. The report of the Working Group on Precautionary Approach Terminology was published (see CWP19/2(B)). The WG identified and reviewed differences in the approaches anticipated by the participants, particularly ICES, NAFO and ICCAT.
3 12. ICES, as documented at the Copenhagen meeting, has adopted a process to apply the Precautionary Approach in the advice given to its clients. In addition, significant work on reliability analysis and on the development of reference points was undertaken with funding support supplied by the European Union. Discussions on how the Precautionary Approach could be applied at the management level is ongoing. 13. The NAFO Scientific Council, in response to the report, has reviewed the Precautionary Approach framework developed in 1997. The NAFO Scientific Council and ICES frameworks are similar in concept but differ primarily with respect to the Blim reference point and the associated course of action. The NAFO Fisheries Commission and Scientific Council are continuing discussions on the final formulation of the Precautionary Approach framework. The Scientific Council has applied the existing framework to three candidate stocks in 2000 and 2001. 14. It may be anticipated that at some point it will be of use to reconvene a meeting between the RFBs in the area for continued discussions on concepts and terminology. Meetings of Tuna Agencies 15. An intersessional meeting of tuna agencies took place in Nouméa, New Caledonia, on 11 July 2000 in conjunction with the thirteenth session of the Standing Committee on Tuna and Billfish (SCTB13). The meeting was informal as ICCAT was not able to attend. Substantive discussions dealt with the exchange of vessel records as a means of combating IUU fishing. SPC undertook to circulate to the other tuna agencies a copy of the vessel listing compiled from a variety of sources, including the FFA Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels, the FFA Violations and Prosecutions database, and logsheet, landings and observer data held by SPC. ICCAT has already circulated a list, but this only covers identified IUU vessels. IATTC publishes its fleet list. 16. The Second Meeting of Secretariats of Tuna Agencies and Programmes was held at FAO, Rome on 23 February 2001. Representatives from CCSBT, IATTC, ICCAT, IOTC and SPC attended the meeting. The meeting noted that it had been agreed that each agency would circulate a list of vessels operating within their area of competence to other tuna agencies and programs, and that SPC had circulated a list in response to that agreement. The representative from IOTC distributed a diskette containing data on vessels operating in its area of competence. The list was basic data and did not include restricted information such as vessel owner names. IATTC continues to publish its fleet list (see paragraphs 17 and 43 below). 17. The IATTC representative advised that a list of known purse seine vessels licensed by members and those not licensed but known to be operating in the area of competence had been compiled. The full list would be circulated to other agencies when arrangements within IATTC permitted. A list of longline vessels would be compiled next. The ICCAT representative advised that lists had been prepared for IUU, northern albacore and bigeye fishing vessels, and vessels which had been identified for scrapping by some countries. Mr Richard Grainger, FAO, attended the meeting briefly and advised that the development of a record of fishing vessels authorized to fish on the high seas by FAO was progressing slowly and so far only four countries have provided data. Only basic data, as set out in the Compliance Agreement, would be collected initially, but additional fields can be added if countries agree so as to make the data more useful. 18. According to the Compliance Agreement, data diffusion would be restricted to Governments of Parties to the Agreements and Regional Fishery Bodies. FAO would, however, be interested.
4 in receiving listings of vessels from regional fishery bodies which could be included in a parallel database (accessible to whoever the data providers decide), both to verify the Record data, and to attempt to estimate global fishing capacity. CWP recommended that Vessel Name, National registration number, Flag, Fishing gear, Size, including LOA and capacity of hold, Party providing authorization to fish and Provider organization, where available, be exchanged among tuna agencies and programs. 19. The meeting considered that current practices for the release in the public domain of catch and effort data should continue, noting that there would be merit in data being published on the basis of aggregation to monthly levels rather than, say, quarterly, as is the current situation in some cases. Meeting of Agencies Participating in FIGIS/FIRMS 20. CWP reviewed the Report of the Meeting of Agencies Participating in FIGIS/FIRMS which was held on 9 July 2001 in Nouméa (Appendix 7) and agreed that FIGIS/FIRMS offers a good opportunity to facilitate improved reporting on fishery status and trends through cooperation amongst CWP agencies. It was agreed that progress on the development of FIGIS/FIRMS should be reviewed at CWP-20. INTERSESSIONAL DEVELOPMENTS IN AGENCY PROGRAMMES IN FISHERY STATISTICS (includes observer and national reports) (Agenda item 6; Documents CWP/19 Agency Reports) CCAMLR 21. The main development since CWP-18 has been the implementation of a catch documentation scheme for toothfish (Dissostichus spp.) in 2000 as part of a set of Conservation Measures introduced to combat the problem of IUU fishing on toothfish stocks. This scheme monitors the international trade in toothfish; identifies the origins of toothfish imported into or exported from the territories of Contracting Parties; determines whether toothfish imported into or exported from the territories of Contracting Parties, if caught in the Convention Area, was caught in a manner consistent with CCAMLR conservation measures; and gathers catch data for the scientific evaluation of stocks. CCSBT 22. A Trade Information Scheme (TIS) was implemented for southern bluefin tuna in June 2000. The TIS provides export information on the nation undertaking fishing together with the quantity, location, time and method of capture of southern bluefin tuna. The scheme operates by requiring all exports of southern bluefin tuna to a CCSBT member to be accompanied by TIS documentation. The dominance of Japan in the southern bluefin tuna market ensures good compliance with the TIS. 23. A database manager was appointed and will commence work during September 2001. At this time, it is intended that an interim database be developed as soon as possible to hold aggregated data (including catch and effort, annual adjusted catch by fleet and size structured data) provided by members and relevant non-members. 24. During June 2001, the CCSBT Secretariat circulated a questionnaire in order to document the existing catch (and effort) data collection systems of members and non-members. The results.
5 of the questionnaire will be compared with requirements proposed in the CCSBT Scientific Research Program and recommendations will be made for any necessary implementation or improvement of data collection systems. Eurostat 25. Since CWP-18 Eurostat has increased the coverage in the NewCronos domain FISH database, largely by reformatting the data available from other CWP agencies. 26. The routine collection of catch landings and aquaculture production statistics under the terms of European Economic Area (EEA) legislation has continued. Modifications to the legislation on catch statistics have been proposed in order to meet the requirement for the improved availability of catch statistics for Elasmobranch species. 27. Development of socio-economic data for fisheries has been restricted by lack of staff resources. 28. The publication programme of a Yearbook of Fishery Statistics, an annual CD-ROM on the contents of the NewCronos database and short reports in the Eurostat series "Statistics in Focus" has been maintained. 29. Eurostat made a major contribution to the compilation of an integrated data-file for Atlantic catch statistics and has aided the ICES and NAFO secretariats in installing FISHSTAT Plus software on their computer systems. 30. Close contact with EEA national authorities is maintained through the annual meetings of the Working Group "Fishery Statistics", through bilateral contacts and by means of a twice-yearly Newsletter. The development of contacts with the EU Candidate Countries is proceeding well and the NewCronos database includes much data for these countries. 31. Reviews of data quality are playing an important role in the development and implementation of the programme of fishery statistics. 32. The developments and implementation of the statistical programme depends heavily of the good relationship and collaboration developed with the Commission's Directorate-General for Fisheries (DG FISH), the main customer for Eurostat's data. At the same time a central point in the programme is the collaboration with the CWP and its member agencies. FAO 33. FAO continued its annual global statistical programme (catch, aquaculture, fleet, fishers, production and trade of fishery commodities) and the regional catch data for the statistical areas 34 and 37 without any significant change. CWP was informed that work was again in progress to update the calculation of Supply/Utilization Accounts. 34. FAO fishery data are used internally in policy and trend studies, and are also widely used for global analyses. The array of data collected by FAO on a geographical basis responds to the needs of describing essentially an economic activity contributing to the achievements of national social, economic and nutritional goals. Renewed impact to the FAO programme came from the work of the Advisory Committee on Fisheries Research (ACFR) Working Party on Status and Trend Reporting in Fisheries and by the increasing interest of users in Internet disseminated.
6 fishery data, where most of the fishery statistics held by FAO are accessible without restrictions as downloadable databases. 35. Major projects completed in the intersessional period included: · rationalization and expansion of the ASFIS species list; · the extension back to 1970 of the separation between aquaculture and capture production, including the regional datasets of the Mediterranean and Black Sea and the Eastern Central Atlantic and data allocation to sub-areas or division; · the systematization of STATLANT A data in preparation for electronic dissemination of catches from the Red Sea and Gulf, for 1986-1999 and the Southeast Atlantic (former ICSEAF area), for 1975-1999; · preparatory work for the re-organization of catch statistics on a large ecosystems approach; · the inclusion of the Las Palmas Survey in the FISHSTAT PLUS dissemination package; · the publication of the revised Conversion Factors from landed to nominal catch weight; and · the finalization of the draft of a revised CWP Handbook of Fishery Statistics. 36. Collaboration with CWP agencies resulted in intensified data exchange with tuna agencies and CCAMLR, and in a revised publication of conversion factors with Eurostat. 37. Improvements on aspects of data processing concentrated on the development of the fishing fleet system as an Oracle database, and on the migration of capture fisheries and aquaculture databases to the same environment. Two issues of the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics Aquaculture Production (formerly published as a Fishery Circular) were produced, from the Oracle platform database. Work was in progress for achieving the same output for the Capture Production Yearbook. Collaboration with the FIGIS project in this respect had required shifting some resources and redefining internal priorities. 38. The delivery system to accompany forms despatch and the design of electronic forms to report the STATLANT inquiry had been further developed. Priority was given to the development of electronic forms to report aquaculture production by species and some structural characteristics, and fishery commodity production and trade. 39. Despite continued efforts to facilitate data submission, no significant progress could be reported in improvements to the timeliness of the dissemination of world data sets, largely due to the poor respect of deadlines by national reporters in returning data to FAO. Further efforts had been made recently to facilitate reporting by countries such as posting in FTP the FISHSTAT NS-1 questionnaires and intensifying e-mail communication with national reporting offices, but it is too early to conclude whether any positive result is likely to occur in disseminating the 2000 data set. 40. Methodological work on concepts and data collection was achieved through regional workshops and seminars (e.g. on structural aquaculture statistics at a Workshop on World Census of Agriculture 2000 for selected Asian countries, on inland fisheries at the Eighteenth Session Asia-Pacific Commission on Agriculture Statistics, on the development of a Glossary of aquaculture terms) and on sample survey data collection (ARTFISH and associated packages). At national level the field programme of fishery statistical development concentrated on Africa (e.g. Angola, Burundi, Mozambique, Congo PDR, Madagascar); two seminars were held in China to identify methodological shortcomings and possibly rectify the likely overestimation of fishery production. There is increasing concern for the loss of reliability of statistics of some.
7 major Asian fish producers, which requires shifting attention to statistical development work in that region. IATTC 41. The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), with headquarters in La Jolla, California, USA, was established in 1950. It has obtained and compiled statistics on fisheries in the eastern Pacific Ocean (EPO) that can harvest tunas and tuna-like species, and the various species taken by these fisheries, as required to meet mandates for monitoring and management of fisheries. These statistics include data on vessels and gear configuration, skipper and navigator identification and performance, catches, landings, imports/exports, biological data, and various other statistics for ad hoc studies as required. Sources of information include fishing vessels, canners and fish processors, transhipping agencies, import/export companies, customs agencies, and various other government and fisheries agencies. The IATTC obtains data from its scientific observer program, and it has assisted in the design and implementation of national logbook and observer programs of various countries participating in fisheries under the purview of the IATTC, from which it also obtains data. 42. Since CWP-18 the IATTC has undertaken a complete restructuring of its major database and information systems. This has involved moving from a mainframe data processing system to a PC-based system using Microsoft SQL as the principal database engine. The principal intent of this major undertaking was to integrate the information from the various scientific and information systems used to monitor and develop recommendations for management action into a single system in such a way as to simplify identification and use of the best available data and analysis techniques. Data are maintained in original resolution detail (e.g. individual set data), but information is published only in summary form that prevents identification of individual company or vessel operations. 43. The IATTC has established a vessel registry that includes, for each vessel authorized to fish in the Convention Area, vessel name (previous name if known), registration number, port of registry, photograph showing registration number, flag (previous if any), international radio call sign, name and address of registered owner(s), when and where built, overall length, depth, beam, fish hold capacity in cubic metres, and carrying capacity in metric tons, name and address of operator(s)/manager(s), type of fishing method or methods, gross tonnage, and power of main engines. In addition to the registry, the IATTC maintains a list of vessels found to be operating in the Convention Area but which are not authorized to fish therein (i.e. are not on the registry). Flag nations for vessels not authorized to fish will be contacted by the IATTC for further information and action. 44. The IATTC promulgates management actions restricting fishing activities in the EPO for conservation of fisheries resources. Real-time statistics are used to monitor the fishery, initiate restrictions and monitor compliance. 45. The IATTC recognizes the need for reliable market and trade data to track catches from origin (convention areas of the regional bodies, and ocean) to location of final processing (e.g. canning, or gilled and gutted for fresh fish market) for entry into the retail market. Developments in transportation and market systems have provided increased access to catches of artisanal fisheries, which may make significant catches of some species, to the global fresh fish market. This has led to an increased need for detailed trade statistics for use in estimation of total catch by species. This is particularly true for billfishes and other species which are generally marketed through these fresh-frozen fish markets.
8 46. The IATTC has established a Tuna Tracking System, the sole purpose of which is to enable "dolphin safe" tuna to be distinguished from non-dolphin safe tuna from the time it is caught to the time it is ready for retail sale. This system is based on the premise that dolphin safe tuna shall, from the time of capture, during unloading, storage, transfer, and processing, be kept separate from non-dolphin safe tuna. Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation Program (AIDCP) Dolphin Safe Certificates may be issued in accordance with the guidelines in the Resolution to Establish Procedures for AIDCP Dolphin Safe Tuna Certification. 47. The IATTC has made major modifications to its biological data collections systems in response to changes in the nature of fisheries operating in the EPO. This has required significant increases in the monitoring of vessel activities and unloadings. 48. The IATTC has taken steps to increase monitoring and to reduce the catch and mortality of non-target and protected species, including a requirement to retain all catches on board and to monitor their disposition on return to port and to take steps to release non-target species. Data on discards are regularly published in various reports and scientific publications. 49. The IATTC Permanent Working Group on Compliance has proposed consideration of a requirement for vessels fishing in the Convention Area for species under the purview of the IATTC to operate under a VMS system. A plan for evaluation of various types of available systems and an implementation plan have been developed. 50. The IATTC considers public domain data to be that data from which the operations of individual companies and/or vessels may not be identified. Catch and effort data considered in the public domain is at the resolution of 5° latitude by 5° longitude by quarter. Access to confidential data for scientific purposes may be considered on application to the Director. 51. The IATTC has established a website (http://www.iattc.org) with English and Spanish versions. The site provides direct access to such as the annual background reports for Commission meetings, reports on the fishery and statistics, stock assessments, and the resolutions of the IATTC and the AIDCP. ICCAT 52. Since the last CWP meeting in 1999, ICCAT has been working to improve both the databases and the quality of the data which they contain. A biostatistician has been hired, and work is now well advanced on the new relational database (MS-SQL). When this is operational, the methods of submission of data will be streamlined to include an automatic verification process. Submission of data will be requested, where possible, in electronic format, which will reduce possible errors in data entry. The new database will greatly facilitate the extraction of data at any level of aggregation requested by ICCAT scientists and Working Groups. Separate bases will also be designed for shark data and tuna trade statistics. In order to ensure that data are not lost in case of system failure, backup of the current flat file data bases have been made and deposited in a bank strong box, rented for this purpose. 53. Studies are currently being carried out by the Standing Committee on Research and Statistics to assess the effects of bluefin tuna farming on the collection of catch statistics. 54. In 2000, a questionnaire was sent to all parties, entities and fishing entities believed to be fishing for Atlantic tuna and tuna like species, in order to obtain more complete information on observer programmes in operation.
9 55. ICCAT has adopted a recommendation to establish statistical document programs for bigeye tuna and swordfish. It is expected that this will become operational in 2002, and will greatly improve the reliability of statistics for these species. 56. Statistics from both targeted and by-catch fisheries of blue shark, mako shark and porbeagle shark in the Atlantic have been requested. A data preparatory meeting will be held in September 2001 to assess the level of data available and study the possibility of carrying out future stock assessments of these species. ICES 57. ICES fisheries statistics programme has continued without major changes compared to the report delivered at CWP-18. ICES has implemented the relevant recommendations from CWP18, notably on the collection of elasmobranch catch statistics. ICES previously used an internal 4-digit species code and translated this code to the 3-alpha species for communication of catch statistics. Use of the 4-digit code has now been abandoned and the 3-alpha species code is also used in the internal database. 58. ICES has published its statistics for the period 1973-199 on a CD-ROM using the FISHSTAT Plus system for presenting these data. This CD will be updated and re-issued annually. The data are also available on the ICES website for free downloading. The CD also includes the integrated database on Atlantic catch statistics (see paragraphs 140 to 144). IOTC 59. The statistical data available to IOTC come mainly from flag State reporting. IOTC is mandated to use best scientific estimates and all data submissions are verified for consistency and compared with any reliable alternative data sources available. 60. Sampling schemes initiated by IOTC in Indian Ocean transhipment ports cover landings of some of the estimated 1 600 small fresh tuna longliners not covered by statistical reporting, providing data on catches, size-composition by species, retained bycatch and effort. Some location information is obtained from skipper interviews. Some 140 large freezer longliners that provide no statistical data have been identified in the Indian Ocean. Their catches are estimated, based on vessel and fleet statistics and some transhipment data. The proportion of tuna transhipped at sea is increasing rapidly and makes the estimation of non-reported catch difficult. 61. In purse seine fisheries, a substantial proportion of the European-owned vessels are flagged in countries that do not report their catch to IOTC. All the mandatory data reporting for these vessels is provided by authorities of the country of ownership. Data from some nationally operated observer programmes are supplied to the Commission. 62. Databases currently held include: Nominal Catch; Discards; Catch and effort; Lengthfrequency; Tuna transhipment; Fishing fleet; Fishing craft and Predation of longline-caught fish. IOTC is also the repository for all tagging data concerning tuna in the Indian Ocean. 63. 