Complete Texts.
Codex Alimentarius.
THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION AND THE FAO/WHO FOOD STANDARDS PROGRAMME The Codex Alimentarius Commission implements the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the purpose of which is to protect the health of consumers and to ensure fair practices in the food trade. The Codex Alimentarius (Latin, meaning Food Law or Code) is a collection of internationally adopted food standards presented in a uniform manner. It also includes provisions of an advisory nature in the form of codes of practice, guidelines and other recommended measures to assist in achieving the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius. The Commission has expressed the view that codes of practice might provide useful checklists of requirements for national food control or enforcement authorities. The publication of the Codex Alimentarius is intended to guide and promote the elaboration and establishment of definitions and requirements for foods, to assist in their harmonization and, in doing so, to facilitate international trade. FOOD LABELLING - COMPLETE TEXTS Food labelling is the primary means of communication between the producer and seller of food on one hand, and the purchaser and consumer of the other. The Codex Alimentarius standards and guidelines on food labelling published in various volumes of the Codex Alimentarius are now collected and republished in this compact format to allow their wide use and understanding by governments, regulatory authorities, food industries and retailers, and consumers. Further information on these texts, or any other aspect of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, may be obtained from: The Secretary, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100, Rome Italy fax: +39(06)57.05.45.93 email: codex@fao.org Internet address: www.codexalimentarius.net.
CODEX GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS.
CODEX STAN 1-1985 (Rev. 1-1991).
SCOPE This standard applies to the labelling of all prepackaged foods to be offered as such to the consumer or for catering purposes and to certain aspects relating to the presentation thereof.2.
DEFINITION OF TERMS For the purpose of this standard: "Claim" means any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature, processing, composition or any other quality. "Consumer" means persons and families purchasing and receiving food in order to meet their personal needs. "Container" means any packaging of food for delivery as a single item, whether by completely or partially enclosing the food and includes wrappers. A container may enclose several units or types of packages when such is offered to the consumer. For use in Date Marking of prepackaged food: "Date of Manufacture" means the date on which the food becomes the product as described. "Date of Packaging" means the date on which the food is placed in the immediate container in which it will be ultimately sold.
The Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission at its 14th Session, 1981 and subsequently revised in 1985 and 1991 by the 16th and 19th Sessions and amended by the 23rd and 24th Sessions, 1999 and 2001. This standard has been submitted to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO for acceptance in accordance with the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius.
2 When notifying their position on the acceptance of this standard, governments are requested to indicate any provisions concerning the presentation of mandatory information on the label and in labelling, in force in their country which are not covered by this standard.
Food Labelling.
"Sell-by-Date" means the last date of offer for sale to the consumer after which there remains a reasonable storage period in the home. "Date of Minimum Durability" ("best before") means the date which signifies the end of the period under any stated storage conditions during which the product will remain fully marketable and will retain any specific qualities for which tacit or express claims have been made. However, beyond the date the food may still be perfectly satisfactory. "Use-by Date" (Recommended Last Consumption Date, Expiration Date) means the date which signifies the end of the estimated period under any stated storage conditions, after which the product probably will not have the quality attributes normally expected by the consumers. After this date, the food should not be regarded as marketable. "Food" means any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, and includes drinks, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of "food" but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs. "Food Additive" means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result, (directly or indirectly) in it or its by-products becoming a component of or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include "contaminants" or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities. "Ingredient" means any substance, including a food additive, used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and present in the final product although possibly in a modified form. "Label" means any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive matter, written, printed, stencilled, marked, embossed or impressed on, or attached to, a container of food. "Labelling" includes any written, printed or graphic matter that is present on the label, accompanies the food, or is displayed near the food, including that for the purpose of promoting its sale or disposal. "Lot" means a definitive quantity of a commodity produced essentially under the same conditions.
"Prepackaged" means packaged or made up in advance in a container, ready for offer to the consumer, or for catering purposes. "Processing Aid" means a substance or material, not including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non-intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product. "Foods for Catering Purposes" means those foods for use in restaurants, canteens, schools, hospitals and similar institutions where food is offered for immediate consumption.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 3.1 Prepackaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character in any respect.1 3.2 Prepackaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling by words, pictorial or other devices which refer to or are suggestive either directly or indirectly, of any other product with which such food might be confused, or in such a manner as to lead the purchaser or consumer to suppose that the food is connected with such other product.
MANDATORY LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS The following information shall appear on the label of prepackaged foods as applicable to the food being labelled, except to the extent otherwise expressly provided in an individual Codex standard: 4.1 THE NAME OF THE FOOD 4.1.1 The name shall indicate the true nature of the food and normally be specific and not generic: 4.1.1.1 Where a name or names have been established for a food in a Codex standard, at least one of these names shall be used. 4.1.1.2 In other cases, the name prescribed by national legislation shall be used.
Examples of descriptions or presentations to which these General Principles refer are given in the Codex General Guidelines on Claims. 9.
4.1.1.3 In the absence of any such name, either a common or usual name existing by common usage as an appropriate descriptive term which was not misleading or confusing to the consumer shall be used. 4.1.1.4 A "coined", "fanciful", "brand" name, or "trade mark" may be used provided it accompanies one of the names provided in Subsections 4.1.1.1 to 4.1.1.3. 4.1.2 There shall appear on the label either in conjunction with, or in close proximity to, the name of the food, such additional words or phrases as necessary to avoid misleading or confusing the consumer in regard to the true nature and physical condition of the food including but not limited to the type of packing medium, style, and the condition or type of treatment it has undergone; for example: dried, concentrated, reconstituted, smoked. 4.2 LIST OF INGREDIENTS 4.2.1 Except for single ingredient foods, a list of ingredients shall be declared on the label. 4.2.1.1 The list of ingredients shall be headed or preceded by an appropriate title which consists of or includes the term `ingredient'. 4.2.1.2 All ingredients shall be listed in descending order of ingoing weight (m/m) at the time of the manufacture of the food. 4.2.1.3 Where an ingredient is itself the product of two or more ingredients, such a compound ingredient may be declared, as such, in the list of ingredients, provided that it is immediately accompanied by a list, in brackets, of its ingredients in descending order of proportion (m/m). Where a compound ingredient (for which a name has been established in a Codex standard or in national legislation) constitutes less than 5% of the food, the ingredients, other than food additives which serve a technological function in the finished product, need not be declared. 4.2.1.4 The following foods and ingredients hypersensitivity and shall always be declared:1 are known to cause.
Cereals containing gluten; i.e., wheat, rye, barley, oats, spelt or their hybridized strains and products of these; Crustacea and products of these;.
Future additions to and/or deletions from this list will be considered by the Codex Committee on Food Labelling taking into account the advice provided by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). 10.
Eggs and egg products; Fish and fish products; Peanuts, soybeans and products of these; Milk and milk products (lactose included); Tree nuts and nut products; and Sulphite in concentrations of 10 mg/kg or more. 4.2.1.5 Added water shall be declared in the list of ingredients except when the water forms part of an ingredient such as brine, syrup or broth used in a compound food and declared as such in the list of ingredients. Water or other volatile ingredients evaporated in the course of manufacture need not be declared. 4.2.1.6 As an alternative to the general provisions of this section, dehydrated or condensed foods which are intended to be reconstituted by the addition of water only, the ingredients may be listed in order of proportion (m/m) in the reconstituted product provided that a statement such as "ingredients of the product when prepared in accordance with the directions on the label" is included. 4.2.2 The presence in any food or food ingredients obtained through biotechnology of an allergen transferred from any of the products listed in Section 4.2.1.4 shall be declared. When it is not possible to provide adequate information on the presence of an allergen through labelling, the food containing the allergen should not be marketed. 4.2.3 A specific name shall be used for ingredients in the list of ingredients in accordance with the provisions set out in Section 4.1 (Name of the Food) except that: 4.2.3.1 Except for those ingredients listed in section 4.2.1.4, and unless a general class name would be more informative, the following class names may be used: NAME OF CLASSES Refined oils other than olive CLASS NAMES `Oil' together with either the term `vegetable' or `animal', qualified by the term `hydrogenated' or `partially-hydrogenated', as appropriate.
NAME OF CLASSES Refined fats.
CLASS NAMES `Fat' together with either, the term `vegetable' or `animal', as appropriate. `Starch'. `Fish'.
Starches, other than chemically modified starches All species of fish where the fish constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such food does not refer to a specific species of fish. All types of poultrymeat where such meat constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such a food does not refer to a specific type of poultrymeat. All types of cheese where the cheese or mixture of cheeses constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such food does not refer to a specific type of cheese All spices and spice extracts not exceeding 2% by weight either singly or in combination in the food. All herbs or parts of herbs not exceeding 2% by weight either singly or in combination in the food All types of gum preparations used in the manufacture of gum base for chewing gum. All types of sucrose. Anhydrous dextrose and dextrose monohydrate All types of caseinates.
`Poultrymeat'.
`Spice', `spices', or `mixed spices', as appropriate. `Herbs' or `mixed herbs', as appropriate. `Gum base'.
`Sugar'. `Dextrose' or `glucose'. `Caseinates'.
NAME OF CLASSES Press, expeller or refined cocoa butter. All crystallized fruit not exceeding 10% of the weight of the food.
CLASS NAMES `Cocoa butter'. `Crystallized fruit'.
4.2.3.2 Notwithstanding the provision set out in Section 4.2.2.1, pork fat, lard and beef fat shall always be declared by their specific names. 4.2.3.3 For food additives falling in the respective classes and appearing in lists of food additives permitted for use in foods generally, the following class titles shall be used together with the specific name or recognized numerical identification as required by national legislation.1 Acidity Regulator Acids Anticaking Agent Antifoaming Agent Antioxidant Bulking Agent Colour Colour Retention Agent Emulsifier Emulsifying Salt Firming Agent Flour Treatment Agent 4.2.3.4 The following class titles may be used for food additives falling in the respective classes and appearing in lists of food additives permitted generally for use in foods: Flavour(s) and Flavouring(s) Modified Starch(es)The expression "flavours" may be qualified by "natural",.
Flavour Enhancer Foaming Agent Gelling Agent Glazing Agent Humectant Preservative Propellant Raising Agent Stabilizer Sweetener Thickener.
Governments accepting the standard should indicate the requirements in force in their countries. 13.
"nature identical", "artificial" or a combination of these words as appropriate. 4.2.4 Processing Aids and Carry-Over of Food Additives 4.2.4.1 A food additive carried over into a food in a significant quantity or in an amount sufficient to perform a technological function in that food as a result of the use of raw materials or other ingredients in which the additive was used shall be included in the list of ingredients. The exemption does not apply to food additive and processing aids listed in section 4.2.1.4. 4.2.4.2 A food additive carried over into foods at a level less than that required to achieve a technological function, and processing aids, are exempted from declaration in the list of ingredients. The exemption does not apply to food additives and processing aids listed in section 4.2.1.4. 4.3 NET CONTENTS AND DRAINED WEIGHT 4.3.1 The net contents shall be declared in the metric system ("Système International" units).1 4.3.2 The net contents shall be declared in the following manner: (i) for liquid foods, by volume; (ii) for solid foods, by weight; (iii) for semi-solid or viscous foods, either by weight or volume. 4.3.3 In addition to the declaration of net contents, a food packed in a liquid medium shall carry a declaration in the metric system of the drained weight of the food. For the purposes of this requirement, liquid medium means water, aqueous solutions of sugar and salt, fruit and vegetable juices in canned fruits and vegetables only, or vinegar, either singly or in combination.2 4.4 NAME AND ADDRESS The name and address of the manufacturer, packer, distributor, importer, exporter or vendor of the food shall be declared. 4.5 COUNTRY OF ORIGIN 4.5.1 The country of origin of the food shall be declared if its omission would mislead or deceive the consumer.
The declaration of net contents represents the quantity at the time of packaging and is subject to enforcement by reference to an average system of quantity control. The declaration of drained weight is subject to enforcement by reference to an average system of quantity control. 14.
4.5.2 When a food undergoes processing in a second country which changes its nature, the country in which the processing is performed shall be considered to be the country of origin for the purposes of labelling. 4.6 LOT IDENTIFICATION Each container shall be embossed or otherwise permanently marked in code or in clear to identify the producing factory and the lot. 4.7 DATE MARKING AND STORAGE INSTRUCTIONS 4.7.1 If not otherwise determined in an individual Codex standard, the following date marking shall apply: (i) The "date of minimum durability" shall be declared. (ii) This shall consist at least of: the day and the month for products with a minimum durability of not more than three months; the month and the year for products with a minimum durability of more than three months. If the month is December, it is sufficient to indicate the year. (iii) The date shall be declared by the words: "Best before ..." where the day is indicated; "Best before end ..." in other cases. (iv) The words referred to in paragraph (iii) shall be accompanied by: either the date itself; or a reference to where the date is given. (v) The day, month and year shall be declared in uncoded numerical sequence except that the month may be indicated by letters in those countries where such use will not confuse the consumer. (vi) Notwithstanding 4.7.1 (i) an indication of the date of minimum durability shall not be required for: fresh fruits and vegetables, including potatoes which have not been peeled, cut or similarly treated; wines, liqueur wines, sparkling wines, aromatized wines, fruit wines and sparkling fruit wines; beverages containing 10% or more by volume of alcohol;.
bakers' or pastry-cooks' wares which, given the nature of their content, are normally consumed within 24 hours of their manufacture; vinegar; food grade salt; solid sugars; confectionery products consisting of flavoured and/or coloured sugars; chewing gum. 4.7.2 In addition to the date of minimum durability, any special conditions for the storage of the food shall be declared on the label if the validity of the date depends thereon. 4.8 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE Instructions for use, including reconstitution, where applicable, shall be included on the label, as necessary, to ensure correct utilization of the food.
ADDITIONAL MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS.
5.1 QUANTITATIVE LABELLING OF INGREDIENTS 5.1.1 Where the labelling of a food places special emphasis on the presence of one or more valuable and/or characterizing ingredients, or where the description of the food has the same effect, the ingoing percentage of the ingredient (m/m) at the time of manufacture shall be declared. 5.1.2 Similarly, where the labelling of a food places special emphasis on the low content of one or more ingredients, the percentage of the ingredient (m/m) in the final product shall be declared. 5.1.3 A reference in the name of a food to a particular ingredient shall not of itself constitute the placing of special emphasis. A reference in the labelling of a food to an ingredient used in a small quantity and only as a flavouring shall not of itself constitute the placing of special emphasis. 5.2 IRRADIATED FOODS 5.2.1 The label of a food which has been treated with ionizing radiation shall carry a written statement indicating that treatment in close proximity to the name of the food. The use of the international food irradiation symbol, as shown below, is optional, but when it is used, it shall be in close proximity to the name of the food.
5.2.2 When an irradiated product is used as an ingredient in another food, this shall be so declared in the list of ingredients. 5.2.3 When a single ingredient product is prepared from a raw material which has been irradiated, the label of the product shall contain a statement indicating the treatment.
EXEMPTIONS FROM MANDATORY LABELLING REQUIREMENTS With the exception of spices and herbs, small units, where the largest surface area is less than 10 cm², may be exempted from the requirements of paragraphs 4.2 and 4.6 to.
7. OPTIONAL LABELLING 7 .1 Any information or pictorial device written, printed, or graphic matter may be displayed in labelling provided that it is not in conflict with the mandatory requirements of this standard and those relating to claims and deception given in Section 3 - General Principles. 7.2 If grade designations are used, they shall be readily understandable and not be misleading or deceptive in any way.
PRESENTATION OF MANDATORY INFORMATION.
8.1 GENERAL 8.1.1 Labels in prepackaged foods shall be applied in such a manner that they will not become separated from the container. 8.1.2 Statements required to appear on the label by virtue of this standard or any other Codex standards shall be clear, prominent, indelible and readily legible by the consumer under normal conditions of purchase and use. 8.1.3 Where the container is covered by a wrapper, the wrapper shall carry the necessary information or the label on the container shall be readily legible through the outer wrapper or not obscured by it.
8.1.4 The name and net contents of the food shall appear in a prominent position and in the same field of vision. 8.2 LANGUAGE 8.2.1 If the language on the original label is not acceptable, to the consumer for whom it is intended, a supplementary label containing the mandatory information in the required language may be used instead of relabelling. 8.2.2 In the case of either relabelling or a supplementary label, the mandatory information provided shall be fully and accurately reflect that in the original lab el.
CODEX GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF FOOD ADDITIVES WHEN SOLD AS SUCH.
CODEX STAN 107-1981.
SCOPE This standard applies to the labelling of "food additives" sold as such whether by retail or other than by retail, including sales to caterers and food manufacturers for the purpose of their businesses. This standard also applies to food "processing aids"; any reference to food additives includes food processing aids.
DEFINITION OF TERMS For the purpose of this standard: (a) food additive means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result, (directly or indirectly) in it or its by-products becoming a component of or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include contaminants, or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities, or sodium chloride; processing aid means a substance or material not including apparatus or utensils and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non-intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product; contaminant means any substance not intentionally added to food, which is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations carried out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging,.
1 The Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Food Additives When Sold as Such was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius at its 14th Session in 1981. This Standard has been submitted to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO for acceptance in accordance with the General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius.
transport or holding of such food or as a result of environmental contamination; (d) label includes any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive matter, written, painted, stencilled, marked, embossed or impressed on, or attached to, a container; labelling includes the label and any written, printed or graphic matter relating to and accompanying the food additives. The term does not include bills, invoices and similar material which may accompany the food additives; container means any form of packaging of food additives for sale as a single item, whether by completely or partially enclosing the food additives, and includes wrappers; ingredient means any substance, excluding a food additive, used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and present in the final product; sale by retail means any sale to a person buying otherwise than for the purpose of resale but does not include a sale to caterers for the purposes of their catering business or a sale to manufacturers for the purposes of their manufacturing business.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 3.1 Food additives1 shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling in a manner than is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding their character in any respect.
3.2 Food additives1 shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling by words, pictorial or other devices which refer to or are suggestive, either directly or indirectly, of any other product with which such food additives might be confused, or in such a manner as to lead the purchaser or consumer to suppose that the food additive is connected with or derived from such other product; provided that the term "x flavour" may be used to describe a flavour which is not derived from, but reproduces the flavour of "x".
MANDATORY LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOOD ADDITIVES SOLD BY RETAIL The labels of all food additives sold by retail shall bear the information required by sub-sections 4.1 to 4.5 of this section, as applicable to the food additive1 being labelled.
The term includes "processing aids" as defined (see Scope).
DETAILS OF THE FOOD ADDITIVE The name of each food additive present shall be given. The name shall be specific and not generic and shall indicate the true nature of the food additive. Where a name has been established for a food additive in a Codex list of additives, that name shall be used. In other cases the common or usual name shall be listed or, where none exists, an appropriate descriptive name shall be used. If two or more food additives are present, their names shall be given in the form of a list. The list shall be in the order of the proportion by weight which each food additive bears to the total contents of the container, the food additive present in the greatest proportion by weight being listed first. Where one or more of the food additives is subject to a quantitative limitation in a food covered by a Codex standard, the quantity or proportion of that additive may be stated. If food ingredients are part of the preparation, they shall be declared in the list of ingredients in descending order of proportion. In the case of mixtures of flavourings, the name of each flavouring present in the mixture need not be given. The generic expression "flavour" or "flavouring" may be used, together with a true indication of the nature of the flavour. The expression "flavour" or "flavouring" may be qualified by the words "natural", "nature-identical", "artificial", or a combination of these words, as appropriate. This provision does not apply to flavour modifiers, but does apply to "herbs" and "spices", which generic expressions may be used where appropriate. Food additives with a shelf-life not exceeding 18 months shall carry the date of minimum durability using words such as "will keep at least until ....". The words "For Food Use" or a statement substantially similar thereto shall appear in a prominent position on the label.
4.2 INSTRUCTIONS ON KEEPING AND USE Adequate information shall be given about the manner in which the food additive is to be kept and is to be used in food. 4.3 NET CONTENTS The net contents shall be declared in either the metric (Système International Units) or avoirdupois or both systems of measurement as required by the country in which the food additive is sold. This declaration shall be made in the following manner:.
for liquid food additives, by volume or weight; for solid food additives, other than those sold in tablet form, by weight; for semi-solid or viscous food additives, either by weight or volume; for food additives sold in tablet form, by weight together with the number of tablets in the package.
4.4 NAME AND ADDRESS The name and address of the manufacturer, packer, distributor, importer, exporter or vendor of the food additive shall be declared. 4.5 (a) (b) COUNTRY OF ORIGIN The country of origin of a food additive shall be declared if its omission is likely to mislead or deceive the consumer. When a food additive undergoes processing in a second country which changes its chemical or physical nature, the country in which the processing is performed shall be considered to be the country of origin for the purposes of labelling.
4.6 LOT IDENTIFICATION Each container shall be marked in code or in clear to identify the producing factory and the lot.
MANDATORY LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOOD ADDITIVES SOLD OTHER THAN BY RETAIL The labels of all food additives sold other than by retail shall bear the information required by sub-sections 5.1 to 5.5 of this section, as applicable to the food additive being labelled; except that, where the food additives in non-retail containers are solely destined for further industrial processing, the required information, other than that described in sections 5.1(a) and 5.1(d), may be given on the documents relating to the sale. 5.1 (a) DETAILS OF THE FOOD ADDITIVE The name of each food additive present shall be given. The name shall be specific and not generic and shall indicate the true nature of the food additive. Where a name has been established for a food additive in a Codex list of.
additives, that name shall be used. In other cases, the common or usual name shall be listed or, where none exists, an appropriate descriptive name shall be used.
If two or more food additives are present, their names shall be given in the form of a list. The list shall be in the order of the proportion by weight which each food additive bears to the total contents of the container, the.
food additive present in the greatest proportion by weight being listed first. Where one or more food additives is subject to a quantitative limitation in a food in the country in which the food additive is to be used, the quantity or proportion of that additive and/or adequate instruction to enable the compliance with the limitation shall be given. If food ingredients are part of the preparation, they shall be declared in the list of ingredients in descending order of proportion. (c) In the case of mixtures of flavourings, the name of each flavouring present in the mixture need not be given. The generic expression "flavour" or "flavouring" may be used together with a true indication of the nature of the flavour. The expression "flavour" or "flavouring" may be qualified by the words "natural", "nature-identical", "artificial", or a combination of these words, as appropriate. This provision does not apply to flavour modifiers, but does apply to "herbs" and "spices" which generic expressions may be used where appropriate. Food additives with a shelf-life not exceeding 18 months shall carry the date of minimum durability using words such as "will keep at least until ...". The words "For Food Use" or a statement substantially similar thereto shall appear in a prominent position on the label.
5.2 INSTRUCTIONS ON KEEPING AND USE Adequate information shall be giv