This report describes global estimates of N2O and NO emissions and NH3 volatilization losses from fertilizer and manure application to fields used for crop production. Their quantification is important for assessing N fertilizer efficiency and their impact on atmospheric pollution and ecosystem acidification and eutrophication. The report reviews the literature and examines the regulating factors (e.g. N application rate) and measurement techniques for N2O and NOx emissions and NH3 volatilization. Using models, it generates global annual estimates: 3.5 million t of N2O-N emission and 2.0 million t of NO-N emission from crop and grassland. Estimated by fertilizer type, the emissions induced by fertilizers amount to 0.9 and 0.5 Mt respectively or approximately 0.8 and 0.5 percent respectively of current nitrogen fertilizer input, an NH3 loss of 14 percent of mineral fertilizer N use (higher in developing countries), while that from animal manure is 22 percent (60 percent from developed countries). The results for NH3 volatilization agree with other inventories, though NH3 volatilization from some fertilizers appears higher than previously thought. The outcome of the model shows that the potential impact of fertilizer use regulations would be modest from a global emission perspective. The quantities involved, however, constitute a valuable plant nutrient source. Farmers' ability to curtail such losses will primarily relate to economic incentives, in particular in South and South East Asia.
Acknowledgements.
This report, jointly commissioned by the International Fertilizer Association (IFA) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), is based on the work of A. Bouwman and L.J.M. Boumans (both from the National Institute Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands) and N.H. Batjes (International Soil Reference and Information Centre, Wageningen, the Netherlands). The report benefited from contributions from P. Botschek (European Fertilizer Manufacturers Association, Brussels, Belgium), W. Bussink (NMI Research Station for Cattle, Sheep and Horse Husbandry PR, Lelystad, the Netherlands), S.K. de Datta (College of Agriculture & Life Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA), T. Denmead (CSIRO, Canberra, Australia), K. Isherwood (IFA, Paris, France), E. Kreileman (National Institute of Public Health and the Environment) J. K sters and M. Laegreid (both from Hydro Agri, D lmen, Germany), H.-J. Michel and H. Wozniak (both from SKW Stickstoffwerke Piesteritz GmbH, Cunnersdorf, Germany), A.R. Mosier (USDA-Agricultural Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA), J. Plummer, J. Poulisse (FAO), M. Prud'homme (IFA) and T. van den Bergen (FAO).
INTRODUCTION.
REGULATING FACTORS.
Factors regulating nitrous oxide and nitric oxide emission General Controls of denitrification, nitrification and N oxide fluxes.
N availability Nitrification and denitrification rates Soil moisture and temperature Wetting.
Gas diffusion.
Agricultural management factors.
Crop type Fertilizer management Soil and crop management.
Factors regulating ammonia loss General Flooded soils.
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES.
Chamber techniques Micrometeorological techniques Indirect open measurement technique 15N, N balance and N difference methods.
MEASUREMENTS.
Nitrous oxide, denitrification and nitric oxide measurements Fertilizer induced emissions.
Nitrous oxide Nitric oxide.
List of tables.
Global sources of atmospheric NOx, NH3 and N2O, 1990 Information collected for measurements Measurement technique codes Fertilizer induced N2O emission, % Fertilizer induced NO emission (%) and the NO/N2O ratio Climate codes Values of constants and factor classes in the models for N2O and NO NH3 volatilization rates for various factors Factor values in the linear regression model.
10. N2O and NO emission from N fertilizer and animal manure application on crops, 1995 11. N2O and NO emission from N fertilizer and animal manure application on grasslands, 1995 12. Global N use and fertilizer induced N2O and NO emissions by fertilizer type 13. NH3 volatilization loss from mineral fertilizer application on grasslands, upland crops and wetland rice by region, 1995 14. NH3 volatilization loss from animal manure application on intensively used grasslands, upland crops and wetland rice by region, 1995 15. NH3 volatilization loss rates for mineral fertilizer category and for animal manure, 1995 16. N2O emissions from the data set 17. NO emissions from the data set.
List of figures.
The nitrogen cycle Fertilizer N application and nitrous oxide emission Relation between fertilizer N application and nitric oxide emission.
AA ABC ACl AF AP AN AS b bf bw bpi CAN CEC CN DAP ECETOC g GIS i KCl KN MAP Mix N NF.
Anhydrous ammonia including aqueous ammonia Ammonium bicarbonate Ammonium chloride Ammonium bicarbonate, ammonium chloride, ammonium sulphate Ammonium phosphate Ammonium nitrate Ammonium sulphate Broadcast Broadcast and then flooded Broadcast in floodwater Broadcast in floodwater at panicle initiation Calcium ammonium nitrate and combinations of AN and CaCO3 Cation exchange capacity Calcium nitrate Diammonium phosphate European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology Gradient method Geographical Information Systems Incorporated Potassium chloride Potassium nitrate Monoammonium phosphate Mix of various fertilizers Nitrogen Calcium nitrate, potassium nitrate, sodium nitrate.
Global Estimates of Gaseous Emissions of NH3, NO and N2O from Agricultural Land.
Chapter 1 Introduction.
There is increasing concern about plant nutrient losses to the environment. Such losses arise through leaching to the groundwater and emissions to the atmosphere. Mineral fertilizer is one of the sources of plant nutrients used in crop production systems. Applied nutrients that crops fail to take up constitute both a financial loss to the farmer and a considerable economic loss at the national level. With the demand for food and fibres projected to increase, albeit at a decreasing pace, farmers will apply more fertilizer in the attempt to boost agricultural production. The implementation of mitigating measures will probably focus on those nutrient sources that are easiest to regulate, with mineral fertilizer use being a prime target. Reconciling the goals of ensuring ample food supply, enabling adequate farm income and reducing the adverse environmental impact of increased fertilizer use requires the adoption of sound agricultural practices. The adoption of balanced fertilization would be one of the measures for achieving higher yields without incurring accelerated nitrogen losses to the environment. In order to develop the measures and implementation programmes for fostering efficient mineral fertilizer use, it is necessary to quantify the nutrient losses involved. The magnitude provides a benchmark of the potential benefits at farm, national and global level. The effective implementation of such programmes should focus on regions where losses are largest. This report generates global estimates of nitrous oxide (N2O) and nitric oxide (NO) emissions and of ammonia (NH3) volatilization losses. The analysis establishes the relative contribution of the sustained losses from the application of mineral fertilizers and animal manure to croplands and grasslands. The report also identifies the regions where such losses are primarily sustained. The supply of nitrogen (N) for growth often constrains yields of crops and forage species. Although there are wide differences between various countries and regions, more than 50 percent of the world's major food crops,.
Introduction.
sugar crops and some cash crops are routinely fertilized and high nitrogen fertilizer application rates are not uncommon. Moreover, fertilizer N is being increasingly applied to grasslands. At present the global use of mineral fertilizers is 78 million t N per year, and farmers use large quantities of animal manure to fertilize crops and grasslands. The use of N fertilizer is expected to increase, particularly in developing countries, and the production of animal wastes may also continue to grow. The use of N fertilizer by plants is rather inefficient. Plant uptake is commonly only 50 percent of the N applied. The major cause of this low N use efficiency is the loss of N from the plant-soil system via leaching, runoff, erosion, or by gaseous emissions. The relative importance of each of these pathways varies from site to site and from year to year. In climates where precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration or in irrigated fields leaching losses may be considerable. Water and wind erosion may occur in systems with bare fallow and in irrigation systems where water flows down the slopes from one field to another (e.g. wetland rice fields). Gaseous loss of N is the dominant mechanism in many agricultural production systems. Loss processes include volatilization, nitrification and denitrification, resulting in the release of NH3, NO, N2O and dinitrogen (N2) to the atmosphere. The figure opposite illustrates the nitrogen cycle. N2O is one of the so-called greenhouse gases, constituting 6 percent of the anthropogenic greenhouse effect, and contributes to the depletion of stratospheric ozone. Neither the sources nor the causes of the increase in N2O of 0.7 ppbv per year are well known. It is generally accepted that the most important source is natural soils, followed by emissions from the oceans (Table 1), although there is uncertainty regarding the distribution and magnitude of the sources themselves. Identified anthropogenic sources include: agricultural fields amended with N fertilizers, animal manure, aquifers, sewage, industry, automobiles, biomass burning, land clearing, and trash incineration. The contribution of agriculture to the global N2O source is about 35 percent. NO also plays an important role in atmospheric chemistry as it participates in regulating the oxidant balance of the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, NO oxidizes to nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Re-deposition of NOx (NO and NO2 together) contributes to the acidification and eutrophication of ecosystems. The contribution of food production to the global NO emission may be about 10 percent (Table 1). The estimates for N2O and NO emissions.
Global Estimates of Gaseous Emissions of NH3, NO and N2O from Agricultural Land 3.
Source: OECD (2001): Environmental indicators for Agriculture Volume 3: Methods and Results, Publications Service, Paris, France.
from animal manure and mineral fertilizers are based on the so-called fertilizer induced emission . Therefore, they do not represent the total emission, as in their calculation the emission from unfertilized control plots is subtracted from that from the fertilized plot. The product of this report will be the total emission, which is more appropriate for global budget studies. Food production is also a major source for NH3, contributing more than 50 percent to the global emission. NH3 is an important atmospheric pollutant with a wide variety of impacts. In the atmosphere, NH3 neutralizes a large portion of the acids produced by oxides of sulphur and nitrogen. A large proportion of atmospheric aerosols, acting as cloud condensation nuclei, consists of sulphate neutralized to various degrees by ammonia. Deposition returns most of the NH3 to the surface, where it may contribute to the acidification and eutrophication of ecosystems. The effects of fertilizer application on the quantities of N2O released from agricultural soil have been the subject for a number of reviews in recent years. Other similar studies have focused on NO. However, because of the extremely high spatial, temporal and interannual variability, considerable uncertainty persists in the estimates of N2O emissions. The available data on NO emissions are more uncertain than those for N2O as fewer studies have focused on NO, mainly because the measurements are intrinsically more demanding. There are many reviews of ammonia volatilization from flooded rice fields, N losses including ammonia volatilization from fertilizers in general, and ammonia losses from grazing systems. Various authors have estimated country emissions on the basis of their measurements. The ECETOC (1994) and Asman (1992) have compiled inventories of European NH3 emissions. Recent global estimates indicate that the global NH3 loss from mineral N fertilizers is about 9 million t of NH3-N, constituting more than 10 percent of global N fertilizer use (Table 1). However, the uncertainty in these estimates may be 50 percent. A recent development is the use of simulation models to describe N2O and NO fluxes. Models can form a firm basis for extrapolation by developing an understanding of the mechanisms that regulate processes and their spatial and temporal patterns. Models help to break down a system into its component parts and describe the behaviour of the system through their interaction. In general, trace gas flux models include descriptions of the processes responsible for the cycling of carbon or nitrogen and the fluxes associated with these processes. Various types of models exist, including empirical and process (or mechanistic) models.
Global sources of atmospheric NOx, NH3 and N2O, 1990 Source NOx NH3 N 2O.
million t N/year Anthropogenic sources Fossil fuel combustion including aircraft Industrial processes Animal manure application, direct emission Animal manure, emission from other animal waste management systems Animal manure application, indirect emission Mineral fertilizer use, direct emission Mineral fertilizer use, indirect emission Leguminous crops Cultivated histosols Biomass burning including biofuel combustion Crops and decomposition of crops Human excreta Coastal water Atmospheric deposition Natural sources Soils under natural vegetation Oceans Excreta of wild animals Lightning Tropospheric chemistry Stratospheric chemistry Total 12.2 0.9 0.7 59 13 __ 2.4 8.2 0.1 __ __ __ 54 6.6 3.6 0.0 __ 0.6 __ 20c 21.9 1.5 0.7 __ __ 0.4 __ n.d. n.d. 7.7 __a __ __ 0.3 0.1 0.2 ~8 ~13.6 __ 9.0 __ n.d. n.d. 5.9 3.6 2.6 __b __ 0.2 0.3 0.4 2.1 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.7 0.4 0.2 1.9 0.6.
n.d.: not determined ~ approximately a. Other animal waste management systems include storage, grazing, etc. b. NH3 emissions from coastal water are included in the estimate for oceans. c. This total is based on mass balance calculations of atmospheric N2O. The sum of the individual source estimates exceeds the global source by about 30%. Based on Bouwman et al. (1997), Davidson and Kingerlee (1997), Lee et al. (1997), Mosier et al. (1998), Olivier et al. (1998), and Veldkamp and Keller (1997a).
An example of a global model describing processes of N2O formation is an expanded version of the Carnegie-Ames-Stanford Biosphere model on a 1 resolution developed by Potter et al. (1996). This ecosystem model simulates nitrogen mineralization from net primary production, N uptake, litterfall and its decomposition. Fluxes of organic matter from litter and soil to microbial pools and from microbial pools back to soil pools occur in proportion to C assimilation rates so that prescribed C:N ratios for the various organic matter pools are maintained. The N2O (and NO) fluxes are a fixed fraction of 2 percent of nitrogen mineralization. However, the uncertainty of the model is unknown as the output has not been validated against flux measurements. Li and Aber (2000) and Li et al. (1992a, 1992b) developed a field-scale process model to simulate N2O and NOx fluxes from decomposition and denitrification in soils. The model simulated gas fluxes by using soil, climate and management data to drive three submodels (thermal-hydraulic, denitrification and decomposition). The management practices considered include tillage timing and intensity, fertilizer and manure application, irrigation (amount and timing), and crop type and rotation. Comparison of observed flux data with fluxes simulated by models including the field-scale process model reveal major differences in the simulated N gas fluxes from soils. A major problem in developing trace gas flux models is the proper statistical description of soil processes that operate in hot spots in field-scale models. Large-scale patterns of soil gaseous emissions, when aggregated to prolonged (e.g. seasonal or annual) time scales, may have a strong element of predictability. This is because at such spatial and temporal scales integrated gas fluxes may be strongly related to average biophysical conditions. Therefore, if estimation of seasonal or annual emissions is the objective, the use of empirical relationships between gas fluxes and environmental and management conditions represents a suitable approach for bridging the gap between site and landscape scales. Although the approaches to estimating N2O and NO emissions and NH3 volatilization losses are distinct, they are sufficiently similar to appear together in this document. First, this report analyses the direct emissions of N2O and NO from fertilized crops and grasslands. It does not consider indirect emissions from ground and surface water, or resulting nitrogen leached from agricultural soils. A review of measurement data from the literature forms the basis for calculating the estimates. An extrapolation exercise uses models for N2O and NO emissions that include the major controlling factors. The basis for this is a.
data set of measurements primarily from the reviewed literature. This report does not consider chemicals such as nitrification inhibitors as their use is still limited on the global scale. It also excludes experiments in grazed grasslands, as that system is not within the scope of this report. Furthermore, measurements of emissions from organic soils were excluded from the analysis. This report summarizes 896 measurements of N2O emissions from 139 studies and 99 measurements for NO emissions from 29 studies. The experiments represent a range of different techniques for measuring fluxes for different crops and uncropped systems, different soil types, climates, fertilizer types and N application rates, and methods and timing of fertilizer application. Table 2 lists the available information on the environmental conditions, soil properties and measurement techniques for each measurement provided in the literature reports and included in the data set. The various research papers used different methods to determine soil pH, cation exchange capacity (CEC), carbon content, texture, etc. In addition, they sometimes reported temperature as air temperature, and in other cases as soil temperature. This report ignored these differences and used the reported values as such. For NH3 losses, the first objective of this report is to summarize the available literature on NH3 volatilization from the application of mineral N fertilizers and animal manure to crops and grasslands in order to assess the factors that regulate NH3 volatilization. A second objective is to describe the relationships found between regulating factors and NH3 volatilization rates in an empirical summary model, and to use this model for a global-scale extrapolation on the basis of national fertilizer statistics and land-use data. The data set of measurements (primarily from the reviewed literature) contains data for almost 1 900 individual measurements. Table 2 presents details of the available information on the environmental conditions, soil properties and measurement techniques for each measurement provided in the literature. This report does not use data on the effect of controlled-release and stabilized fertilizers and chemical additives used to reduce NH3 volatilization as their use also is still very limited on the global scale. In addition, the report does not include NH3 losses from stored manure and plants. The analysis of the complete set of literature data to assess relationships between the various regulating factors and N2O and NO emission rates and NH3 volatilization rates made use of Genstat 5 release 4.1 (PC/Windows NT).
Information collected for measurements N2O and NO emissions and denitrification Data base label Reference Soil type Texture/other soil properties Soil organic carbon content Soil organic nitrogen content Soil drainage pH Residues left in field Crop Fertilizer type Fertilizer application method NH3 volatilization rates in upland and flooded systems Information for both upland and flooded systems Data base label Reference Soil type Texture/other soil properties Soil organic carbon content Soil drainage pH CaCO3 content CEC Mean temperature during measurements Mean precipitation during measurements Flooding (if applicable) Residues left in field Crop Fertilizer type Fertilizer application method Fertilizer form N-rate NH4+-rate (for organic fertilizers) NH3 volatilization loss (kg N/ha) Length of measurement period Measurement technique Frequency of measurements NH3 volatilization rate (% of N application accounting for control) NH3 volatilization rate (% of N application) Additional information (remarks)a Additional information for wetland rice systems Floodwater pH Presence of azolla N-rate NH4+-rate (for organic fertilizers) N2O/NO emission (kg N/ha) over measurement period Denitrification (kg N/ha) over measurement period Length of measurement period Measurement technique Frequency of measurements N2O/NO emission (% of N application accounting for control) N2O/NO emission (% of N application) Additional information (remarks)a.
a. Additional information on the measurement such as year/season of measurement, information on soil, crop or fertilizer management, the volume of air flowing through the forced draught chambers, specific characteristics of the fertilizer used, specific weather events important for explaining the measured volatilization rates.
Contrary to many studies using regression analysis, this report used the Residual Maximum Likelihood (REML) directive of Genstat for summarizing the data set and developing models relating gas emissions to controlling factors. REML is appropriate for analyzing unbalanced data sets with missing values. By assuming all factor classes to have an equal number of observations, REML balances the emission for factors not represented by the full range of environmental and management conditions. Chapter 2 discusses the factors that regulate N2O and NOx emissions and NH3 volatilization. Chapter 3 presents the different measurement techniques used in determining N2O and NOx emissions and NH3 volatilization rates, as it is important to know the characteristics of each technique for the interpretation of flux estimates in comparison with those obtained with other techniques. Chapter 4 analyses the data collected for this study in order to determine the major regulating factors and their effect on N2O and NO emissions and NH3 losses. Chapter 5 extrapolates the results up to global estimates based on fertilizer statistics and geographic data for the regulating factors. Finally, Chapter 6 presents some conclusions.
Chapter 2 Regulating factors.
REGULATING NITROUS OXIDE AND NITRIC OXIDE.
General Soils act as both sources and sinks of N2O and NO. However, on the global scale the N2O and NO emissions dominate the sink activity. The production and consumption of N2O and NO in soils involves both biotic and abiotic processes. Numerous groups of micro-organisms contribute to the production and consumption of NO and N2O, but biological nitrification and denitrification are the dominant processes involved. Biological denitrification is the reduction of nitrate (NO3-) or nitrite (NO2-) to gaseous N oxides and molecular N2 by essentially aerobic bacteria. Nitrification is the biological oxidation of ammonium (NH4+) to NO2- or NO3under aerobic conditions. Under oxygen limited conditions nitrifiers can use NO2- as a terminal electron acceptor to avoid accumulation of the toxic NO2-, whereby N2O and NO are produced. The bacterial processes of denitrification and nitrification are the dominant sources of N2O and NO in most systems. Only denitrification is recognized as a significant biological consumptive fate for N2O and NO. The chemical decomposition of HNO2 (or chemical denitrification), that is, the reduction of NO2- by chemical reductants under oxygen limited conditions and at low pH, can also produce N2, N2O and NO. Chemical denitrification generally occurs when NO2- accumulates under oxygen limited conditions, which may occur when nitrification rates are high, e.g. after application of NH4+-based mineral fertilizers or animal manure. This process may account for 15-20 percent of NO formation.
Regulating factors.
Plant uptake of NO and NO2 is a further important biological process determining the exchange of NOx at the Earth's surface. Some other abiotic processes may also produce and consume trace amounts of NO. Controls of denitrification, nitrification and N oxide fluxes The simplifying conceptual hole in the pipe model is useful in understanding the processes of NO, N2O and N2 emissions. In this model, gas production and exchange with the atmosphere depend on: (i) factors controlling the amount of N flowing through the pipe (that is those affecting denitrification and nitrification rates e.g. N availability and temperature); and (ii) the size of the holes in the pipe through which N gases leak. Factors controlling the partitioning of the reacting N species to NO, N2O or more reduced or oxidized forms regulate the size, while the rate at which N moves through the pipes determines the importance of the leaks. In addition to soil and climate characteristics, agricultural management may also interfere with soil processes and thus influence N availability and the relative rates of N2O and NO.
N availability.
In agricultural soils N inputs from various sources determine the amount of N flowing through the pipe. N fertilizer, N inputs in agricultural soils, animal manure, crop residues, deposition and biological N fixation are strong stimulants of denitrification and associated N oxide fluxes. The magnitude of NH3 volatilization also determines the availability of N for nitrification and denitrification. Studies have found denitrification to be lower when NH3 losses are high in both upland soils and wetland rice systems.
Nitrification and denitrification rates.
Whether denitrification or nitrification dominates depends on many different factors. Nitrification is a relatively constant process across ecosystems, whereas denitrification rates are temporally and spatially variable. In most soils, availability of NH4+ and oxygen are the most important factors controlling nitrification. The major controls on biological denitrification include the availability of organic carbon, oxygen and nitrate (NO3-) or other N oxides. Various studies have found high denitrification activity in hot spots created by decomposing organic matter which generates anaerobic microsites. This phenomenon may explain some of the high spatial variability of soil denitrification commonly observed.
N2/N2O ratios observed under different conditions in laboratory experiments were found extremely variable and dependent on the available C and NO3-, and on the moisture content of the soil. The NO/N2O emission ratio has been proposed as an indicator of the importance of nitrification and denitrification. Laboratory studies indicate that for nitrifiers the NO/N2O ratio is close to unity while for denitrifiers this ratio is less than unity. As denitrification and nitrification often occur simultaneously, it is not possible to extrapolate these results to field conditions. However, even in field situations the NO/N2O ratio may provide an indication of the dominant process responsible for NO emission.
Soil moisture and temperature.
Soil moisture and temperature control soil processes at all levels by governing organic matter decomposition rates, denitrification and nitrification. Some studies have shown that emissions of NO increase with increasing soil temperatures. However, the relationship between temperature and NO fluxes is subject to considerable uncertainty with numerous exceptions in temperate and tropical systems where no clear relationship was found between temperature and NO fluxes. During denitrification the ratio of N2O/N2 generally increases with decreasing temperatures. In systems where soil N temporarily accumulates due to wet-dry or freeze-thaw cycles, then early spring, winter and autumn in temperate climates may account for an important part of the annual N2O emission from agricultural or any other land. Soil-water content influences N2O and NOx emissions from all types of soil. In general, microbial activity peaks at 30-60 percent water-filled pore space. Nitrification and associated N2O and NOx production also show maximum activity at 30-60 percent water-filled pore space, while optimum conditions for denitrification may occur at 50-80 to 60-90 percent water-filled pore space. The oxygen and moisture status and gas diffusion in agricultural soils depend on soil texture and drainage. Fine-textured soils have more capillary pores within aggregates than do sandy soils, and so hold soil water more tightly. As a result, anaerobic conditions may be more easily reached and maintained for longer periods within aggregates in fine-textured soils than in coarse-textured soils.
The wetting of dry soils causes pulses in N mineralization, nitrification and NO and N2O fluxes. The alternating drying and wetting of soils enhances the release of N2O and NO from the soil to the atmosphere although peaks in N2O production may decline with subsequent wetting events. Soil pH Soil pH has a marked effect on the products of denitrification. Denitrification rates are slower under acid than under slightly alkaline conditions, but the N2O fraction may be larger at low soil pH, particularly with an adequate nitrate supply. This is commonly attributed to the sensitivity of N2O reductase to proton activity. Emissions of N2O and NO decrease with increasing pH in acid soils, and increase when the pH of alkaline soils decreases. Soil pH is a major factor in determining the mechanism of NO formation. In one study, in an alkaline loamy clay soil (pH 7.8) nitrification was the main source of NO, whereas in an acid sandy clay loam (pH 4.7) denitrification dominated the NO production.
Before escaping from the soil to the atmosphere the N gases diffuse through the soil pore system, where denitrifiers may consume NO and N2O or plants may take up NO. In situations where high soil water content, impeded drainage, shallow groundwater, soil structure, soil compaction, fine soil texture or soil surface sealing limit gas diffusion, denitrification activity is high. However, such conditions greatly enhance the probability of denitrifiers re-consuming N2O and NO. Soils close to saturation show high denitrification activity but low N2O and NO emission. Under such conditions the oxygen supply is low and N2O and NO diffusion is limited; in the absence of oxygen as an electron acceptor, denitrifiers consume more N2O and NO than under more aerobic conditions. Under wet conditions N2O uptake from the atmosphere may occur. Agricultural management factors.
Nitrous oxide fluxes from flooded rice systems during the growing season are generally lower than those from rainfed fields. The cause of this may be the anaerobic conditions prevailing in wetland rice systems. However, aerobic conditions generally prevail during the fallow period after the rice crop,.
allowing nitrification of NH4+ mineralized from soil organic matter and residues of crops and aquatic biota. Observed N2O emission from drained soils during the post-harvest fallow period is much higher than during the crop season. Biological N fixation by leguminous crops, such as alfalfa, soybeans, pulses, and clovers, provides an important input of N in many agricultural systems. Although these crops generally receive no or only small N fertilizer inputs as a starter, studies have demonstrated that leguminous crops show emissions of N2O that are of the same level as those of fertilized nonleguminous crops.
Fertilizer management.
The type of fertilizer influences the magnitude of nitrification and denitrification. Furthermore, the type of fertilizer may influence the magnitude of NO and fluxes. For example, anhydrous ammonia (AA), which is generally injected, commonly shows higher losses than other fertilizers. Total N gas production and in particular emission may increase with the N application rate. However, denitrification and production may be more closely related to the amount of unused N than to the total amount. Therefore, the timing of fertiliz