Dams, fish and fisheries.
Opportunities, challenges and conflict resolution.
FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER.
edited by Gerd Marmulla Fishery Resources Officer Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service Fishery Resources Division FAO Fisheries Department.
This was a working paper for the World Commission on Dams ­ the report published herein was prepared for the Commission as part of its information gathering activity. The views, conclusions and recommendations are those of the authors and are not intended to represent the views of the Commission. Publication by the Commission does not imply endorsement of the authors' findings or recommendations. This report is published to share with the public information and ideas gathered and considered by the Commission in its deliberations. The Commission's views, conclusions and recommendations will be set forth in the Commission's own report.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104694-8.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This FAO Fisheries Technical Paper has been prepared to publish information that was compiled as a working paper for the World Commission on Dams (WCD). The material presented herein was previously submitted to WCD as FAO's contribution to the Thematic Reviews on Environmental Issues, initiated by WCD in their process of reviewing the various impacts and benefits of dams while preparing a global review on "Dams and Development". The World Commission on Dams had entrusted FAO to review, and to report upon, major fishery issues in relation to world dams. As agreed, the report delivered to WCD contained four individual reviews that had been prepared to address the following complexes of questions: Have reservoir fisheries been successful in replacing river fisheries? Which migration mitigation measures exist and how effective are they? What is the information base and capacity required for effective management of fisheries through a dam project cycle (appraisal, design, construction, operation)? What are the existing criteria and guidelines concerning dams and fisheries? We acknowledge with thanks the useful comments and suggestions by Dr. T. Petr, Australia. Furthermore, the financial support by WCD is herewith duly acknowledged.
Distribution: FAO Representatives FAO Regional Fisheries Officers FAO Fisheries Department Inland Fisheries Authors.
Marmulla, G. (ed.) Dams, fish and fisheries. Opportunities, challenges and conflict resolution. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 419. Rome, FAO. 2001. 166p. ABSTRACT The four papers presented in this publication address major fishery issues in relation to dams as identified by the World Commission on Dams (WCD) and FAO for the purpose of WCD's global review on "Dams and Development". Characteristics of river and reservoir fisheries in various regions of the world are reviewed. As reservoirs provide significant contributions to global freshwater fisheries, production figures for reservoirs in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as for the Commonwealth of Independent States, are mentioned. Also fish production figures for large rivers are provided, emphasizing the importance of floodplains for fish production. The extent to which fisheries can be developed, sustained or protected along riverine ecosystems modified by dams reflects basin topography, geological features, watershed hydrology, and climate, as well as engineering features of the dam itself, and operational programmes for retention and release of water from the reservoir, through the dam and into the tailwaters. Compensation for loss in yield from river fisheries can be difficult to achieve through development of reservoir fisheries. Even if compensation is achieved from a fishery perspective, specific needs of fish species that are not included in the fishery, but are threatened or endangered, must be considered to avoid negative impacts to these fishes. The importance of free longitudinal passage of river fauna is stressed. The construction of dams can block or delay upstream fish migration and thus contribute to the decline and even the extinction of species that depend on longitudinal movements along the stream continuum during certain phases of their life cycle. Mortality resulting from downstream passage through hydraulic turbines or over spillways can be significant. Habitat loss or alteration, discharge modifications, changes in water quality and temperature, increased predation pressure, as well as delays in migration caused by dams, are discussed. Various technical solutions are suggested and critical points, that have to be considered in fishpass construction, are stresssed. A non-exhaustive review of the current status of the use of fish facilities at dams throughout the world is presented, with the main target species considered from North America, Europe, Latin America, Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Asia. The main challenges to maintaining and enhancing reservoir fisheries, as well as associated social and economic benefits, are fish habitat and environmental degradation, inadequate fish assemblages, inefficient harvesting systems, stakeholder conflicts, and insufficient institutional and political recognition. Fishery administrators find it difficult to defend the interests of their sector; decisions over developments affecting fisheries and aquatic environments are often made with minimum or no consideration of these sectors, mainly for lack of reliable economic valuation and lack of political clout by the users. Given this lack of political power, the interests and needs of fishers and fisheries managers are often not properly represented within existing political frameworks, and thus neglected or ignored. Fishery administrators and stakeholders should seek every opportunity to communicate their needs and demonstrate the value of fisheries and the aquatic natural resources. The multi-sectoral nature of water resources development in the context of socio-economic development must be recognized. Management policy must be country-specific and take local conditions into account as blind application of imported principles may lead to policy failures. Fisheries management capacity and information base requirements are reviewed for the six phases of the dam project cycle, i.e. dam identification, dam design, dam project appraisal, dam construction, dam operation and dam decommissioning. Effective environmental assessment and management coupled with improvements in design of civil engineering structures has made some recent dam projects more fish friendly and environmentally acceptable. The need for drafting legal instruments, which will facilitate modification of dam structures to incorporate mitigation measures and help altering dam operation rules to be more beneficial to fish biodiversity and fisheries, is emphasized.
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page THE INFLUENCE OF DAMS ON RIVER FISHERIES (by Donald C. Jackson and Gerd Marmulla) ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES, DAMS AND FISH MIGRATION (by Michel Larinier) A REVIEW OF GUIDANCE AND CRITERIA FOR MANAGING RESERVOIRS AND ASSOCIATED RIVERINE ENVIRONMENTS TO BENEFIT FISH AND FISHERIES (by Leandro E. Miranda) ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES, CAPACITY AND INFORMATION BASE FOR MANAGEMENT OF FISHERIES AFFECTED BY DAMS (by Garry M. Bernacsek) 45 1.
THE INFLUENCE OF DAMS ON RIVER FISHERIES.
by Donald C. Jackson Professor of Fisheries Management Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Mississippi State University Box 9690, Mississippi State, USA and Gerd Marmulla Fishery Resources Officer Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
The extent to which fisheries can be developed, sustained or protected along riverine ecosystems modified by dams reflects basin topography, geological features, watershed hydrology, and climate, as well as engineering features of the dam itself, and operational programmes for retention and release of water from the reservoir, through the dam and into the tailwaters. Compensation for loss in yield from river fisheries can be difficult to achieve through development of reservoir fisheries. The larger the river, and the more downstream the location of the dam, the less potential there is for a reservoir fishery to compensate in terms of yield for losses sustained by the river fishery. Compensation potentials apparently are higher in shallower reservoirs in tropical regions than they are in deeper reservoirs and in more northern latitudes. Even if compensation is achieved from a fishery perspective, specific needs of fish species not included in the fishery, and/or that may be threatened or endangered, must be considered to avoid negative impacts to these fishes. There is considerable variability in fishery production among and within regions with respect to reservoir and river fisheries. River fishery production is dependent on length of river, catchment area and, for specific sections of rivers, the position of the segment along the river continuum. In tropical and temperate rivers, fish yields per unit surface area are considerably greater in rivers with flood pulses and floodplains than in nearby impoundments where flood pulses are reduced or absent. In the tropics, for example, large, slow-flowing rivers averaged 30-100 kg/ha/year and the floodplains averaged 200-2 000 kg/ha/year. Fish yields in floodplain river ecosystems are directly related to the height and duration of floods. If altered hydrology resulting from dams curtails or eliminates normal, historical downstream flooding, overall fisheries production throughout the system can be negatively impacted. In Africa, large reservoirs subject to moderate to heavy fishing (e.g. Kariba, Nasser/Nubia, Volta), have yields ranging 27-65 kg/ha/year. In contrast, however, Lake Kainji, another large African reservoir has yields of only 3.5-4.7 kg/ha/year. For medium-sized African reservoirs, estimated mean yield was approximately 80 kg/ha/year. Mean yield from a variety of Sub-Saharan small water bodies was 329 kg/ha/year. Substantial overall losses to overall fishery production in river basins have been reported as a result of dam construction in Africa. For example, an annual net loss of 11 250 t of fish per year were lost in the Senegal River system as a result of dam construction associated with Lake de Guiers.
Major concern throughout Asia is that movements of migratory fishes along river courses will be blocked by dams. Additionally, dewatering of stream channels immediately downstream from dams can be a serious problem. Reservoir yields in China are reported to range from 127 to 152 kg/ha/year, but these high values tend to be the result of intensive stocking programmes. In India reservoir fishery yields range from 11.4 (large reservoirs) to 49.5 (small reservoirs) kg/ha/year. Reservoir fishery yields in Southeast Asia (e.g. Malaysia) and Central Asia and Kazakhstan are reported to be much less than in other parts of Asia, with values typically around 15 kg/ha/year or less. Yields in Sri Lanka range from 40 to 650 kg/ha/year, but these yields are primarily the result of stocking reservoirs with exotic species. In Australia, dams have generally resulted in negative impacts to native riverine fishes while encouraging exotic species. This has been attributed, in part, to disruption of seasonal flood cycles, and to dams acting as barriers to fish movements. The Murray River now has the lowest commercial fish yield per km2 of floodplain of any of the world's major rivers, although historical catches were comparable. In reservoirs constructed on Queensland rivers, fish stocks are maintained through stocking of native fish species. In Latin America and the Caribbean, reservoir fishery yields tend to be higher for the Caribbean (Cuba 125 kg/ha/year; Dominican Republic 29-75 kg/ha/year) than is generally recorded for Central and South America reservoirs. Records available for Brazil (2.1-11.5 kg/ha/year) and Panama (4.8-63.2 kg/ha/year), suggest that reservoirs can have quite variable yields, depending on flushing rates, elevation, and basin morphology. Higher yields throughout the region typically result from stocking of exotic species. Similar patterns exist with regard to fishery yields from reservoirs in temperate zones. The average yield from North American reservoirs is only 24 kg/ha/year. In Europe, records indicate reservoir fishery yields ranging from 21 to 76 kg/ha/year. Dams can enhance some riverine fisheries, particularly tailwater fisheries immediately below dams that result from discharge of seston (primarily plankton) from the upstream reservoir. However, discharge of seston is typically attenuated quickly downstream from the dam, with corresponding attenuation of the associated fisheries. If discharge is from the hypolimnion of the reservoir, lowered temperatures in the receiving tailwater can curtail or eliminate warmwater river fisheries and require stocking of exotic coldwater species, e.g. salmonids (assuming that the water is sufficiently oxygenated). Productive tailwater fisheries targeting these coldwater fishes can result but generally require supplemental hatchery programmes and introduction of coldwater invertebrates to serve as forage items for these fish. In North America, yield from coldwater tailwater fisheries have been recorded for up to 339 kg/ha/year with fishing effort seven times higher than the respective upstream reservoir. This high amount of effort reflects high standing stock of salmonids in these environments. Some of these coldwater tailwater fisheries can extend considerable distances (e.g. > 150 km downstream from dams in Arkansas, USA). Reservoirs resulting from construction of dams can in some situations result in productive fisheries. This is particularly true for locations where river fisheries contribute little to overall national fishery yields. Beneficial reservoir fisheries also exist in drier regions where dams are constructed for agricultural irrigation, and fisheries are secondary considerations. Benefits seem more pronounced for smaller, shallower reservoirs that have reasonably high concentrations of dissolved solids and that are located in the upper reaches of their respective river ecosystem. Stocking of exotic species (both in reservoirs and in tailwaters ) can enhance yields, as long as the exotic fishes are environmentally sound and culturally acceptable to the surrounding human population. In this regard, caution is warranted in cultures where fishing and fish consumption are non-traditional activities. Building reservoirs in the context of such cultures may not achieve projected fishery benefits even though exploitable fish stocks may exist.
Development of reservoir plankton reflects nutrients captured by the reservoir. This plankton generally relates directly to fisheries production of the respective reservoir. However, when several dams are constructed on upstream tributaries of a river ecosystem, the cumulative effects of these dams can be that of blocking the flow of nutrients originating from the catchment basin from the lower reaches of the ecosystem, thereby negatively affecting fisheries production in downstream portions of the ecosystem (including estuary and marine environments). Dams also can block the flow of nutrients from ocean environments upstream into riverine environments by preventing anadromous fishes that die after spawning (e.g. Pacific salmonids) from depositing these nutrients via carcass decay in upstream reaches. Furthermore, and if the riverine fishery is sustained by stocks of migrating fishes that become blocked by a dam, the riverine fishery can be severely impacted. If the migrating fishes are anadromous or catadromous species, linked to ocean fisheries, or those of inland seas or large lakes, the negative impacts to these stocks and their associated fisheries can be catastrophic. Because dams tend to be constructed to enhance socio-economic development activities, they tend to attract people and industry. Subsequently, river ecosystems containing dams must contend with secondary environmental pressures such as increases in pollution as well as increased exploitation and extraction of their resources (primarily water, fish, and substrates), that are independent from and in addition to the direct influences of dams and reservoirs on the physical and biological dimensions of the system. Determining the impact of dams on river ecosystems and their associated fisheries depends on spatial and temporal scales of interest. If spatial scales are sufficiently large (planetary, continental, perhaps regional and biome), and temporal scales are sufficiently long (decades, centuries, millennia), placing a dam on a river does little more than increase atmospheric water vapour (through evaporation from the reservoir), reduce long-term streamflows downstream, desiccate terrestrial environments, salinate surrounding areas, and shift bio-energetic processes (some of which can lead to floral and faunal extinction at various scales of resolution). We cannot assign the terms "good" or "bad" to any of these phenomena. They simply reflect anthropogenic activity on this planet. However, if we look at smaller spatial and shorter temporal scales, (which we obviously cannot neglect since we have to make decisions that have bearings on the present and future human generations and also on present and future living aquatic resources) we have to keep in mind that dams and their reservoirs (which can under certain circumstances help to better nourish people and make their livelihoods more sustainable) can - if wrongly placed - also lead to significant declines of fisheries and to extinction of aquatic species. Given sufficient time, geophysical and climatic forces will override and erode the physical influences of dams, and evolutionary forces will alter how life forms interact with the resulting environments. Caution is warranted to avert potential negative impacts from dams with respect to fisheries and associated human interactions with these and other river resources. Such caution underscores the reality that people are depending on us, the scientists, the resource managers, the decision-makers, to be right.
INTRODUCTION.
Dams interrupt streamflow, and generate hydrological changes along the integrated continuum of river ecosystems (Vannote et al., 1980; Junk et al., 1989) that ultimately can be reflected in their associated fisheries. The most obvious effects from placing dams on rivers result from formation of new lentic or semi-lentic environments upstream from the dam, and tailwater environments downstream from the dam. Both environments can be conducive to the establishment and maintenance of fish stocks appropriate for exploitation by fisheries.
Photo 1: Through the effect of this hydroelectric dam, the fishery of the White River (Arkansas, USA) was converted from a naturally sustained warmwater fishery into an artificially sustained trout fishery dependant on periodic stocking by Government hatcheries. (Photo: D.C. Jackson, Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, Mississippi State University, USA).
The extent to which fisheries can be developed, sustained or protected along these modified riverine ecosystems reflects basin topography, geological features, watershed hydrology, and climate, as well as engineering features of the dam itself, and operational programmes for retention and release of water from the reservoir, through the dam and into the tailwaters. Fundamental considerations must include establishment and maintenance of habitat for spawning, recruitment and maturation of the fish stocks, and provisions for passage by fishes that during certain phases of their life cycles, depend on longitudinal movements along the stream continuum (FAO, 1998). In this regard, Bernacsek (1984) provided an excellent summary of design and operational features for dams to address fisheries concerns. Although the emphasis of Bernacsek's paper focused on African reservoirs, the general orientation has applicability to many situations on a global scale. He suggested: (i) maximum possible crest elevation; (ii) discharge structure intakes positioned at highest possible elevation; (iii) discharge water into tailwaters be sufficiently oxygenated to support aquatic fauna; (iv) annual water level fluctuation in the reservoir to be within the range of 2.5-4.0 m; (v) drawdown rate not to exceed 0.6 m/month; and (vi) downstream discharge to include an annual artificial flood event.
Photo 2: A section of the River Perak (Malaysia) has been dewatered downstream of a dam; only few fish are caught in the dewatered stream stretch. (Photo: D.C. Jackson, Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, Mississippi State University, USA).
Along the stream continuum, dams and their associated upstream reservoirs have downstream effects on riverine environments and, subsequently, diverse influences on downstream fisheries, even beyond the lotic ecosystem. Cumulative effects of dams in catchment basins and tributary streams can significantly block nutrient flow throughout the ecosystem, affecting fisheries production in downstream reservoirs (Welcomme, 1985), river channels (Hess et al., 1982) and estuary and marine environments (Ryder, 1978). Tolmazin (1979) related reduced fish yields in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov to impoundments on the Danube, Dnieper, and Dniester rivers in Europe and, in line with the orientations of Welcomme (1985), Hess et al. (1982), and Ryder (1978), suggested that such patterns reflected dams acting as nutrient traps. Dams also block the flow of nutrients from ocean environments upstream into riverine environments. This is particularly true of anadromous fishes such as Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) that die in the rivers after spawning one time. Cederholm et al. (1999) give an account of the essential contributions of nutrients and energy of Pacific salmon carcasses to the ecosystem. Post spawning mortality of these adult fish introduces nutrients back into the stream in proportion to the number of carcasses deposited. Blockage of this allochthonous organic material from the sea can severely restrict subsequent recruitment of young salmonids in these rivers, directly by limiting their consumption of flesh from dead adults, and indirectly by reducing primary production of plankton and secondary production of benthic macroinvertebrates (Piorkowski, 1995).
Photo 3: A dewatered stream reach downstream of a dam in the Dominican Republic. (Photo: D.C. Jackson, Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, Mississippi State University, USA).
Dams also can enhance some riverine fisheries, and particularly with respect to tailwater fisheries immediately below dams. Fishes can become concentrated below dams as a result of the attractive foraging opportunities there as well as from seasonal congregations of migratory fishes (Jackson, 1985a). On a per unit area basis, tailwater fisheries can be better than those of the reservoirs themselves (Bennett, 1970). Fry (1965) reported that the tailwater fisheries below Table Rock and Taneycomo dams on the White River (Missouri, USA) and Clearwater Dam on the Black River (Missouri, USA) received 7, 10 and 16 times, respectively, more fishing effort per unit area (angler hours per hectare per year) than their associated upstream reservoir. Table Rock tailwater is a coldwater tailwater dependant on stocking of exotic rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), a species that does not reproduce naturally in the system. The other two tailwaters are warmwater tailwaters with native species that reproduce naturally in the rivers. Yields were 339 kg/ha, 364 kg/ha and 753 kg/ha, respectively for the Table Rock, Taneycomo and Clearwater tailwaters. Reservoir yields during the same period (1950s-1960s) for these reservoirs were: Table Rock, 21.4 kg/ha (SE 4.23, N = 10 years); Taneycomo, 71.2 kg/ha (SE 9.93, N = 9 years); Clearwater, 31.35 kg/ha (SE 8.58, N = 4 years) (Turner and Cornelius 1989). For the two warmwater systems (Taneycomo and Clearwater), the tailwaters (Taneycomo 129.5 ha; Clearwater 32.4 ha) also provided greater overall total harvests by weight than did their respective reservoirs (Taneycomo 570.6 ha; Clearwater 805 ha) (Fry, 1965). This high level of production can be related to the transport of seston (primarily plankton) from the upstream reservoir to the receiving tailwater (Jackson et al., 1991).
Photo 4: A blue catfish captured in the tailwater of Coosa River below Jordan Dam (Alabama, USA). (Photo: D.C. Jackson, Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, Mississippi State University, USA).
Fisheries benefits from most tailwater fisheries typically encompass relatively short sections of streams below their respective dams. For example, in navigation channels of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway (Mississippi, USA), tailwater influences extend approximately 4 km below Aberdeen and Columbus dams (Jackson and Dillard, 1993). In the Coosa River tailwater below Jordan Dam (a hydropeaking facility in Alabama, USA), tailwater influences on the fisheries extended approximately 4 km downstream under low flow regimes and nearly 15 km downstream under high flow regimes (Jackson and Davies, 1988a, 1988b; Jackson et al., 1991). Maintaining instream flows to address fisheries concerns in the tailwater below Jordan Dam has been a subject of intense debate in the biopolitical arena of re-licensing this hydroelectric facility (Jackson, 1985a). Two examples of tailwater fisheries in Africa are the ones on the Volta River below the Akosombo Dam (Ghana) and below the Kainji Reservoir (Nigeria). Eschmeyer and Miller (1949) and Miller and Chance (1954) estimated that 35% of the angling in Tennessee Valley Authority waters (USA) occurred below dams, and that tailwater fisheries accounted for 52% of the total harvest. Jackson (1985a), Jackson and Davies (1988b), and Jackson and Dillard (1993) recorded highly productive fisheries in the warmwater tailwaters of the Alabama-Coosa and Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway systems in the southeastern USA. Hess et al. (1982) noted that reservoirs on the Missouri River produced plankton that upon discharge through the dams was beneficial to the respective downstream fisheries. However, Jackson (1985a), Jackson et al. (1991) and Sarnita (1991) demonstrated that plankton transport in a tailwater is rapidly attenuated downstream.
Maintaining higher discharges from dams can extend the beneficial influences of plankton discharged from the dam to lower stream reaches; and thereby lengthen tailwater fisheries in the respective system. Caution, however, is warranted, because excess flushing rates from the upstream reservoir can result in reduced residence time for water in the reservoir, which in turn can preclude development and production potentials for plankton in the reservoir. This would undermine the plankton foundation that supports both the reservoir fishery and its respective downstream tailwater. Temperature can greatly influence riverine fishes, and particularly warmwater fishes. Ye (1996) and Jackson and Ye (2000) related hydrological and climatological factors to principal fish stocks of the Yalobusha River (Yazoo River ecosystem, Mississippi, USA) and identified water temperature (R2 = 0.99) as the most important factor influencing stock structure of channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus). Cooler water apparently curtailed reproduction and subsequent recruitment, and resulted in stocks dominated by larger fish. Rutherford et al. (1995) reported that growth increments of channel catfish in the lower Mississippi River were positively related only to length of the growing season (number of days > 15°C) and attributed this to favourable production of fish food items (primarily invertebrates) during extended warm environmental conditions. Subsequently, cool and cold water releases from dams can curtail or eliminate warmwater fisheries in the tailwaters below the dams (Pasch et al., 1980). However, oxygenated hypolimnetic discharges of cold water can sustain stocks of salmonids where normally waters are too warm during the summer for these fishes (Cadwallader, 1978). Unlike warmwater tailwater fisheries, many coldwater tailwater fisheries require supplemental stocking for their maintenance, primarily because variable flow regimes from hydropower facilities preclude availability of seasonally-stable spawning environments. Dams purposefully or inadvertently alter downstream hydrology, including flooding. If the altered hydrology curtails or eliminates normal, historical downstream flooding, overall fisheries productivity throughout the system can be impacted negatively (Holcik and Bastl, 1977; Welcomme, 1976, 1985; 1986; Junk et al., 1989). In both tropical and temperate rivers, fish yields per unit surface area are considerably greater in rivers with flood pulses and floodplains than in nearby impoundments where flood pulses are reduced or absent (Sparks, 1995). Flooding sets into motion incorporation of extrachannel allochthonous organic material as well as nutrients of terrestrial origin into aquatic dimensions of the riverine ecosystem (Vannote et al., 1980; Junk et al., 1989; Bayley, 1989; 1995; Thorp and Delong, 1994; Sparks, 1995). Once flooding occurs, invertebrates and fishes colonize the inundated areas to take advantage of these allochthonous resources and their products (e.g. invertebrates) on the floodplain (Flotemersch, 1996). Floodplains thus serve as important spawning and nursery grounds, as well as important sources of food for fish of all sizes. The moving interface between the aquatic and terrestrial dimensions of the ecosystem is particularly important because this environment, which is limited in time, promotes faunal interactions biotically as well as abiotically, and rapid nutrient exchanges (Goulding, 1980; Bayley, 1989). Fish yields from floodplain river ecosystems are directly related to the height and duration of floods (Holcik and Bastl, 1977; Goulding, 1980; Welcomme, 1985; Jackson and Ye, 2000; Jackson, in press). It is essential that a fishery be understood as a composite of three interactive components: (i) fish stocks; (ii) habitat; and (iii) people (Nielsen, 1993). If one of these components is missing, there is no fishery. The presence of fisheries resources (e.g. a reservoir stocked with fish appropriate for exploitation) does not necessarily mean that a fishery exists. People must be exploiting the resources consumptively or otherwise for there to be a fishery. This exploitation can be curtailed or rendered void or non-existent by factors such as access, culture and tradition, social disturbance, and economics. Modifications to or loss of the natural river environment supporting fish stocks, and human interactions with these stocks, can challenge or eliminate traditional, and culturally-important fisheries (Jackson, 1991). River fisheries are non-portable. Persons with individual, community and/or subcultural identities linked to river fisheries can suffer profound social and economic stress if the foundation for their identities (i.e., the river and its resources) is taken from them (Baird, 1994; Brown et al., 1996). Shifting focus and techniques from those appropriate for the seasonal dynamics of river.
Photos 5a and 5b: Tibbie Creek, a tributary of Tombigbee River (Mississippi, USA), during (a) the dry season and (b) the wet season. Both photos show exactly the same location. (Photos: D.C. Jackson, Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, Mississippi State University, USA).
ecosystems to those appropriate for reservoirs and tailwaters can require training 