FAO TECHNICAL GUIDELINE FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION TO DETER, PREVENT AND ELIMINATE ILLEGAL, UNREPORTED AND UNREGULATED FISHING.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT The FAO Committee on Fisheries, at its 24th Session, adopted the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU). On 23 June 2001, at its 120th Session, the FAO Council endorsed the IPOA-IUU. The FAO Fisheries Department has prepared and finalized these guidelines to assist FAO Members, regional fisheries management organizations and other interested parties in the implementation of the IPOA-IUU. These guidelines are based on the work of Mr David Balton, a consultant to the FAO Fishery Policy and Planning Division. These guidelines have no formal legal status. They are intended to be practical and flexible, and may be revised in the future in light of new information and experience.
Distribution: All FAO Members and Associate Members Interested Nations and International Organizations FAO Fisheries Department FAO Fisheries Officers in FAO Regional Offices Interested Non-Governmental Organizations.
iv FAO Fisheries Department. Implementation of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries. No.
Rome, FAO. 2002. 122p. ABSTRACT These Guidelines have been produced to support implementation of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU). These Guidelines are addressed to decision-makers and policy-makers associated with the management of fisheries, but they should be of interest to fishing industries and other parties. The international community has experienced a growing incidence of fishing activity that does not respect applicable laws and regulations, including the standards set forth in recent international instruments. Examples of such activity include reflagging of fishing vessels to evade controls, fishing in areas of national jurisdiction without authorization by the coastal State, failure to report (or misreporting) catches, etc. Such irresponsible fishing activity directly undermines efforts to manage marine fisheries properly and impedes progress toward the goal of sustainable fisheries. The term "illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing" ­ or IUU fishing ­ has emerged to describe a wide range of such activity. The FAO Committee on Fisheries decided in 1999 to address this growing problem through the elaboration of an International Plan of Action. Over the course of the next two years, a significant effort unfolded, which culminated in the adoption of the IPOA-IUU in 2001. The IPOA-IUU is conceived of as a "toolbox" ­ a set of tools for use in dealing with IUU fishing in its various manifestations. Obviously, not all tools in the toolbox are appropriate for use in all situations. These Guidelines are intended (1) to help familiarize FAO Members and others with the tools; (2) to suggest which tools to use in particular circumstances; and (3) to provide guidance on how to use the tools effectively.
The IPOA-IUU is voluntary. However, like the Code of Conduct, certain parts of the IPOA-IUU are based on relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and other pertinent instruments. The IPOA-IUU also contains provisions that may be, or have already been, given binding effect by means of other legal instruments, including global, regional and subregional instruments. In short, these Guidelines review the measures to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing that are contained in the IPOA-IUU and provide advice as to how those measures may be best put into effect. The guidelines also provide advice on the possible organization and content of national plans of action for implementation of the IPOA-IUU, as well as suggestions for reporting to FAO on implementation of the IPOA-IUU.
vii CONTENTS.
BACKGROUND ACR ONYMS.
1.1 1.2.
3. 3.1 INTERNATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION ­ IUU Origin and purpose of the IPOA-IUU Elements of the IPOA-IUU PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF GUIDELINES ALL STATE RESPONSIBILITIES Observance of international standards 3 .1 .1 Areas under national jurisdiction 3.1.2 High seas National laws, regulations and practices 3.2.1 Review of pertinent laws, regulations and practices 3.2.2 State control over nationals 3 .2 .3 Vessels without nationality 3.2.4 Eliminating subsidies and other economic support 3.2.5 Monitoring, control and surveillance Cooperation between States FLAG STATE RESPONSIBILITIES Fishing vessel registration 4.1.1 Chartering arrangements Record of fishing vessels Authorization to fish Transport and support vessels Other control measures COASTAL STATE MEASURES Coastal State rights and responsibilities Access and access agreements Cooperation among coastal States PORT STATE MEASURES Basic port State measures.
xi xiv 1 1 4 8 8 8 9 10 11 11 12 14 16 17 20 20 22 24 26 27 29 30 32 32 34 36 38 39.
4 .1 4.2 4 .3 4.4 4.5.
5 .1 5.2 5.3.
viii 6.2 6 .3.
Examples of some port State measures in use Other possibilities for coordination INTERNATIONALLY AGREED MARKET-RELATED MEASURE S Actions by RFMOs Other market-related measures IMPLEMENTATION OF THE IPOA-IUU THROUGH RFMOS Role of RFMOs in addressing IUU fishing Examples of measures adopted by RFMOs Possibilities for further action 8 .3 .1 Institutional strengthening 8.3.2 Additional compliance measures 8.3.3 Better collection and exchange of information 8.3.4 Improved monitoring, control and surveillance 8.3.5 Comprehensive port State regimes 8 .3 .6 Certification/Documentation schemes 8.3.7 Controls on chartering 8.3.8 Actions in response to remaining non-member problems 8.3.9 Cooperation among RFMOs and between RFMOs and other international organizations SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES NATIONAL PLANS OF ACTION AND REPORTING ON IMPLEMENTATION Development of NPOAs Suggested format for NPOAs Suggested format for reports to FAO on implementation CHECKLIST OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS LITERATURE CITED 41 46.
8.1 8.2 8 .3.
ix APPENDIXES I. II. International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing Technical Terms of Reference of the International Network for the Cooperation and Coordination of Fisheries-Related Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Activities Scheme to Promote Compliance by Non-Contracting Party Vessels with the Conservation and Enforcement Measures Established by NAFO Revised ICCAT Port Inspection Scheme CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme for Dissostichus spp. Websites of Selected RFMOs.
xi BACKGROUND.
From ancient times, fishing has been a major source of food for humanity and a provider of employment and economic benefits to those engaged in this activity. However, with increased knowledge and the dynamic development of fisheries, it was realized that living aquatic resources, although renewable, are not infinite and need to be properly managed, if their contribution to the nutritional, economic and social well being of the growing world's population was to be sustained.
The adoption in 1982 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea provided a new framework for the better management of marine resources. The new legal regime of the oceans gave coastal States rights and responsibilities for the management and use of fishery resources within the area of their national jurisdiction (EEZs), which embrace some 90 percent of the world's marine fisheries.
In recent years, world fisheries have become a dynamically developing sector of the food industry, and many States have striven to take advantage of their new opportunities by investing in modern fishing fleets and processing factories in response to growing international demand for fish and fishery products. It became clear, however, that many fisheries resources could not sustain an often uncontrolled increase of exploitation.
Clear signs of over-exploitation of important fish stocks, modifications of ecosystems, significant economic losses, and international conflicts on management and fish trade threatened the long-term sustainability of fisheries and the contribution of fisheries to food supply. Therefore, the Nineteenth Session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI), held in March 1991, recommended that new approaches to fisheries management embracing conservation and environmental, as well as social and economic, considerations were urgently needed. FAO was asked to develop the concept of responsible fisheries and elaborate a Code of Conduct to foster its application.
Subsequently, the Government of Mexico, in collaboration with FAO, organized an International Conference on Responsible Fishing in Cancún in May 1992. The Declaration of Cancún endorsed at that Conference was brought to the attention of the UNCED Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, which supported the preparation of a Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing, held in September 1992, further recommended the elaboration of a Code to address the issues regarding high seas fisheries.
The One Hundred and Second Session of the FAO Council, held in November 1992, discussed the elaboration of the Code, recommending that priority be given to high seas issues and requested that proposals for the Code be presented to the 1993 session of the Committee on Fisheries.
The Twentieth Session of COFI, held in March 1993, examined in general the proposed framework and content for such a Code, including the elaboration of guidelines, and endorsed a time frame for the further elaboration of the Code. It also requested FAO to prepare, on a "fast track" basis, as part of the Code, proposals to prevent reflagging of fishing vessels which affect conservation and management measures on the high seas. This resulted in the FAO Conference, at its Twenty-seventh Session in November 1993, adopting the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, which, according to FAO Conference Resolution 15/93, forms an integral part of the Code.
The Code was formulated so as to be interpreted and applied in conformity with the relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, as well as with the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, 1995, and in the light of, inter alia, the 1992 Declaration of Cancún and the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, in particular Chapter 17 of Agenda 21.
The development of the Code was carried out by FAO in consultation and collaboration with relevant United Nations Agencies and other international organizations, including non-governmental organizations. 10. The Code of Conduct consists of five introductory articles: Nature and Scope; Objectives; Relationship with Other International Instruments; Implementation, Monitoring and Updating and Special Requirements of Developing Countries. These introductory articles are followed by an article on General Principles, which precedes the six thematic articles on Fisheries Management, Fishing Operations, Aquaculture Development, Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management, Post-Harvest Practices and Trade, and Fisheries Research. As already mentioned, the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas forms an integral part of the Code.
xiii 11. The Code is voluntary. However, certain parts of it are based on relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. The Code also contains provisions that may be or have already been given binding effect by means of other obligatory legal instruments amongst the Parties, such as the Agreement to Promote Compliance with Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, 1993. 12. The Twenty-eighth Session of the Conference in Resolution 4/95 adopted the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries on 31 October 1995. The same Resolution requested FAO inter alia to elaborate as appropriate technical guidelines in support of the implementation of the Code in collaboration with members and interested relevant organizations. 13. Despite these achievements, the international community has experienced a growing incidence of fishing activity that does not respect applicable laws and regulations, including the standards set forth in these international instruments. Examples of such activity include reflagging of fishing vessels to evade controls, fishing in areas of national jurisdiction without authorization by the coastal State, failure to report (or misreporting) catches, etc. Such irresponsible fishing activity directly undermines efforts to manage marine fisheries properly and impedes progress toward the goal of sustainable fisheries. 14. The term "illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing" ­ or IUU fishing ­ has emerged to describe a wide range of such activity. As discussed more fully herein, the FAO Committee on Fisheries decided in 1999 to elaborate an International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate IUU fishing (IPOAIUU). Over the course of the next two years, a significant effort unfolded, which culminated in the adoption of the IPOA-IUU in 2001. 15. The IPOA-IUU is conceived of as a "toolbox" ­ a set of tools for use in dealing with IUU fishing in its various manifestations. Obviously, not all tools in the toolbox are appropriate for use in all situations. These guidelines are intended primarily (1) to help familiarize FAO Members and others with the tools; (2) to suggest which tools to use in particular circumstances; and (3) to provide guidance on how to use the tools effectively. 16. As a "toolbox," the IPOA-IUU attempts to embrace all existing measures that have been shown to be useful in combating IUU fishing, including new and emerging tools that at least some States are currently bound to apply. The IPOA recognizes that different States have different legal obligations at present. At the same time, the design of the IPOA is flexible to allow the dynamic development of international law and relevant obligations.
xiv ACRONYM S.
1982 UN Co nv entio n 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement.
CCAMLR CCSB T Code of Conduct COFI EEZ FAO FFA GFCM IATTC IBSFC ICCAT IMO IOTC IPOA IPOA-IUU IUU Fishing M CS NAFO NEAFC NPAFC NPOA NGO RFM O VM S WTO.
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas Agreement for the Implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries FAO Committee on Fisheries Exclusive economic zone Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission The International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas International Maritime Organization Indian Ocean Tuna Commission International plan of action International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Monitoring, control and surveillance Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission National plan of action Non-governmental organization Regional fisheries management organization Vessel monitoring system World Trade Organization.
INTERNATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION ­ IUU Origin and Purpose of the IPOA-IUU.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing occurs in virtually all capture fisheries, whether they are conducted within areas under national jurisdiction or on the high seas. IUU fishing poses a direct and significant threat to effective conservation and management of many fish stocks, causing multiple adverse consequences for fisheries and for the people who depend on them in the pursuit of their legitimate livelihoods. By frustrating fishery management objectives, IUU fishing can lead to the collapse of a fishery or seriously impair efforts to rebuild depleted fish stocks. This, in turn, may result in lost economic and social opportunities, both short-term and long-term, and may diminish food security. Left unchecked, IUU fishing can completely negate the benefits of effective fisheries management. Those who conduct IUU fishing are also unlikely to observe rules designed to protect the marine environment from the harmful effects of some fishing activity, including, for example, restrictions on the harvest of juvenile fish, gear restrictions established to minimize waste and bycatch of non-target species, and prohibitions on fishing in known spawning areas. To avoid detection, IUU fishers often violate certain basic safety requirements, such as keeping navigation lights lit at night, which puts other users of the oceans at risk. Operators of IUU vessels also tend to deny to crew members fundamental rights concerning the terms and conditions of their labour, including those concerning wages, safety standards and other living and working conditions. In addition to its detrimental economic, social, environmental and safety consequences, the unfairness of IUU fishing raises serious concerns. By definition, IUU fishing is either an expressly illegal activity or, at a minimum, an activity undertaken with little regard for applicable standards. IUU fishers gain an unjust advantage over legitimate fishers; i.e. those who operate in accordance with those standards. In this sense, IUU fishers are "free riders" who benefit unfairly from the sacrifices made by others for the sake of proper fisheries conservation and management. This situation undermines the morale of legitimate fishers and, perhaps more importantly, encourages them to disregard the rules as well. Thus, IUU fishing tends to promote additional IUU fishing, creating a downward cycle of management failure.1 The unreported nature of IUU fishing makes it particularly difficult to quantify. Available information nevertheless indicates that, for some important.
For further discussion, see "Dealing with the `Bad Actors' of Ocean Fisheries, " by David Balton.
2 fisheries, IUU fishing accounts for up to 30 percent of total catches and in at least one case possibly much more.2 For example, the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) recently indicated that at least 70,000 tons of tuna catches by large longline vessels go unreported each year in the Indian Ocean.3 The International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) estimated in 1999 that unreported catches represent about 10 percent of overall catches of the major Atlantic tuna species (bluefin, swordfish and bigeye) and that misreporting of catches by some ICCAT members is also suspected.4 The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) indicated in 1999 its extreme concern about the high level of IUU fishing for toothfish (Dissostichus spp.) in its Convention Area,5 a concern that has been echoed by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Moreover, available information strongly suggests that, despite apparent improvement in some regional situations, the amount of IUU fishing world-wide is increasing, as IUU fishers seek to avoid compliance with stricter fishing regulations that are being imposed to deal with downturns in a growing number of fish stocks. While some estimates suggest that IUU fishing may account for as much as one quarter of total catch in the world's oceans, fully reliable data on IUU fishing are unfortunately scarce.
See SOFIA 2000, p. 57. Report of the Second Meeting of FAO and Non-FAO Regional Fishery Bodies or Arrangements, p.
See also IOTC Resolution 00/01, indicating that "70 percent of data from longline operations [in that region] are still not reported to IOTC." 4 However, due presumably to a number of measures adopted by ICCAT in recent years to combat IUU fishing, which are described in later sections of these guidelines, ICCAT estimates of IUU fishing levels for at least bluefin tuna and bigeye tuna have decreased in 1999/2000, compared to previous years. 5 CCAMLR estimates for 1999/2000 show a decrease in IUU fishing for toothfish from previous years, but it remains quite high, at more than 8,000 tons of landings (green weight). The high market value of toothfish has made this species a prime target for IUU fishing. CCAMLR members see this issue as the greatest challenge currently facing the Commission. The continuation of IUU fishing could reduce toothfish stocks to levels from which they cannot recover. Also, the incidental mortality of seabirds caused by those involved in IUU fishing is threatening to drive to extinction a number of species, specifically petrels and albatrosses. For further information, see "The Illegal and Unregulated Fishery for Toothfish in the Southern Ocean, and the CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme," by D.J. Agnew.
3 Since the late 1990s, a number of international fora have issued calls to combat IUU fishing.6 The FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI), at its Twentythird Session in 1999, considered the problem to be a matter of high priority. Information presented to COFI at that time indicated that IUU fishing, particularly by fishing vessels flying "flags of convenience," was a growing threat to the achievement of sustainable fisheries. In the face of such information, COFI recommended the elaboration of an International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU).7 Shortly afterwards, an FAO Ministerial Meeting on Fisheries in March 1999 expressed concern over the growing incidence of IUU fishing and declared that, without prejudice to the rights and obligations of States under international law, FAO "will develop a global plan of action to deal effectively with all forms of illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing, including fishing by vessels flying `flags of convenience,' through coordinated efforts by States, FAO, relevant regional fisheries management bodies and other relevant international agencies such as the International Maritime Organization (IMO)." In June 1999, the FAO Council echoed these calls for a comprehensive initiative to tackle the problem of IUU fishing and determined that this initiative should be carried forward through the development of an international plan of action within the framework of the Code of Conduct. The Government of Australia, in cooperation with FAO, organized an Expert Consultation on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, which took place in Sydney, Australia, from 15 to 19 May 2000.8 FAO subsequently convened a Technical Consultation on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing in Rome from 2 to 6 October 2000. During a further Technical Consultation, held in Rome from 22 to 23 February 2001, careful deliberations produced a complete text for the draft IPOA for consideration by COFI at its Twenty-fourth Session. COFI adopted the IPOA-IUU, by consensus, on 2 March 2001. In doing so, COFI urged all FAO Members to take the necessary steps to implement the.
E.g. the Commission on Sustainable Development (April 1999); the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Fisheries Working Group (July 1999); the United Nations General Assembly (November 1999); the IMO Sub-Committee on Flag State Implementation (January 2000); the IMO Marine Environment Protection Committee (March 2000); the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (May 2000). 7 Report of the Twenty-third Session of the Committee on Fisheries, Rome, Italy, 15-19 February 1999, Paragraph 72. 8 Documents relating to this Expert Consultation are available in the Report of the Expert Consultation on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing.
4 IPOA-IUU effectively. The FAO Council, at its 120th Session in June 2001, endorsed the IPOA-IUU. On 28 November 2001, the United Nations General Assembly urged all States, as a matter of priority, to coordinate their activities and cooperate directly and, as appropriate, through relevant regional fisheries management organizations, in the implementation of the IPOA-IUU and to develop corresponding national plans of action (NPOAs).9 1.2 Elements of the IPOA-IUU.
Addressing the complex problem of IUU fishing in an effective manner is not an easy task. The term "IUU fishing," as discussed below, covers a broad range of activity. The vessels that conduct IUU fishing are, by nature, highly mobile platforms that often operate in marine areas far from land and in places where effective monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) are lacking.10 The beneficial owners of the vessels, who typically have nationalities that differ from those of their vessels, often succeed in preventing fisheries managers and law enforcement officials from ascertaining their identities. In addition, the ease with which IUU fishers can change the registration of their vessels and the number of ports in which they can off-load their catch make tracking difficult. In light of these manifold challenges, the IPOA-IUU was conceived as a kind of comprehensive "toolbox" that includes a full range of tools to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing. Many of these tools are already in use by at least some States, acting alone or in cooperation with other States, including through regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs). Not all tools work in all situations. However, States should be able to find in the IPOA-IUU an appropriate tool or combination of tools to fit every circumstance and, in so doing, reduce the incidence of IUU fishing. The following section briefly summarizes the major elements of the IPOA-IUU. Basic terminology. Section II of the IPOA-IUU highlights a number of key terms as they are used in the text. Of particular note are the terms "illegal," "unreported," and "unregulated" as they relate to fishing activity. They are presented here verbatim: Illegal fishing refers to fishing activities:.
See UNGA Resolution 56/13, paragraph 15. The term "monitoring, control and surveillance" ­ or MCS ­ appears to have come into common usage following the 1981 FAO Expert Consultation on Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Systems for Fisheries Management.
5 conducted by national or foreign vessels in waters under the jurisdiction of a State, without the permission of that State, or in contravention of its laws and regulations; conducted by vessels flying the flag of States that are parties to a relevant regional fisheries management organization but operate in contravention of the conservation and management measures adopted by that organization and by which the States are bound, or relevant provisions of the applicable international law; or in violation of national laws or international obligations, including those undertaken by cooperating States to a relevant regional fisheries management organization.
Unreported fishing refers to fishing activities: (1) which have not been reported, or have been misreported, to the relevant national authority, in contravention of national laws and regulations; or undertaken in the area of competence of a relevant regional fisheries management organization which have not been reported or have been misreported, in contravention of the reporting procedures of that organization.
Unregulated fishing refers to fishing activities: (1) in the area of application of a relevant regional fisheries management organization that are conducted by vessels without nationality, or by those flying the flag of a State not party to that organization, or by a fishing entity, in a manner that is not consistent with or contravenes the conservation and management measures of that organization; or in areas or for fish stocks in relation to which there are no applicable conservation or management measures and where such fishing activities are conducted in a manner inconsistent with State responsibilities for the conservation of living marine resources under international law.11.
As these provisions reveal, "IUU fishing" is a broad term that captures a wide variety of fishing activity, most of which is illicit. Illegal fishing is, by definition, wrongful. Any fishing activity that should be reported but is not (or is misreported) is also wrongful. Although unregulated fishing may or may not be.
The IPOA-IUU notes that "certain unregulated fishing may take place in a manner which is not in violation of applicable international law, and may not require the application of measures envisaged under" the IPOA-IUU.
6 wrongful, depending on the circumstances, the IPOA-IUU is generally concerned with unregulated fishing that is likely to frustrate the achievement of sustainable fisheries.12 The common thread is that IUU fishing may generally be said to occur in violation of ­ or at least with disregard for ­ applicable fisheries rules, whether adopted at the national or international level. Relationship to the Code of Conduct and to other instruments. Like the other IPOAs adopted by COFI in recent years, the IPOA-IUU has been elaborated within the framework of the Code of Conduct. A number of provisions of the Code of Conduct, particularly certain provisions of Articles 1 and 3, also describe the relationship between the IPOA-IUU and other relevant international instruments. Generally speaking, the IPOA-IUU is to be interpreted and applied in a manner that is consistent with those instruments, including the 1982 UN Convention, the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. The provisions of the IPOA-IUU that relate to international trade are also to be interpreted and applied in a manner that is consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Objectives and principles. As its title indicates, the objective of the IPOA is to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing. The principles to guide the pursuit of this objective include: (1) broad participation and coordination among States, as well as representatives from industry, fishing communities and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs); (2) the phasing in of action to implement the IPOA-IUU on the earliest possible timetable; (3) the use of a comprehensive and integrated approach, so as to address all impacts of IUU fishing; (4) the maintenance of consistency with the conservation and long-term sustainable use of fish stocks and the protection of the environment; (5) transparency; and (6) non-discrimination in form or in fact against any State or its fishing vessels. Overlapping responsibilities of States. As detailed below, the IPOAIUU contains a large and diverse set of measures for States to take to combat IUU fishing, individually and in collaboration with other States. Some of these measures are designed for use by all States; others are tailored for application by.
One could say that fishers are always to blame for engaging in "illegal" and "unreported" fishing activity. The wrongful acts are entirely within their control. Similarly, fishers who become "unregulated" by evading rules that apply to other fishers, e.g. by reflagging or by using vessels without nationality, are to blame for wrongdoing. However, fishers who conduct activity that is unregulated solely because the relevant State or States have not adopted any regulatory measures for the fishery concerned cannot be said to be engaged in wrongful acts.
7 flag States, coastal States and Port States.13 Another section of the IPOA-IUU, on "Internationally Agreed Market-Related Measures," may be said to be addressed to "market States" ­ those States involved in the international trade of fish and fish products. Obviously, there may well be some overlap in these measures as they are implemented. The IPOA-IUU also calls u