FAO Fisheries Circular No. 975.
ISSN 0429-9329.
USE OF FISHMEAL AND FISH OIL IN AQUAFEEDS Further thoughts on the fishmeal trap.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
by Michael B. New Consultant and Ulf N. Wijkström Chief, Development Planning Service Fishery Policy and Planning Division FAO Fisheries Department.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2002.
The mention of specific companies, their products or brand names does not imply any endorsement by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
TC/D/Y3781E/1/6.02/550.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document has been prepared to provide an assessment of the current utilization of fishmeal and fish oil in aquafeeds and to make some projections into the future. This topic is addressed in the light of currently static levels in the production of fishmeal and fish oil. The document was jointly prepared by Ulf N. Wijkström, Chief of the Development Planning Service, FAO Fishery Policy and Planning Division, and by M ichael B. New who was under contract to FAO as a consultant. The principal targeted audience includes policy makers, aquafeed and aquaculture producers, environmentalists, and researchers.
FAO. 2002. Use of fishmeal and fish oil in aquafeeds: further thoughts on the fishmeal trap, by M .B. New & U.N. Wijkström. FAO Fisheries Circular No. 975. Rome. 61 pp. ABS TRACT This Circular reports the results of a re-assessment of the use of fishmeal and fish oil in aquafeeds in the context of the currently static supplies of marine resources. After reviewing earlier studies on this topic, the methodological approach to the topic used in the current study is described in detail. The results of the study indicate that nearly 2.1 million tonnes of fishmeal and approaching 0.7 million tonnes of fish oil were used in the global aquafeed industry in 1999. This represented some 32 percent of the global fishmeal supply and 49 of the fish oil available worlwide. It is estimated that the aquafeed industry in the People's Republic of China was utilizing about 30 percent of the fishmeal used in aquafeed manufacture and 16 percent of the fish oil used for this purpose by 1999. The expected future expansion of global aquaculture, particularly of carnivorous species, has the potential to utilize about 70 percent of total global supplies of fishmeal by the year 2015 and to exceed the total supplies of fish oil well before that date. The changing characteristics of Chinese aquaculture production will have a significant effect on future utilization of these marine resources. The report then discusses the factors that will mitigate this potential problem. These factors include economic, resource supply, resource competition, environmental, ethical, safety, quality, public image, and other issues. The potential for the partial or complete replacement of marine resources in aquafeeds is also briefly discussed. Finally, the report stresses the importance of future research on improved feeding technology and on the utilization of marine resource replacement ingredients in aquafeeds. It is vital that fishmeal and fish replacers not only promote similar growth and survival rates to marine aquafeed ingredients but also ensure that aquatic animal health and welfare is fostered and that the resultant aquaculture products are nutritionally excellent, safe to eat, and accepted by the consuming public.
CONTENTS Page.
BACKGROUND EARLIER STUDIES M ET HODOLOGICAL APPROACH 3.1 Species raised on feeds that contain fishmeal and fish oil 3.2 Aquaculture production trend analysis 3.3 Feed conversion ratio 3.4 Proportion of production achieved through commercial aquafeeds 3.5 Fishmeal and fish oil inclusion rates RESULTS OF THE CURRENT STUDY DISCUSSION 5.1 Economic aspects 5.1.1 Introduction 5.1.2 Raw material for the fishmeal industry 5.1.3 The impact on production costs for cultured salmon and shrimp 5.2 Environmental and ethical factors 5.3 Safety, human health and the replacement of marine ingredients in aquafeeds 5.3.1 Quality of animal feeds and human health 5.3.2 Effects of quality concerns on the public image of aquaculture 5.3.3 Replacement of conventional marine ingredien 5.4 Nutritional value of fish 5.5 Other factors SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS REFERENCES 1 1 2 2 4 4 6 6 7 8 9 9 10 14 15 16 16 18 19 22 23 23 25.
ANNEXES.
Summarized results of earlier studies Species involved in this study Dioxins in aquafeeds and marine feed ingredient 45 55 61.
Two articles written more than a decade ago (Wijkström and New, 1989; New and Wijkström, 1990) expressed concern about the use of marine resources for aquafeeds and coined the term `fishmeal trap' which became common parlance in aquaculture (e.g. Little and Edwards, 1997). At that time it was already becoming obvious that aquaculture was likely to require an increasing quantity of fishmeal (and other marine resources) as global production expanded. On the other hand, world fishmeal production was already static. These observations implied that, at some point in the future, farmers culturing shrimp and carnivorous fish would run into a cost-price squeeze - the fishmeal trap - and that this might be the first of several `ingredient traps' which might constrain certain forms of aquaculture in the future. Wijkström and New (1989) attempted to devise a `fishmeal equivalent' (FM E) to take account not only of the use of commercially produced fishmeal in aquafeeds, but also the use of other marine ingredients, such as shrimp meal, squid meal, and trash fish. These were utilized not only in commercial aquafeeds but also in `farm-made feeds', a term later defined by New, Tacon and Csavas (FAO, 1993a). Following a paper by New (1991), which first provided targets for the expansion of aquaculture production, forecasting became a common feature in the aquaculture press (e.g. Chamberlain, 1993; New, 1997; Tacon, 1998; New, 1999;) and in official documents (e.g. New, Shehadeh and Pedini, 1995; Pedini, 1999). M any of these forecasts included considerations of the future use of marine resources in aquafeeds (e.g. Chamberlain, 1993). In 1994, a review of the use of marine resources was presented at a symposium in Norway (New and Csavas, 1995), which included an attempt to refine forecasts of future usage of both fishmeal and fish oil. Following these early reviews, other reports and forecasts of the use of marine resources in aquafeeds have been published (e.g. Tacon, 1998; De Silva, 1999, and information on this topic is regularly released to members of IFOM A1 (I.H. Pike, pers. comm., 2000) and discussed in symposia (Chamberlain, 2000). The animal feedstuff industry anticipates that specialized feed production, especially aquafeeds and pet food, is likely to be the fastest expanding sector of its business in the new millennium (Gill, 2000).
EARLIER S TUDIES.
Using the concept of the `fishmeal equivalent' (FM E), Wijkström and New (1989) estimated that about eight percent of the global fishmeal supply was used by aquaculture in 1984, 1985 and 1986. These authors expected that aquaculture would be using 15-17 percent of the world supply of fishmeal by the year 2000. This proved to be an underestimate, mainly because aquaculture expanded much more rapidly than was anticipated in 1989. For example, it was estimated that the total production of carnivorous fish and shrimp would be about 2.4 million.
International Fish Meal and Oil Manufacturers Association [now merged with the Fishmeal Exporters Organisation (FEO) to form the International Fishmeal and Fishoil Organisation (IFFO)].
tonnes by the year 2000. In fact, the farmed production of marine shrimp and salmonids alone had exceeded 2.5 million tonnes by 1999 (FAO, 2001a). Earlier studies on marine resource use in aquafeeds and other relevant literature (New and Csavas, 1995; Pike, 1998; Tacon, 1998; Barlow, 2000; Chamberlain, 2000; I.H. Pike, pers. comm., 2000) have been taken into account in this study. The assumptions utilized and the results obtained in these studies are summarized in Annex.
3. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH.
Wijkström and New (1989) applied relatively general assumptions in their calculations. On the other hand, New and Csavas (1995) developed a rather elaborate system for estimating current and future usage of fishmeal and fish oil. Firstly, this entailed estimates of FCR on a species group basis. Secondly, estimates of the proportion of the farmed production for each group achieved through the use of commercial feeds were made on a regional, sub-regional, or sometimes even a country basis. Finally, inclusion rates for both fishmeal and fish oil were estimated on a species group basis. In retrospect, the use of differential inclusion rates on a geographical basis by New and Csavas (1995) was a little too ambitious, and some of the species group categories used were not fully defined in the paper, or did not completely correspond with normal FAO statistical categories. For example, the term `other carnivorous' aggregated freshwater, diadromous and marine species and included groupers, which might have been better linked with seabreams and seabasses. Some more recent reports and forecasts, while being less ambitious, have lacked clarity. For example, some IFOM A (IFFO) forecasts (e.g. I.H. Pike, pers. comm., 2000) list `carp' as a category without making it clear whether this applies only to common carp or to all carps, or `catfish' without specifying whether this includes channel catfish alone, or other cultured catfishes. Tilapias were also included, without clarifying whether this referred only to Nile tilapia or to other tilapias, or indeed to other cichlids. These documents also introduced more than one category of marine fish. The first linked `seabass, seabream, yellowtail, grouper, jacks, and mullets', without defining whether this included the whole of the ISSCAAP2 categories 33 and 34. The second `marine fish' category linked flounder, turbot, halibut, sole, cod and hake, presumably corresponding to the ISSCAAP categories 31 and 32. Some carnivorous species (such as barramundi) and freshwater species (such as mandarin fish and pike) seem to have been omitted. The recent presentation by Chamberlain (2000) appears to have followed these IFOM A (IFFO) categories, except that the second marine fish category was re-named `flatfish'. Differences in the species included in each general category also existed. For example, the category named `carp' in the study by Tacon (1998) included all carps and other cyprinids, whereas New and Csavas (1995) only included (and clearly specified) common carp from this group of fish. Such differences and lack of clarity help to.
International Standard Statistical Classification of Aquatic Animals and Plants (ISSCAAP).
explain some of the apparent differences in the estimated FCRs, proportions of fish fed by commercial feed, and marine resource inclusion rates (see Annex 1). These issues have been addressed in the current study by providing more detailed definitions of the categories and terms used. 3.1 S pe ci e s raised on feeds that contain fishmeal and fish oil.
The species using aquafeeds containing fishmeal and fish oil have been aggregated into groups with similar characteristics, including the level of inclusion of marine resources in their diets, their rearing technology and their biological similarity. Allotment into these groups is based on previous studies but some adjustments have been made. A summary of the species groups used in this study is given in Table.
For clarity, details of the actual species included in each group, [and their production history from 1990-1999] are listed in Annex.
Within ISSCAAP group 11, common carp have been selected for inclusion in this study (Table 1) as being the major cyprinid species for which commercial feeds containing marine resources exist or are expected to be developed. The inclusion of the large production figures for other cyprinids would distort the estimates of marine resource use derived. The whole of group 12 (tilapias and other cichlids) has been included. In group 13, the various types of catfishes have been separated from the category called selected freshwater fish in this study (Table 1) because differing production expansion rates (Table 2) and other parameters (Table 3) have been applied to them. The study category `selected freshwater fish' includes snakeheads, pikes, perches, gobies and mandarin fish. Other freshwater fish contained in ISSCAAP group 13 have been omitted from this study altogether because they are not regarded as carnivorous [e.g. cachama (Colossoma macropomum)]. It is recognized that the omission of the category `freshwater fishes nei' in group 13 from the species listed in Table 1 may have resulted in an underestimation of the marine resources used in aquafeeds. This category probably contains unspecified carnivorous species; however it certainly also contains many species which are not fed commercial feeds containing marine resources. The category `freshwater fishes nei', whose volume (e.g. nearly 1.9 million tonnes in 1999) would have distorted the estimates made in this study, has therefore been omitted. Some diadromous species, (e.g. eels, milkfish, salmon) have been separated (Table 1) because of the differing characteristics shown in Table 2 and 3, while others (trouts and sturgeons) have been linked because of their similarities in these respects. The category `salmon' includes all salmon species, as well as sea trout and chars. Amongst the marine finfish, selected species from a number of ISSCAAP groups have been aggregated as `selected marine fish' but separated from redfish, for which different parameters appear in Table 2 and.
The category `redfish' includes the whole of ISSCAAP group 33, and primarily consists of seabasses, seabreams and groupers (Table 1).
The crustaceans included in this study have been separated, for similar reasons to those mentioned above, into marine shrimp, freshwater prawns, and crabs and lobsters. The category `crabs and lobsters' used in this study includes both freshwater and marine crabs, drawing upon statistics contained in different ISSCAAP groups. It is recognized that the production statistics contained in the category `freshwater prawns' are incomplete, because an undefined quantity of Macrobrachium rosenbergii is contained in the FAO category `freshwater crustaceans nei' (see footnotes to Table 1). In addition, substantial quantities of other Macrobrachium spp. are farmed (New and Valenti, 2000) but do not yet appear in FAO statistics. Other species groups, for example turtles (reared principally in China, M alay sia, and Taiwan Province of China) and frogs (farmed mainly in Taiwan Province of China, Brazil, and Thailand) may be fed feeds containing marine resources. However, production is relatively small and the expansion pattern of these groups cannot yet be determined; they have therefore been omitted from consideration in this study. 3.2 Aquaculture production trend analysis.
In the course of this study, average percentage growth rates (APR) were calculated for each of the species groups defined in Table 1, covering the historical periods 1984-1999, 1990-1999, 1995-1999, and 1997-1999. The further expansion of the aquaculture for each species group was considered on a global basis, with and without China. The latter calculations were made because of the dominant influence that current Chinese levels of production and historical growth rates have on the global total for some of the species groups. Estimates of future expansion for each species group were constructed on the basis of past growth rates. In general, the lowest growth rates achieved in the four historical periods listed above were selected for use in this study. Expansion in the culture of certain species groups, especially in China, has been extremely rapid. In some cases, all the historical growth rates are well over 10 percent (some exceeding 40 percent per year). Applying such growth rates to the future results in grossly excessive projections. In some cases, partly for this reason, a `cap' has been applied to the growth rate used for projections. Other `artificial expansion rates were also set, for reasons explained in Table.
M ore accurate forecasts than those developed in this study, can be obtained by consideration of developments in capture fisheries and livestock production. However, such forecasts are complex and demanding in terms of information and specialist knowledge. As FAO has already initiated such studies it was decided not to duplicate those efforts, but instead to present detailed information about the growth rates used in this study, so that when more accurate information is available, it can be inserted in the analysis presented in this report.
Feed conversion ratio.
The feed conversion ratio (FCR) is a measure of feed efficiency that is used for all livestock production. In this case FCR represents the number of units of `dry' aquafeed required to produce a unit of `wet' fish or crustacean. A more comparable measure of efficiency would be to reduce both the aquafeed and the product to a dry matter basis. However, it is traditional to compare the units of so-called `dry' aquafeed [despite the fact that it typically contains approximately 10-12 percent moisture (depending on the processing technique, storage conditions, etc.)] on an `as-received' basis and to use wet animal weight for the other segment of the ratio. FCR is the traditional measure of efficiency in commercial animal feeding, although its deficiencies have been pointed out by New and Wijkström (1989). These authors devised an annual profit index, which took into account not only the concept of feed efficiency but also the cost of other inputs and the value of the harvested products. There are several other ways of measuring comparative efficiency besides FCR. One is the relationship between total energy input and live weight gain. In this concept, all energy inputs to the farming process are included, not only the energy used in the production and processing of feed ingredients. M any efficiency ratios, including FCR, take no account of the inedible parts of the animal carcasses. They also discount the relative nutritional value of the animals being farmed. Such considerations are especially important in the assessment of the relative efficiencies of alternative uses of resources. These matters have been discussed by Forster and Hardy (2001), who pointed out that if efforts are made to find and utilize proper (i.e. they can be substantiated and defended) measures of efficiency, they are likely to demonstrate that species produced through aquaculture are more efficient converters of feed into animal tissue than poultry, pigs and cows. A step towards such comparisons was taken by Åsgård and Austreng (1995) who noted that while approximately 30 percent of feed protein, fat and energy is retained in the edible part of salmon, only 18, 13, and 2 percent is retained in the edible part of chicken, pigs, and sheep, respectively. Despite these important long-term considerations, FCR is adequate for the purposes of this study, which seeks to determine the quantity of marine resources utilized in aquafeeds. FCR varies according to several factors, including the nutritional and physical quality of the aquafeed; environmental variants, such as temperature; the intensity of production (and therefore the availability or not of `natural' feed); and other factors, including genetics. M art ín (1998), commenting that there are no statistics for global feed production (although an American trade journal regularly publishes reviews containing estimates, e.g. Gill (1998, 1999, 2000), noted differences between what he described as `biological FCR' and `economical FCR'. While the former, the `true' FCR, indicates feed potential, it is the latter (which takes fish mortalities and losses into account) which controls actual feed demand. The concept of `economical FCR' is similar to the `apparent feed conversion ratio' (AFCR) used by New (FAO, 1987), which also took into account the contribution from natural food in less intensive.
forms of aquaculture. In assessing the actual volume of current or future levels of aquafeed production for carnivorous species, a series of `apparent feed conversion ratios' (AFCR) have been derived for the current study. This approach is more realistic than applying the more accurate feed conversion ratios obtained in controlled experimental work. Apparent feed conversion ratios (AFCR) have been estimated for each target species or species group (Table 3), so that these can be used to calculate estimates of the quantity of commercial feed required. In deriving the AFCRs for 2015 and 2030, the following factors have been borne in mind, in addition to the FCRs used in earlier studies (Annex 1): General progress (based on improvements in nutritional quality and feeding techniques, and on other factors) is being made towards FCRs of 1.0:1. Even greater efficiency has been achieved for some species, both experimentally and, it is claimed, commercially. For example, FCRs were quoted by one European aquafeed manufacturer3 to have ranged between 0.85 and 1.16:1 for Atlantic salmon in 1998, an improvement from 1.25:1 in 1990. The same company gave a range of 0.75-1.35:1 for rainbow trout in its marketing literature. FCRs of 0.9:1 were used for salmon and trout in one forecast for 2010 (Chamberlain, 2000). FCRs of 1.1:1 have been claimed by an Asian manufacturer4 of marine shrimp feeds (Ridmontri, 2001). Progress towards what might be regarded as an `ideal' FCR of 1.0:1 is faster for high-value species that require high unit cost feeds and that have become global commodities, such as farmed salmon and marine shrimp. Progress towards this goal has been and will be slower for other high-value species (e.g. freshwater prawns) until the volume of their production increases to a level at which product value typically falls and the pressure to reduce the cost of feeding increases. Such pressures are also unlikely to occur so rapidly for species with lower product values. Although the literature is replete with FCRs achieved under experimental conditions, almost no FCRs achieved in commercial practice are published, either in the scientific press or in manufacturers' literature (with some exceptions, as noted above). Fish and crustacean producers may regard such information as proprietary, while aquafeed manufacturers often avoid quoting specific FCRs since so many other factors besides feed quality affect actuality; they do not relish the possibility that farmers may complain that target FCRs have not been achieved because of feed quality. 3.4 Proportion of production achieved through commercial aquafeeds.
This is mainly a consideration of the level of intensity of production. M ost species for which feeds containing high levels of marine ingredients are used are high-value species. These are grown in highly intensive rearing systems (cages, tanks) and the tendency is towards 100 percent being fed on commercial feeds. Trout and salmon are already in this category.
Biomar Ltd., UK. Charoen Pokphand Foods.
Estimates of the proportion of production of each species group used in earlier studies (Annex 1) have been taken into account in deriving the estimates shown in Table.
3.5 Fishmeal and fish oil inclusion rates.
It is well recognized that marine resources are generally over-exploited. Supplies of fishmeal and fish oil have remained relatively steady for many years (Figures 1 and 2). The responsible use of this finite supply, principally by the animal feeds industry but also, in the case of fish oil, as human food and for pharmaceutical use, is therefore important. The use of fishmeal and fish oil for aquafeeds has increased as the culture of carnivorous species has expanded. The aquafeed industry is taking an increasing proportion of the supply. In common with other livestock feed producers, aquafeed manufacturers are normally legally obliged to list the ingredients that they use on feed bags and in their promotional literature. In addition, there is usually a requirement for the ingredients to be listed in order of the magnitude of their inclusion rate. However, there is no requirement for them to state the actual inclusion rates of major ingredients in terms of percentages; formulations are proprietary information, and carefully guarded as such. The inclusion rates used for fishmeal and fish oil used in earlier reviews (see Annex 1), and in the current study (Table 3) are partially based on published (and therefore) experimental information. However, the total protein and lipid levels of commercial feeds (which manufacturers always state), together with the list and order of ingredients, provide further clues to actual inclusion rates for fishmeal and fish oil. Considerable reductions have been made in the inclusion rates of fishmeal in carnivorous fish and crustacean diets over the past decade. In some species, such as channel catfish, fishmeal has almost completely been replaced, not only in experimental diets but also in commercial feeds.
RES ULTS OF THE CURRENT S TUDY.
Estimates and projections of the levels of fishmeal and fish oil used in aquafeeds have been derived from the criteria summarized in Table.
Projected use in 2015 and 2030 has been determined by applying the aquaculture expansion factors that have been discussed in section 3.2 and summarized in Table.
The results of these calculations are presented in Table.
New (1999) noted that it had already become clear that forecasts of future marine resource usage in aquafeeds (Tacon, 1998) were becoming highly influenced by reports of the expansion, not only in the aquaculture production of China, but also specifically in the growth of its aquafeed industry (Cremer et al., 1998). Sorgeloos (2000) commented that an evolution is occurring in China, the world's largest aquaculture producer, from its traditional freshwater pond culture systems into the use of commercial aquafeeds, as well as into the culture of both freshwater and marine carnivorous aquatic species. This fundamental change in the character of Chinese aquaculture will have a serious impact on the rate with which the requirements for.
marine resources may potentially equal supply. China is the world's largest importer of fishmeal (FAO Fishstat, 2001) and the second largest commercial feed manufacturing nation (Gill, 2000). Separate forecasts have therefore been provided in Table 4 for the global picture (i.e., including China) and for China alone. These clearly indicate the substantial influence that the farming of carnivorous fish and shrimp farming in China has on global marine resource utilization in aquafeeds. The speed with which Chinese aquaculture becomes more intensive and skewed towards the farming of high-value, carnivorous species, either for its own expanding domestic luxury and tourist markets or for future export, will also critically affect the future for the fishmeal and fish oil industry. This study estimates that 2.09 million tonnes of fishmeal and over 0.66 million tonnes of fish oil were used in global aquafeed manufacture in the base line year, 1999 (Table 4). It is estimated that China utilized about 0.64 million tonnes of fishmeal and 0.11 million tonnes of fish oil in that year. Based on the assumptions used in this study, the annual demand from aquaculture will have risen to nearly 4.6 million tonnes of fishmeal and nearly 1.9 million tonnes of fish oil by 2015. By that date, China is expected to be using 1.86 million tonnes of fishmeal and 0.55 million tonnes of fish oil per year. Estimates are also provided in Table 4 for the year 2030. This study indicates that the global aquaculture demand for fishmeal was 32 percent of the supply level in 1999 and may reach nearly 70 percent by 2015 (Table 5; Figure 3). Table 5 and Figure 3 clearly show that the demand from China alone, providing present trends continue, would be equivalent to nearly 30% of the global fishmeal supply, rising to over 70% by 2030. The results of this study show that the demand for fish oil from the aquaculture industry is likely to reach 1.86 million tonnes by 2015 (Table 4). This is equivalent to 145% of the fish oil supply (Table 5). The demand from China alone is potentially 0.55 million tonnes by 2015 and 2.14 million tonnes by 2030 (Table 4). China thus has the potential to utilize over 40% of the global fish oil supply by 2015 and the entire supply well before 2030 (Figure 4). Thus another of the `fish ingredient traps' anticipated by Wijkström and New (1989), namely a `fish oil trap', may apply even before the fishmeal trap becomes operative. This study therefore indicates that the global demand for fishmeal for aquafeeds would exceed total available supplies around the year 2020 and for fish oil well before the year 2010 (Figure 5). The global projection from this study for fishmeal utilization by aquaculture for the year 2015 agrees quite closely with the estimates made by the fishmeal and fish oil industry itself in 2000 (Annex 1), namely in excess of 4.3 million tonnes/year. The results show that the demand from aquaculture for fish oil may exceed supplies rather earlier than anticipated by the fish oil industry itself but not so rapidly and indicated by another forecaster (Annex 1). All.
three studies agree that the 100% aquafeed utilization mark for fish oil supply will be reached before 2010. In 1999, the four major aquaculture users of fishmeal supplies were salmon (21%), followed by marine shrimp (19%), selected marine fish (10%), eels (9%), and trouts and sturgeons (8%). On the assumed aquaculture expansion trends (Table 2), salmon (24%) will remain the major fishmeal consumer in aquaculture in 2015, followed by selected marine fish (20%) and redfish (20%), with marine shrimp (11%) falling from second to fourth place. By that time, the proportion of fishmeal resources used in the production of trouts and eels will have become relatively minor. In 1999, salmon (41%), followed by trouts and sturgeons (13%), were the most significant consumers of fish oil. Salmon (36%) is likely to remain the leader in 2015 but redfish (21%) and selected marine fish (14%) are expected to be next most important consumers by then. It is estimated that Chinese aquaculture consumed about 30% of the fishmeal used by the global industry in 1999 (Table 4). This proportion is expected to rise to 41% by 2015. The proportion of total aquafeed usage of fish oil by China in 1999 was estimated to be 16%, with the projection for 2015 being 30%. The fishmeal industry is already focusing its attention on the ever-increasing demands of China for marine feed ingredients (M illar, 2001).
DIS CUS S IO N.
The results of this study, which have been reported in section 4, provide estimates of the possible demand for fishmeal and fish oil if the culture of carnivorous aquatic species continues to expand at similar rates to historical values. These projections are also dependent on the accuracy of the assumptions that have been made on the future levels of commercial aquafeed use, marine resource inclusion, and feed conversion efficiency. There are many mitigating factors that will influence actual developments. The use of all of the fish oil supply in aquafeeds is unlikely to occur, because of its other uses for direct hum