FAO Fisheries Report No. 678.
FIPL/FIPP/R678.
Report of the.
S US TAINABLE FIS HERIES LIVELIHOODS PROGRAMME (GCP/INT/735/UK) AND FAO ADVIS O RY COMMITTEE ON FIS HERIES RES EARCH JOINT WORKING PARTY ON POVERTY IN S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES.
Promoting the Contribution of the S ustai nabl e Livelihoods Approach and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in Poverty Alleviation.
Rome, 10 ­ 12 April 2002.
FAO Fisheries Report No. 678 FIPL/FIPP/R678.
Report of the S US TAINABLE FIS HERIES LIVELIHOODS PROGRAMME (GCP/INT/735/UK) AND FAO ADVIS ORY COMMITTEE ON FIS HERIES RES EARCH JOINT WORKING PARTY ON POVERTY IN S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2002.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104794-4.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This is the report of the Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (GCP/INT/735/UK) and FAO Advisory Committee on Fisheries Research Joint Working Party on Poverty in Small-Scale Fisheries ­ Promoting the Contribution of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in Poverty Alleviation held in Rome, Italy, from 10 to 12 April 2002.
Distribution: All meeting participants All FAO M embers and Associated M embers Interested Nations and International Organizations.
iv Directors of Fisheries FAO Fisheries Department FAO Fishery Officers in FAO Regional and Subregional Offices Interested Non-Governmental Organizations.
FAO. Report of the Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (GCP/INT/735/UK) and FAO Advisory Committee on Fisheries Research Joint Working Party on Poverty in Small-Scale Fisheries. Promoting the Contribution of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in Poverty Alleviation. Rome, 10 ­ 12 April 2002. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 678. Rome, FAO. 2002. 22p. ABSTRACT This report presents a summary of the presentations and discussions of the Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (SFLP) (GCP/INT/735/UK) and FAO Advisory Committee on Fisheries Research (ACFR) Joint Working Party on Poverty in Small-Scale Fisheries ­ Promoting the Contribution of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach (SLA) and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in Poverty Alleviation. The objectives of the meeting were to (i) share experience and knowledge on this subject; (ii) identify clearly how the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries could serve as a tool in poverty alleviation in fishing communities; (iii) identify critical knowledge gaps and research needs; and (iv) elaborate a project framework and research methodologies. The meeting benefited from earlier discussions of this subject matter at the Third Session of ACFR, December 2000, and the Centre for the Economics and M anagement of Aquatic Resources (CEM ARE), SFLP/FAO Cotonou Workshop, November 2001, and the background papers prepared for them. The meeting agreed on the urgent need to obtain a better understanding of the manifestations and extent of poverty in fishing communities and on the causal factors of the dynamics of poverty. It recommended the development of appropriate guidance material on poverty assessment and poverty alleviation measures in small-scale fisheries including the application of the SLA and the potential contribution of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The meeting noted that more research was required of the factors that influence the contribution of fisheries and aquatic resources to sustainable livelihoods and poverty reduction especially in rural areas. In view of the close relationship between poverty and food security, a better understand was also needed of the actual contribution of fish to human nutrition, and reasons for changes over time. Improved knowledge and understanding of these aspects would contribute to a better recognition of fisheries in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP). There was also a need of a greater participatory role of fisheries stakeholders in the development of PRSPs. A focus on PRSPs, however, should not divert attention away from the importance of other types of poverty reduction strategies.
v The research framework and methodologies should be tailored to the intended use of the information (e.g. to inform about appropriate situation-specific poverty reduction measures; to generate comparable information on the extent of poverty; etc.). The meeting noted that for an increasing number of countries Living Standard M easurement Surveys (LSM S) provide excellent data by household, and that the use of LSM S data in combination with census data might allow the application of poverty mapping techniques to measure poverty for small population groups such as fishing communities. Poverty mapping techniques and well-designed case studies provide powerful analytical tools for poverty assessment, to explain the causality of poverty and to help in prioritizing poverty reduction measures. The meeting also considered the need for effective tools to disseminate research findings of project/case study results.
vi CONTENTS Page INTRODUCTION OPENING POVERTY AND S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES ­ AN OVERVIEW OF IS S UES OVERVIEW OF THE BENIN WORKS HO P ON S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES , POVERTY AND THE CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RES PO NS IBLE FIS HERIES , COTONOU, NOVEMBER 2001 1 1 2.
THE POTENTIAL OF US ING THE S US TAINABLE LIVELIHOODS APPROACHES IN POVERTY REDUCTION S TRATEGIES 5 THE POTENTIAL ROLE OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RES PO NS IBLE FIS HERIES IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION S O ME THEORETICAL CONS IDERATIO NS ON EQUITY AND EFFICIENCY S UMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW PREPARED AS BACKGROUND TO THE MEETING POVERTY AS S ES S MENT METHODOLOGIES POVERTY MAPPING RES EARCH FRAMEWORK AND METHODOLOGIES MAIN OUTCOMES AND FINDINGS OF THE WORKING PARTY PREPARATION OF THIS REPORT APPENDIX A: AGENDA APPENDIX B: LIS T OF PARTICIPANTS APPENDIX C: LIS T OF DOCUMENTS.
-1INTRODUCTION1.
The Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (GCP/INT/735/UK) and FAO Advisory Committee on Fisheries Research (ACFR) Joint Working Party on Poverty in Small-Scale Fisheries ­ Promoting the Contribution of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in Poverty Alleviation, was held in FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy, from 10­12 April 2002. The Agenda for the meeting is provided in Appendix A. The List of Participants is given in Appendix B. A list of papers and submissions tabled at the meeting is provided in Appendix C.
At its Third Session, Rome, Italy, 6­7 December 2001, the Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (SFLP) Steering Committee approved a normative three-year project on "Promoting the contribution of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in poverty alleviation". The principal purpose is to strengthen FAO's normative and field work programme in support of member countries' efforts to alleviate poverty in fishing communities, and to enhance the contribution of the fisheries sector in national poverty reduction strategies and programmes. In addition, the project seeks to increase global awareness on poverty in small-scale and artisanal fisheries and on poverty alleviation strategies and measures. In the desire to ensure that this project is carried out in the most efficient manner possible, taking into account the recommendations of ACFR as well as the experience and knowledge of as wide a crosssect ion of persons knowledgeable on the subject, FAO and SFLP convened this working party whose expected outcomes were to: · · · · enrich our understanding of the subject through exchange of experience and knowledge; identify clearly how the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF) could serve as a tool in poverty alleviation in fishing communities; identify critical knowledge gaps and research needs; elaborate a project framework and research methodologies.
OPENING.
The meeting was opened by Neil M acPherson who chaired its first day and welcomed all the participants. Participants introduced themselves and their interest in the meeting.
Benedict Satia welcomed the participants on behalf of Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, FAO Fisheries Department. In his address, Dr Satia stressed the paramount objectives of FAO to contribute to enhanced food security and poverty alleviation. Small-scale fisheries played an important role in achieving these objectives and provided livelihoods to millions of mostly poor people. Enhancing the contribution of.
This report is structured such that it first presents summaries of the various presentations made during the meeting and some pertinent commentaries. It then provides in the final section a summary of the meeting's main outcomes and findings.
-2small-scale fisheries in poverty alleviation has become a priority issue in the work of the Fisheries Department as evidenced by the fact that (i) the FAO biannual flagship publication on the State of the World Fisheries and Aquaculture (SOFIA) 2002, will contain an issue paper on small-scale fisheries and poverty alleviation; (ii) an agenda item of the Twenty-fifth Session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI), February 2003, will address "Strategies for Increasing the Sustainable Contribution of Small-scale Fisheries to Food Security and Poverty Alleviation", and (iii) in the FAO M edium-t erm Plan 2004­ 2009, currently under preparation, at least two entities would address sustainable development of small-scale fisheries and poverty alleviation. He then referred to the discussions and outcome of the Third Session of ACFR on poverty-related issues (more details are given below in paragraph 45).
Richard Coutts, SFLP Programme Coordinator, welcomed the participants on behalf of the Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme (GCP/INT/735/UK). He referred to the varied activities of SFLP including poverty profiling work and application of the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach (SLA) participatory assessment methods to inform, in particular, the pilot projects on the most appropriate policies and measures to contribute to sustainable livelihoods and poverty alleviation in fishing communities. He also referred to the very valuable Benin workshop on poverty alleviation and the Code of Conduct of Responsible Fisheries (November 2001) in gaining a better understanding of the causes and dynamics of poverty in West African countries. The workshop increased awareness on the need of a better integration of fishing communities' concerns into national poverty reduction strategies (details of the outcome of the Benin workshop are given in paragraphs 12 to 14). POVERTY AND S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES ­ AN OVERVIEW OF IS S UES.
Rolf Willmann provided an overview of poverty-related issues in small-scale fisheries. Due to the lack of pertinent research and data, any assessment of the extent of poverty in small-scale fisheries has to remain very tentative and speculative at the current time. In terms of employment, there are an estimated 39 million fishers and fish farmers in the world, and about 117 million people involved in fisheries related activities (e.g. fish processing, marketing and distribution) giving a total of 156 million people in fishing and fishery-related employment. As many as 90 percent of these 156 million might be employed in "small-scale" activities and/or living in coastal fishing communities. Given that often more than one person in a household is engaged in fishing and fishery-related activities, a figure of some 250 million people dependent in some way on small-scale fisheries does appear as a conservative estimate. As certainly not all of them are poor, this would clearly be an upper boundary of the possible extent of poverty in small-scale fisheries. On the other hand, the figure is indicative of the possibility of fishing communities contributing a significant share of global poverty estimated at some 1.2 billion people should it prove correct that there is widespread poverty in small-scale fishing communities as is frequently stated.
-37. The food dimension of fisheries is also important given that hunger continues to plague about 1 billion people globally. Globally, fish contributes about 18 percent of animal protein intake, but in many developing countries fish contributes one-third or as much as half of animal protein. Small-scale fisheries provide the majority of fish for human consumption in developing countries. In considering the food dimension, the participants stressed the fact of the high nutritional value of fish (e.g. vitamins; micronutrients) and its affordability even though real fish prices show overall an increasing trend.
In reference to the large body of literature on poverty issues including the 2000 World Development Report, M r Willmann mentioned that the nature of poverty is usually associated with low income and consumption, low attainment levels in education, health and nutrition, high vulnerability, and powerlessness. Whilst there are many characteristics of poor households that are typical, there is no one established, and accepted, theory or conceptual framework that can explain the causes of poverty in all situations. However, evidence points to several interrelated and re-inforcing causes including (i) poor economic performance, (ii) weak asset base and landlessness or land-poor, (iii) political instability and conflict, (iv) poor and inadequate public service delivery, (v) income and gender inequality and (vi) erosion of traditional safety nets. Additional factors that could play a particular role in small-scale fisheries include (i) the high risk nature of fishing activities, (ii) the geographic remoteness of many communities, (iii) the frequent low socio-political status of the fishing occupation and fishing communities, (iv) unfavourable conditions for organizing (absence from home; remoteness; geographic spread), (v) insecure access to natural resources, especially fishery resources and land; and (vi) the proneness to depletion and dissipation of resource rents because of open or quasi-open access to fishery resources.
There were several issues to consider in the development of poverty reduction strategies in small-scale fisheries. A first question was how much more is needed to be known on the extent of poverty, the characteristics of the poor, and the causes of poverty in small-scale fisheries. While many countries have already undertaken poverty assessment studies, they usually did not specifically refer to fisheries. On the other hand, it could be assumed that many of the findings of these studies apply equally to fishing communities. 10. A second issue is whether national programmes for poverty reduction were reaching small-scale fishing communities, and if not why not, and what could be done about it. A related issue was whether fisheries-specific poverty reduction programmes should be led by fisheries departments or other ministries having a more comprehensive mandate such as rural development or economic planning. 11. In discussing these issues, participants agreed that more research would be desirable to obtain a better understanding of the extent to which the specific characteristics of smallscale fisheries contributed to higher or lower incidences of poverty than elsewhere in the economy and whether the dynamics and causes of poverty in fisheries were specifically.
-4influenced by aspects such as resource access conditions, coping and insurance mechanisms, and other factors. OVERVIEW OF THE BENIN WORKS HO P ON S MALL-S CALE FIS HERIES , POVERTY AND THE CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RES PO NS IBLE FIS HERIES , COTONOU, NOVEMBER 2001 12. Arthur Neiland reported on the proceedings and outcome of the Benin workshop whose objectives were to provide a general overview of poverty and poverty alleviation, to examine the relationship between poverty and fisheries management, to identify possible strategies for poverty alleviation, and to contribute to the work of the SFLP. The workshop considered what is, or why is there poverty in rural Africa, what is the relationship between fisheries and poverty, and how can poverty be alleviated. Each day there were key papers and discussion groups.
13. The key findings of the workshop were as follows: · poverty in small-scale fishing communities is a multidimensional phenomenon and cannot be exclusively attributed to endogenous factors within the fisheries sector such as overfishing or excess fishing capacity; in comparison to rural agriculture and urban poverty, there are few detailed assessments of the nature, extent and causes of poverty in fishing communities in most countries of the region; policies for the alleviation of poverty in fishing communities need to be multifaceted and the SLA provides a good entry point to identifying the critical causes of poverty and measures to alleviate poverty; the better integration of the fisheries sector within national poverty reduction strategies is desirable; the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, properly adapted to the specific characteristics of West African fisheries, provides a good basis for addressing endogenous causes of poverty in fishing communities, and for enhancing the contribution of the fisheries sector to national poverty alleviation.
14. Further conclusions of the workshop included: (i) the methodology/diagnosis of poverty needs improving, although the SLA is helping; (ii) there is little real knowledge of the relative importance of the various asset types in the asset pentagon of the SLA; (iii) there is a high complexity of situations in many countries, which means that policy-makers have tended to focus on areas other than the problematic one of political reform in looking for solutions to poverty; these have included training and technology transfer to boost productivity of natural resource systems; (iv) there was a strong willingness among participants to improve understanding and poverty alleviation through incorporation of fisheries into PRSPs, cooperation and lesson learning; and (v) the SFLP is playing an important role in contributing to a better understanding of the causes of poverty. THE POTENTIAL OF US ING THE S US TAINABLE LIVELIHOODS APPROACHES IN POVERTY REDUCTION S TRATEGIES 15. This item was introduced by Foday Turay based on a presentation prepared jointly with Fabio Pittaluga. The preparation of poverty reduction strategy papers (PRSPs) is an ongoing process and it was noted that the SLA can contribute to PRSPs in a number of ways. At the level of analysis and diagnosis of poverty, because the SLA is a peoplefocused approach to poverty assessment, it goes beyond classical analysis of poverty to highlight strengths and opportunities available. In terms of strategy formulation, the SLA recognizes that livelihoods are intrinsically multisectoral and that problems in one sector may have solutions in other sectors. It can also help with the identification and prioritization of entry points, and with sectoral dialogue and synergy.
-616. The SLA may contribute to the decentralization process through an enhanced participation at all levels, and an improved ownership of strategies at all levels. It too can contribute to the monitoring and implementation aspects of PRSPs by providing a framework for results-based monitoring of livelihoods, the use of appropriate indicators, setting of targets, assessing impacts outside the realm of the entry point, and strengthening the learning process which is intrinsic to the PRS process. In addition, the SLA as applied to fisheries can assist PRSPs because this approach: · · looks at more than just catch or production levels; helps with a recognition that fisheries supports more people than if you only consider production; this is important given that PRSPs attempt to identify key sectors which can contribute to economic growth; can help to identify opportunities for diversification to help with overexploitation of inland water bodies and marine fisheries; can help administrators understand that fishing communities have needs, problems and opportunities outside the sector; helps to strengthen the synergies between stakeholders at all levels; supplements money-metric assessments of poverty, and helps to explain the causality of poverty; enhances policy-makers' understanding of human and social capital for developing antip overt y strategies; focuses on vulnerability to make analysis dynamic and flexible.
17. However, some important questions remain. Can a multisectoral approach function with heavily sectoralized budget allocations? Should/does the SLA improve the visibility of individual sectors? THE POTENTIAL ROLE OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RES PO NS IBLE FIS HERIES IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 18. Benedict Satia introduced this agenda item by pointing out that the CCRF is a coherent set of principles, rules, ethics and standards that should be considered by nations and regional fishery organizations and arrangements, NGOs and industries as well as other stakeholders of the fisher sector in relation to the conservation, management and development of all fisheries on a sustainable basis. It was adopted by FAO members in October 1995 against a background of widespread international concern over the serious problems confronting fisheries and aquaculture around the world. 19. Constraints to the implementation of the CCRF include: (i) inadequate institutional and technical capacity; inadequate funding; (ii) a lack of information and inadequate access to information, including public education programmes, underutilization of the media, etc.; (iii) inadequate participation of all stakeholders; (iv) inappropriate legislative framework; (iv) the socio-economic implications of reducing fishing effort; and (v) the difficulties of.
-7implementing such concepts as the precautionary approach in the context of reduced human and financial resources in developing countries. 20. Some suggested solutions to better implementation include: the need for more educational outreach; the active involvement of stakeholders through the adoption of participatory approaches in fisheries management; the presentation of the Code at major national and international fishing and aquaculture industry events; emphasis on training and capacity building at all levels; improvement in the legislative framework by incorporating provisions of the Code; the translation of the Code in local languages, and the increased use of audiovisual aids. 21. A comparison of the SLA and the CCRF was summarized. It was stressed that there are differences and similarities in terms of goals, immediate objectives, principles, strategies and entry points. The SLA is generally wider in terms of aims and perspective, more bottom-up and non-specific to the fisheries sector. However, the Code is also concerned with poverty and livelihoods. The combined application of the SLA and the CCRF can be expected to result in a number of favourable outcomes and results. S O ME THEORETICAL CONS IDERATIO NS ON EQUITY AND EFFICIENCY 22. Jean-Philippe Platteau provided a brief exposé of some theoretical considerations on the relationship between the level of resource exploitation, the resource access regime and outcomes in terms of efficiency and equity. Where open access conditions prevail fishery resources tend to become overexploited. The effect on equity and poverty was dependent, however, on whether the resources were overexploited in economic terms only (i.e. dissipation of resource rent because of excess capital employed in the fishery), or in both economic and biological terms (i.e. rent dissipation as well as a reduction in sustainable yield). While in open access situations, resource rents tend to become totally dissipated, in common property resource regimes, rents may only be partially dissipated, because some community control over resource access and capital investment applied. 23. Assuming that there is no biological overfishing, but rent dissipation, open access and community management would lead to a larger wage bill than under a private property regime (that would maximize resource rent). Thus, while this situation was economically inefficient, it could be beneficial for the poor because of a higher wage bill. In addition, insurance was better for the poor under open access or community management. These results derived from theoretical considerations would not hold in situations where open access or weakly or non-regulated common property regimes caused economic as well as (significant) biological overfishing. 24. Dr Platteau then considered the impacts of other factors on equity. Population growth would lead to a decline in average incomes, and a decline in the insurance function that both would be detrimental for the poor. The effect of market integration had the opposite effect.
-8(as long as real prices for fish increased as a result) i.e. higher incomes and better insurance. The effects of increased socio-economic differentiation in fishing communities would reduce the insurance benefit for the poor, because those with more boats could stabilize incomes at the expense of the poor, as access rights were usually apportioned by the number of boats (i.e. harvesting capacity) that people have, and not according to households. Finally, he noted that inequality in a community is not invariably bad for the poor, as the rich were more likely to push for the establishment of effective resource access controls that could be of benefit to the poor as well. S UMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW PREPARED AS BACKGROUND TO THE MEETING 25. Graeme M acFady en presented the findings of a literature review that he had prepared jointly with Emily Corcoran.1 The reviewed covered eight main topics: · · · · · · · · the applied methodology and findings of studies to analyse poverty in fishing communities; a synthesis of the findings of lessons-learned studies on applying the SLA to fisheries and rural development; a synthesis of reviews of using the SLA in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers; the "commons" nature of fisheries: cause or remedy of poverty? the special characteristics of small-scale fishers' vulnerability and coping mechanisms; the impact of technological change on efficiency, equity and poverty; the role of fishworkers' organizations: a voice for the poor? the critical factors for artisanal/small-scale fishers to get out of poverty.
26. It is clear from the 300 or so references reviewed, that there are very few studies which examine the impacts of different issues on poverty in an empirical way, and which actually define and measure poverty. Furthermore, those that do, generally only measure changes in income. M uch of the older literature refers to income [poverty], and not the broader concept of poverty as proposed in the SLA. As is now realized, poor people have many criteria of well-being and deprivation. Bangladesh, India and the Philippines are the countries that have been the focus of most work, along with a considerable body of literature on West Africa. There remains a rather theoretical focus of much of the work surrounding sustainable livelihoods. 27. The whole concept of poverty has been broadened in recent years. Recognising that it is multidimensional, dynamic and very complex radically affects how it is measured, what approaches are used to tackle it, and its determinants etc. A key realization is that simple.
FAO. In press. Literature review of studies on poverty in fishing communities and of lessons learned in using the sustainable livelihoods approach in poverty alleviation strategies and projects, by G. Macfadyen and E. Corcoran. FAO Fisheries Circular No. 979. Rome. 97 pp.
-9sectoral approaches are unlikely to be successful. The broader concept of poverty means that it is very difficult and time-consuming to measure, define and understand the causes of poverty, but efforts to do so are essential if interventions and policy initiatives are to be successful. Poverty is not a homogeneous phenomenon, but varies between individuals, households and communities, over time, as well as according to people's definition of what poverty is. While poverty traps in fishing communities certainly exist, there is often rapid movement in and out of poverty within communities, as well as people becoming more or less poor. There is usually great differentiation of wealth within any particular group. 28. The study of poverty is very old and poverty alleviation has of course been realized in many contexts long before the SL approach was designed. Nevertheless, the overwhelming impression from the SL literature (perhaps understandably) is that SL approaches are an improvement on conventional sectoral efforts, facilitate the incorporation of inherent complexities, and are applicable in all sectors and with different groups of people in different countries, cultures and at different levels. However, the fact that the SLA is such a new approach to our understanding of poverty means that most of lessons learned are more to do with design and implementation of approaches and interventions, rather than with the results of such programmes in terms of factors to help people out of poverty, key determinants of poverty etc. An important outcome of the SL process is the stimulation of continual critical analysis, challenging ideas and practices that develop the debate. PRSPs have so far made little explicit reference to livelihoods in small-scale fisheries. While the SLA is thought to offer great potential to contribute to improving the relevance of PRSPs, there is some concern over the extent to which SL principles are currently incorporated in PRSPs. 29. Vulnerability seems to be at least as important as poverty, and while related, is distinct from poverty. Policy must focus on preventing people from falling into poverty as much as helping them to get out of it. Vulnerability appears to be increasing in small-scale fisheries, and lacks a well-developed theory and accepted indicators and methods of measurement. There do not appear to be many obvious generalizable findings in the literature about vulnerability and coping mechanisms. 30. While in the earlier fisheries economics literature, common property was often equated with open access, there prevails now a much better understanding of the need to clearly distinguish between different governance regimes including open access, unregulated common property (i.e. de facto open access), weakly to strongly regulated common property and private property regimes. The influence of a particular governance regime on poverty has received little specific attention in the fisheries literature, and what is available in the general literature on that topic relates to the possible trade-offs between efficiency and equity (see above paragraphs 22 to 24). Furthermore, it is important to consider the role of the State itself from which different governance structures are derived or endorsed. For example, what will be the State's policy with regard to matters of resource usage and wealth distribution, and how will a weak State implement the CCRF.
31. Technology has been shown to have had significant equity and poverty implications, both in terms of small-scale fishers loosing out to industrial vessels, but also within the small-scale fisheries sector through increasing debt to middlemen etc. and increased vulnerability. For technology to assist with poverty reduct