FAO Fisheries Report No. 681___.
FIPL/R681 (En).
Report of the twenty-second session of the EUROPEAN INLAND FISHERIES ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Windermere, United Kingdom, 12-19 June 2002.
ii FAO Fisheries Report No. 681____ FIPL/R681 (En).
REPORT of the TWENTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE EUROPEAN INLAND FISHERIES ADVISORY COMMISSION Windermere, United Kingdom, 12-19 June 2002.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2002.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT The present text is the final version of the report adopted on 19 June 2002 by the participants in the Twenty-second Session of the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission.
FAO. Report of the twenty-second session of the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission. Windermere, United Kingdom, 12-19 June 2002. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 681. Rome, FAO. 2002. 42p. SUMMARY The Twenty-second Session of the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC) was held in Windermere, United Kingdom, from 12 to 19 June 2002, in concomitance with a Symposium on Inland Fisheries Management and the Aquatic Environment. The session reviewed EIFAC's activities since 2000 in the fields of fishery biology and management, aquaculture, protection of the aquatic resource, and social and economic issues. EIFAC revised and decided its future programme of work, and in particular the activities which should be carried out until the next session of the Commission in 2004, planned to be held in Poland and preceded by a Symposium on Aquaculture Development ­ Partnership between Science and Producer Associations.
Distribution: Participants EIFAC Members EIFAC Mailing List FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fisheries Officers.
List of EIFAC Correspondents.
vii DECISIONS, DIRECTIVES AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SESSION OF EIFAC Paragraphs Terms of Reference of Ad hoc Working Party on Eels Convener, Ad hoc Working Party on Mapping of Fish Distribution and Aquatic Habitat Quality Establishment of Ad hoc Working Party on Management of Sturgeon Election of Officers of Sub-Commission I Cancellation of Ad hoc Working Party on Fish and Crustacean Nutrition Election of Officers of Sub-Commission II Cancellation of Ad hoc Working Party on Evaluation of Ecological and Human Health Effects from Endocrine Disrupting Substances Establishment of the Liaison Group on the EU Water Framework Directive Establishment of Ad hoc Working Party on Handling of Fishes in Fisheries and Aquaculture Election of Officers of Sub-Commission III Cancellation of Ad hoc Working Party on Communication and Education Election of Officers of Sub-Commission IV Recommendations from the Symposium on Inland Fisheries Management and the Aquatic Environment Symposium in conjunction with the Twenty-third Session of EIFAC Evaluation of Role and Functioning of EIFAC Election of EIFAC Officers Date and Place of Twenty-third Session of EIFAC Adoption of the Report 13 21 22 26 30 40 51 54 59 62 64 69 75 77 80 83 84 86.
ix OFFICERS OF EIFAC AND CONVENERS OF AD HOC WORKING PARTIES Chairperson: First Vice-Chairperson: Second Vice-Chairperson: Secretary ad interim: SUB-COMMISSION I ­ BIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT Chairperson: Vice-Chairperson: Rapporteur: Technical Secretary: Ad hoc Working Parties Eels Fish monitoring in fresh waters Introductions and stocking Mapping of fish distribution and aquatic habitat quality Management of sturgeon Convener Convener Convener Convener Convener T. Brenner P. Fitzmaurice K. Hensel G. Marmulla W. Dekker P. Hickley I.G. Cowx NN M. Chebanov R. Müller K. Pintér P. Hickley G. Marmulla.
SUB-COMMISSION II ­ AQUACULTURE Chairperson: Vice-Chairperson: Rapporteur: Technical Secretary: Ad hoc Working Parties Fish diseases and their control Aquatic resources management in aquaculture Organic fish farming Market perspectives of European freshwater aquaculture (jointly with European Community) Convener Convener Convener Convener L. Váradi Y. Avnimelech J.-P. Proteau U. Barg R. Richards Y. Avnimelech V. Hilge L. Váradi.
x SUB-COMMISSION III ­ PROTECTION OF THE AQUATIC RESOURCE Chairperson: Vice-Chairperson: Rapporteur: Technical Secretary: Ad hoc Working Parties Effects of physical modification of the aquatic habitat on fish populations Methodologies for rehabilitation of lakes and reservoirs Prevention and control of bird predation Influence of management practices on the environment Handling of fishes in fisheries and aquaculture EU Water Framework Directive (liaison group) Convener Convener Convener Convener Convener Members L. Raat D. Gerdeaux P. Gérard U. Barg M. Zalewski H. Lehtonen E. Staub M. Aprahamian A.J.P. Raat I.G. Cowx A.J.P. Raat.
SUB-COMMISSION IV ­ SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ISSUES Chairperson: Vice-Chairperson: Rapporteur: Technical Secretary: Ad hoc Working Parties Recreational fisheries Socio-economic aspects of inland fisheries Convener Convener I.G. Cowx R. Marini M.J. Collares-Pereira D. Greboval B. Breton M. Sipponen.
1 I. OPENING OF THE SESSION AND ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA.
The Twenty-second Session of the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC) was held in Windermere, United Kingdom, from 12 to 19 June 2002 under the Chairmanship of Mr Rudolf Müller (Switzerland). The Session was attended by 34 representatives from 20 Members of the Commission, by observers from one non-Member Nation of FAO and also by observers from two international non-governmental organizations. The List of Participants is given as Appendix B to this report.
The Session was opened by The Honourable Elliott Morley, the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for the United Kingdom, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. His opening address is included in Appendix D.
Sir John Harman, Chairman of the Environment Agency, then took the floor and welcomed delegates to the Lake District. His address is included in Appendix D to this report.
The Secretary of EIFAC, Mr Heiner Naeve, welcomed the participants in the name of the Director-General of FAO, Mr Jacques Diouf, and Mr Ichiro Nomura, Assistant DirectorGeneral of the Fisheries Department. His statement is included in Appendix D.
The Chairperson of EIFAC, Mr Rudolf Müller (Switzerland) expressed his appreciation to the Host Government for hosting this, the second Session to be held in the United Kingdom. His address is included in Appendix D.
The Agenda which appears as Appendix A was adopted. The documents which were before the Commission are listed in Appendix C. II. SYMPOSIUM ON INLAND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT FISHERIES MANAGEMENT AND THE.
The Symposium on Inland Fisheries Management and the Aquatic Environment was organized in conjunction with the Twenty-second Session of EIFAC in Windermere, United Kingdom, from 12 to 15 June 2002. The Symposium was convened by Mr D. Gerdeaux (France) and chaired by Mr I.G. Cowx (United Kingdom). The Symposium was attended by 114 participants from 27 countries. The main documentation comprised 29 experience papers and 29 posters. The summary report of the Symposium is Appendix E to this report. III. BIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT (Sub-Commission I).
The Chairperson of the Sub-Commission, Mr T. Brenner (Germany) informed the Commission of progress achieved in the activities agreed upon during the Twenty-first Session of the Commission. The report of the activities was submitted to the Session as document EIFAC/XXII/2002/Inf.5. Eels.
In August 2001, the Joint EIFAC/ICES Ad hoc Working Party on Eels (Convener: W. Dekker, Netherlands) met in Copenhagen, at the headquarters of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), to address the following Terms of Reference: · In response to the 1998 EC request on providing escapement targets and other biological reference points on European eel for management use, the Ad hoc Working Party should: (a) assess trends in recruitment and their causes and the effects on stock and yield of the species; (b) investigate the impact of fisheries on spawner escapement in selected systems; (c) define relevant units where escapement targets would be applicable;.
2 (d) where information warrants, propose preliminary biologically-based escapement goals for selected systems. · · propose management actions leading to the required escapement; report progress in work on improvements in the scientific basis for advice on management of European eel fisheries; inter alia on: (a) development of harvest rate models for eel fisheries in data-rich systems; (b) assessment of density-dependent processes (growth and mortality) and their impact on spawner escapement; (c) development of reference points for management use in data-poor systems; (d) development of procedures to verify effects of eel fisheries management measures, in data-rich and data-poor systems; (e) assessment of the (positive) impacts of management measures not directly related to exploitation, e.g. fish passes, habitat improvement, re-stocking, etc. A total of 19 people from 10 countries attended the meeting. 10. The report was presented at the ICES/ACFM meeting in October 2001 and the Advisory Committee on Fisheries Management (ACFM) has provided advice to Brussels on the eel fisheries (ICES C.M. 2002/ACFM:03: www.ices.dk/reports/acfm/2001/wgeel/ wgeel01.pdf). The report is currently under preparation for publication as EIFAC Occasional Paper No. 36. 11. The general picture of the eel stock in Europe is one of declining trends: recruitment has declined in the 1980s and has remained low in the 1990s, with even lower records in 2001; the landings are in decline during a much longer period, in many countries. Current scientific knowledge is, however, inadequate to derive specific and detailed management targets. Application of general targets (escapement of at least 30 percent of the unexploited spawner production) is recommended. Implementation should take place on a river catchment basis. Potential causes of the decline (including natural causes as well as man-made: habitat destruction, migration barriers, overexploitation) have been reviewed and time trends documented. Although no conclusive evidence for individual or synergetic effects could be compiled, anthropogenic impacts have been shown to exceed reasonable provisional targets in many places and management actions in compliance with provisional targets are therefore urgently needed. 12. EIFAC noted that the Joint EIFAC/ICES Ad hoc Working Party on Eels had recommended at its 2001 session in Copenhagen (Denmark) that: · an international commission for the management of the European eel stock be formed, organizing monitoring and research on eel stocks and fisheries, and serving as a clearing house for regular exchange of information regarding landings and resource status and facilitating and coordinating management action; a recovery plan for the eel stock is compiled and implemented as a matter of urgency and that fishing mortality be reduced to the lowest possible level until such a plan is agreed upon and implemented; a provisional limit reference point is set at an escapement from currently available habitat of female silver eel of at least 30 percent relative to the unexploited state; to be achieved by exploitation regulations and/or habitat restoration measures, and.
3 · monitoring of recruitment, stocks, fisheries and escapement at least be sustained at recent levels, until a stock recovery plan is agreed upon and implemented, including a comprehensive monitoring and research plan.
13. EIFAC endorsed the Terms of Reference that were prepared by the ICES/ACFM for the 2002 meeting of the Working Group, which are: (a) identify the priority list of stocks for which assessment information will be collated and analysed; assess the trends in their recruitment, stock biomass and yield; and analyse their causes; (b) assess the impact of eel fisheries on local populations by using criteria (or their proxies) developed for data-poor situations, and determine whether this impact compromises existing escapement targets; (c) assess whether growth, mortality and migration are density-dependent, and if so how this could affect the production of spawners; (d) assess the type and extent of habitat loss by river system, region, and country, and derive targets for habitat restoration to achieve appropriate biological goals for eel stocks; (e) compile handbooks to help managers: (i) describe the characteristics of an unexploited eel stock for use in setting management objectives (this may require analytical studies or empirical comparison between exploited and unexploited stocks);.
(ii) quantify the effects and risks associated with exploitation and loss of habitat, and the corresponding effects of ameliorating management measures such as habitat restoration, the construction of fish passes, or re-stocking; (iii) develop data-rich and data-sparse procedures for evaluating the efficacy of management measures; (iv) assess the effect of fishing on the economic viability of local communities and management. The Working Group will meet in Nantes, France from 2 to 6 September 2002. 14. The Commission was made aware of the poor state of the stock several years ago and management advice has been specified, but no action has yet been taken. In addition the Polish delegate informed the meeting of the decline of eel stocks in his country. He drew the attention of the Commission to the need for external funding to set up programmes for the sustainable management of eel populations in Poland. EIFAC therefore expressed its concern about the state of European eel stocks and the slow progress that has been made in drawing up a European-wide eel stock management plan. It also wished to draw the attention of the EC DG-FISH to the Working Group meeting in Nantes. Fish Monitoring in Fresh Waters 15. There was little progress with the work programme of the Ad hoc Working Party (Convener: P. Hickley, United Kingdom) during the intersessional period. This situation resulted from the Ad hoc Working Party deciding to await initial progress by the European Committee for Standardization (CEN) on their programme of new standards related to fish sampling. The main task for the Ad hoc Working Party at the moment is to contribute to the work of CEN and to assist in the development of protocols for fish monitoring with particular reference to the requirements of the Water Framework Directive. CEN has commenced work on a draft.
4 standard entitled "Water quality - Guidance on the scope and selection of fish sampling methods" and input from the Ad hoc Working Party will be required. 16. A meeting of the Ad hoc Working Party was held on 15 June 2002. It decided that the Ad hoc Working Party compile a decision making matrix on the scope and selection of fish sampling methods. 17. The delegation of the United Kingdom informed the Commission that a Symposium concerning the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) would take place at the Hull International Fisheries Institute (HIFI), Hull (United Kingdom) in early 2003. 18. Fish monitoring methods and techniques have a substantial bearing on the WFD compliance procedures. Consequently, it was decided that the aims of the Water Framework Directive Liaison Group be transferred to this Ad hoc Working Party. Introductions and Stocking 19. In the previous period, members of EIFAC contributed towards the EU review on Analysis of the Environmental and Economic Impact of Operations to Reinforce the Aquatic Fauna of Fresh Waters for Fishery Purposes. This document is being updated and summarized to be made available in the near future. An analysis of the economic importance of restocking, in particular for Community aquaculture companies, was also carried out. A draft report is now being finalized for Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland and Romania which gives an overview of practices and issues in non-EU States. 20. The Commission was informed by Mr I.G. Cowx (United Kingdom) Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party that the code of practice for stocking and introductions was being updated and would be circulated to national correspondents in due course. Mapping of Fish Distribution and Aquatic Habitat Quality 21. The Chairperson of Sub-Commission I reminded participants of the sad demise of Mr T. Lelek. Although there has been no action in this Ad hoc Working Party in the intersessional period, the Chairperson drew attention to the need for work to be continued under the original terms of reference and undertook to find a new Convener. Management of Sturgeon 22. Following a recommendation of the EIFAC Executive Committee (EXCOM), at its meeting in Rome, 23-25 May 2001, and with the prior agreement of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM), the Commission established a joint EIFAC/GFCM Ad hoc Working Party on Management of Sturgeon. The Terms of Reference for the Working Group are as follows: · · · to review existing information on the biology and distribution of sturgeon species in the Danube, Black Sea, Caspian Sea and Adriatic Sea regions; to determine long-term trends in the dynamics of the stocks and their exploitation patterns; to determine the current status of the stocks and exploitation based on catch composition (size, species and weight caught), effort, export licences and controls, and.
5 · establish a comprehensive regional catch assessment programme to support rational management of the stocks. Review existing conservation and management measures and advise on appropriate interventions for the sustainable exploitation of the stocks, including enhancement through aquaculture production and stocking.
Mr M. Chebanov (Russian Federation) was appointed as Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party. 23. The Commission felt that specific attention should be paid to the review of the stateof-art of stock assessment methods and their suitability for sturgeon stock assessment, and to the specific role of aquaculture for restoration of natural stocks as well as a means to relieve catch pressure from natural stocks. Restocking and reintroduction programmes conducted elsewhere in Europe, having impact on fisheries management practices, should also be considered by the Ad hoc Working Party. The Ad hoc Working Party should also pay attention to Northern Aegean sturgeon stocks. 24. It was felt that better coordination between environmental and fisheries departments in member countries was essential for proper protection and management of sturgeon stocks, taking into consideration the social and economic situation of the commercial fisheries. Finally, partners for funding for conservation and enhancement projects are needed. Other Matters 25. The Chairperson of EIFAC called for cooperation by national correspondents in replying to requests sent to them by Ad hoc Working Party Conveners. Election of Officers 26. The existing officers of the Sub-Commission: Mr T. Brenner (Germany), Chairperson; Mr P. Fitzmaurice (Ireland), Vice-Chairperson; Mr K. Hensel (Slovakia), Rapporteur, were re-elected. IV. AQUACULTURE (Sub-Commission II) 27. The Chairperson of the Sub-Commission, Mr L. Váradi (Hungary) reported on the activities and achievements of the Sub-Commission. The report of the activities was submitted to the Session as document EIFAC/XXII/2002/Inf.6. Fish Diseases and their Control 28. The Ad hoc Working Party on Fish Diseases and their Control (Convener: R. Richards, United Kingdom) has not been active over the past two years. The Proceedings of the EIFAC/EAFP (European Association of Fish Pathologists) Workshop on Carp and Sturgeon Health Management (held in 1999 in Rhodos, Greece) are still being completed by Messrs R. Richards and R. Subasinghe, the Technical Secretary of the Ad hoc Working Party. The proceedings should be ready by 2003. Aquatic Resources Management in Aquaculture 29. The Convener (Y. Avnimelech, Israel) has prepared a work plan for the elaboration of a comprehensive study on Aquatic Resources Utilization by Aquaculture. The main topics are: production and water statistics; resources economy; and aquaculture options. Competent experts have been identified as potential contributors from Eastern and Western Europe and also from Israel, however the Ad hoc Working Party has not yet succeeded in organizing an expert meeting. There is a good opportunity to hold it on 11 October 2002, consecutively with the FAO Expert Consultation on Land and Water Use in Aquaculture, which will be held in Rome from 7 to 10 October 2002.
6 Fish and Crustacean Nutrition 30. The proceedings of the EIFAC Workshop on Fish and Crustacean Nutrition Methodology and Research for Semi-intensive Pond-based Farming Systems, held from 3 to 5 April 1996 in Szarvas, Hungary, have been published as the 23rd volume of the periodical series of the Research Institute for Fisheries, Aquaculture and Irrigation (HAKI), Szarvas, Hungary. 31. Since 2001, the Convener (I. Csengeri, Hungary) has commenced new activities, which include the development of guidelines for Good Farming Practice, and the preparation of Hungarian standards for organic fish production. Exchange of information on standards of organic fish farming has also been started with Greek, Moldavian and Ukrainian colleagues. 32. The Commission agreed that this Ad hoc Working Party could be disbanded, and that the initiatives of the Convener could be integrated into the activities of the Ad hoc Working Party on Organic Fish Farming. Organic Fish Farming 33. The Ad hoc Working Party on Organic Fish Farming was established during the Twenty-first Session of EIFAC in Budapest in 2000. 34. In order to obtain an overview of organic fish farming in Europe the Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party (V. Hilge, Germany) sent a questionnaire to the EIFAC National Correspondents. A scoping meeting of the Ad hoc Working Party was then held at Nürnberg, Germany, on 18 February 2002. A second version of the questionnaire is now being sent in order to obtain updated information that includes brackishwater and marine culture. 35. The Nürnberg Scoping Workshop was attended by individuals from the conventional trout and carp farming sector from Germany and Hungary, researchers from Germany, Hungary, Italy, and USA, and a representative of a certifying organization from Germany. 36. There is a great interest in a number of countries to develop organic fish farming. However, in some of these countries there is a lack of information on criteria and standards for organic fish farming, including specific aspects such as feed formulation, feeding and nutrition, environmental criteria, marketing and regulations. There is a general need for uniform principles for recognizing fish farms and farming practices which meet the criteria of organic fish farming. EIFAC reiterated the need for scientific bases for such criteria and related certification requirements. Market Perspectives of European Freshwater Aquaculture 37. The EIFAC/EC Ad hoc Working Party on Market Perspectives of European Freshwater Aquaculture convened by L. Váradi (Hungary) was held on the premises of the European Community from 14 to 16 May 2001. The Ad hoc Working Party was attended by 26 invited experts, among them industry representatives, scientists, traders, journalists and FAO/EIFAC as well as EC officials. EIFAC endorsed the conclusions and recommendations of the Ad hoc Working Party. The presentations, discussions and recommendations of the Ad hoc Working Party have been summarized in a report, which has been published as EIFAC Occasional Paper 35 (ftp://ftp.fao.org/fi/documents/eifac/Wgmarket/OP35.pdf). 38. Since marketing in European freshwater aquaculture is going to be a critical issue in the future, further actions are required to address marketing issues taking into account the recommendations of the EIFAC/EC Ad hoc Working Party. The International Conference on Aquaculture Economics and Marketing which will be held from 29 September to 2 October 2002 at Szarvas, Hungary, can be considered as a related follow-up action. In the programme.
7 of the conference special attention will be given to specific topics, which have been emphasized by the EIFAC/EC Ad hoc Working Party. 39. The Ad hoc Working Party will continue follow-up activities according to the recommendations of the EIFAC/EC Ad hoc Working Party. Election of Officers 40. The following persons were re-elected: Mr L. Váradi (Hungary), Chairperson; Mr Y. Avnimelech (Israel), Vice-Chairperson; Mr J.P. Proteau (France), Rapporteur. V. PROTECTION OF THE AQUATIC RESOURCE (Sub-Commission III) 41. The Chairperson of Sub-Commission III, Mr A.J.P. Raat (Netherlands) summarized the activities of the Sub-Commission, which were presented to the Session as document EIFAC/XXII/2002/Inf.7 Rev.1. Effects of physical modification of the aquatic habitat on fish populations 42. In June 2001 an international Workshop on Ecohydrology was organized in Warsaw, Poland, within the framework of the EIFAC Ad hoc Working Party, with the following objectives: · to bring together scientists and fisheries managers interested in the influence of aquatic habitat modifications on fish populations and in methods of rehabilitation of these habitats; to compile data on recent progress and review existing data with special emphasis on identification of integrative interdisciplinary research and perspectives of cooperation, and development of practice-oriented management models.
43. The outcome of the Workshop is published in the International Journal of Ecohydrology & Hydrobiology, volume 1 (3), year 2001. EIFAC emphasized the need for practical instruments based on conceptual frameworks of the ecohydrological approach of the management of inland waterbodies and referred to the conclusions and recommendations of the Symposium. 44. It was proposed that the Chairperson of Sub-Commission III approach the Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party, Mr M. Zalewski (Poland) to clarify progress of the Ad hoc Working Party. Methodologies for rehabilitation of lakes and reservoirs 45. The Commission was informed that the Ad hoc Working Party is preparing a Manual on Rehabilitation of Lakes and Reservoirs for Fish. Almost all of the chapters have been written already and the editors (Convener: H. Lehtonen (Finland); I.G. Cowx (United Kingdom) and R. Müller (Switzerland)) met in Lammi, Finland in August 2001 in order to edit the texts. The aim to complete the work by the end of 2001 proved impossible because not all authors submitted their contribution in time. It is now planned that the work will be completed during 2002. Prevention and control of bird predation 46. During the intersessional period there were several meetings of the EU-project REDCAFE (Reducing the conflict between cormorants and fisheries on a pan-European scale). In April 2001, an International Symposium "Interaction between fish and birds: implications for management", was organized by the Hull International Fisheries Institute,.
8 University of Hull, in collaboration with EIFAC. The proceedings of the Symposium will be published in 2002 by Fishing News Books. 47. Other meetings of REDCAFE took place in Lelystad (Netherlands) and Horsens (Denmark). In autumn 2002 a meeting will be held in the United Kingdom. The reports of these meetings will be distributed by the Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party, Mr E. Staub (Switzerland), to the National Correspondents. The final report on the REDCAFE project will be published in 2003. 48. In March 2002 the Conseil Supérieur de la Pêche (France) organized the "European Conference on the Great Cormorant: towards a European approach?" in Strasbourg. This meeting brought together stakeholders (fishermen, fish biologists and ornithologists) in a public debate. The proceedings of the meeting will be published by the end of 2002. Influence of management practices on the environment 49. The main output from this topic area was the Symposium held in Windermere (United Kingdom) in conjunction with the Twenty-second Session of EIFAC in June 2002 entitled "Inland fisheries management and the aquatic environment". The Symposium was convened by Mr D. Gerdeaux (France) and chaired by Mr I.G. Cowx (United Kingdom). It is intended that, following peer review, some of the papers presented at the Symposium will be published in "Fisheries Management and Ecology" or possibly as conference proceedings published by Fishing News Books. The editorial board will consist of Messrs D. Gerdeaux (France), I.G. Cowx (United Kingdom) and H. Naeve (FAO). 50. The Ad hoc Working Party on Influence of Management Practices on the Environment convened by Mr M. Aprahamian (United Kingdom) met after the Symposium to discuss implementations of the main findings of the meeting. It was agreed in the first instance to try and produce guidelines for biomanipulation and to work more closely with the EIFAC Ad hoc Working Party on Introductions and Stocking to ensure that the impacts of stocking/introductions on the wider environment are considered. The Session decided that the two Working Parties work closely together in order to provide updated guidelines on stocking and introductions for incorporating into national and local level policy. Evaluation of ecological and human health effects from endocrine disrupting substances 51. GESAMP (IMO/FAO/UNESCO-IOC/WMO/WHO/IAEA/UN/UNEP Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection), at its Thirty-second Session in London, May 2002, discussed the future of this joint working group and noted that no new substantive information had come to its attention during the intersessional period. It was decided to remove the issue of effects of endocrine substances as a topic for the future agenda. 52. In the intersessional period the Convener of the Ad hoc Working Party, Mr P.-D. Hansen (Germany) attended the end-user workshop of the European Community Programme of Research on Environmental Hormones and Endocrine Disrupters (COMPREHEND). 53. In view of the withdrawal of GESAMP and in view of the workload of the Coordinator, it was decided to discontinue the Ad hoc Working Party. It was further decided that the Chairman of Sub-Commission III should have a watching brief on the new developments on the effects of endocrine disruptors on fish and fish populations. Mr A.J.P. Raat will inform Mr. P.-D. Hansen of the outcome and thank him for his involvement.
9 New activities EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) 54. In December 2000 the European Commission published the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD). The Directive has consequences for the management of surface- and groundwater in EU States. The WFD identifies the fish fauna as a major component in ecological water quality assessment of waterbodies. Fish-based monitoring and fish-based quality assessment methods have to be developed and implemented in ecological assessment programmes of the EU States. EIFAC is involved in several ways in the WFD: Input of information and expertise: · · · · fish-based methodology and monitoring of stocks and fisheries in varying types of surface waters; fish-based criteria for quality assessment in the four types of surface waters designated in the WFD; data on fish distribution and catches (actual and historical). The consequences of the application of the WFD for fisheries and fisheries management have to be listed and communicated to the institutions and stakeholders of the fisheries that are involved.
Output of the WFD activities and implementation:.
55. During the 2001 Session of the Executive Committee (EXCOM) meeting in Rome an interim liaison group (Messrs I.G. Cowx and A.J.P. Raat) was established with the aim of exchanging information about the WFD. The liaison group prepared proposals for the Session. The Commission decided as follows: · to merge the aims on the input of information and expertise on fish-based monitoring and standardization in the programme of the EIFAC Ad hoc Working Party on Fish Monitoring in Fresh Waters. This includes the link with the European Committee for Standardization (CEN) involvement in standardization of fish monitoring; to link the input of information and expertise on fish distribution of WFD fish-based assessment with the programme of the EIFAC Ad hoc Working Party on Mapping Fish Distribution and Aquatic Habitat Quality; to establish a liaison group on the WFD that sets out the consequences of the WFD for fisheries and fisheries management and reports about these consequences to EIFAC and acts as a link between the EIFAC Ad hoc Working Party on Fish Monitoring and the EU project: Development, Evaluation and Implementation of a Standardized Fishbased Assessment Method for the Ecological Status of Eur