ISSN 0429-9345.
Farming freshwater prawns.
A manual for the culture of the giant river prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii).
FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER.
by Michael B. New Marlow, United Kingdom.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2002.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mention of specific companies, their products or brand names does not imply any endorsement by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
ISBN 92-5-104811-8.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
A PREVIOUS MANUAL ON THIS TOPIC was prepared for FAO in 1982 and revised in 1985 but the.
English edition is now out-of-print. Research has generated considerable benefits on this subject and substantial advances in technology have occurred since the original manual was published. These facts, combined with a revival in interest in expanding the farming of freshwater prawns, have created the need for a new technical manual. This document has therefore been prepared to provide up-to-date and practical information on freshwater prawn farming. Its emphasis is on techniques for cultivating the major farmed species, namely the giant river prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii). The manual also contains information of relevance to the farming of other Macrobrachium species and to the enhancement of freshwater prawn fisheries. The document was prepared under contract for the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service, FAO Fishery Resources Division, by one of the authors of the original FAO manual, Michael B. New. It is a synthesis of the personal experience of the author and of his many international friends and colleagues working in this field, who are gratefully acknowledged within the manual text. The principal targeted audience includes trainers, extension agents, farmers, and students. It is also hoped that the manual will provide background information and reference sources for those embarking on research in this field.
The mention of specific companies, their products or brand names does not imply any endorsement by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2 0 0 2.
THE ORIGINAL MANUAL on freshwater prawn farming was published in English, French.
and Spanish by FAO and translated by others into Farsi, Hindi, and Vietnamese. In the two decades since that manual was written, many technical and practical advances have been made in the rearing of freshwater prawns. Greater farmed production, developing global markets, and the need to ensure that each form of aquaculture is sustainable, have led to an increased interest in the farming of freshwater prawns. A new manual has therefore been prepared, which will be issued in each of the FAO official languages. This manual provides information on the farming of Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Many of the techniques described are also applicable to other species of freshwater prawns that are being cultured. The manual is not a scientific text but is intended to be a practical guide to in-hatchery and on-farm management. The target audience is therefore principally farmers and extension workers. However, it is also hoped that, like the previous manual on this topic, it will be useful for lecturers and students alike in universities and other institutes that provide training in aquaculture. After a preliminary section on the biology of freshwater prawns, the manual covers site selection for hatcheries, nurseries and grow-out facilities, and the management of the broodstock, hatchery, nursery and grow-out phases of rearing. Harvesting and post-harvest handling are also covered and there are some notes on marketing freshwater prawns. The reference and bibliography section is generally restricted to a list of relevant reviews, as well as other (mainly FAO) manuals on general aquaculture themes, such as water and soil management, topography, pond construction and simple economics. Every attempt has been made to illustrate the management principles described in this manual by photographs and drawings. The manual contains many annexes on specific topics, such as the production of larval feeds, size variation and stock estimation. The final annex is a glossary; this lists not only terms used in the manual itself but also terms which the readers may find in other documents that they may consult. Key words: Macrobrachium, broodstock management, crustacean culture, freshwater prawns, hatchery operation, grow-out procedures, post-harvest handling and marketing, site selection.
AN EARLIER FAO MANUAL on freshwater prawn culture was written by the former CoManagers of the UNDP/FAO Programme for the Expansion of Freshwater Prawn Farming in Thailand, Michael New and Somsak Singholka, which was based substantially on their personal experience. The English version was issued in 1982 (New and Singholka, 1982) and FAO published it in Spanish in 1984 and in French in 1985. A minor revision of the English edition was made when it was reprinted in 1985. With the support of local funding, the manual was also translated and published in Vietnamese in 1990, in Farsi in 1991, and in Hindi in 1996. A number of freshwater prawn manuals by other authors, which were published in English, French, Portuguese and Spanish between 1985 and 1993, are listed in a review of the history of freshwater prawn farming by New (2000a). Many technological advances were made in freshwater prawn culture in the final two decades of the 20th century, and a number of other FAO manuals on general but relevant aquacultural topics were issued during that period (e.g. FAO 1981, 1985, 1988, 1989b, 1992a, 1992b, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998; Lavens and Sorgeloos 1996; Tave 1996, 1999; Moretti, Pedini FernandezCriado, Cittolin and Guidastri 1999). In the two decades since the original FAO freshwater prawn manual was published, production from the farming of Macrobrachium rosenbergii has expanded considerably, mainly in Asia but also in South and North America. Thai farmed freshwater prawn production expanded from less than 250 mt in 1979 (New, Singholka and Vorasayan 1982) to about 3 100 mt in 1984 (FAO 1989a). In 1984, the total global production of farmed Macrobrachium rosenbergii was only about 5 000 mt (FAO 1989a). By 2000, official FAO data indicate that global production of M. rosenbergii had risen to nearly 119 000 mt, to which Thailand contributed 3 700 mt (FAO 2002). China, which introduced this species in 1976 (New 2000b), produced over 97 000 mt in 2000. The official FAO production statistics for this species are underestimates, because some countries have not yet disaggregated their production from more general statistical categories such as `freshwater prawns and shrimps nei*' or `freshwater crustaceans nei*'. In addition, several other freshwater p r a w n species are now cultured in pilot or full commercial scale, including M. amazonicum, M. malcolmsonii and M. nipponense (Kutty, Herman and Le Menn 2000) but production data for these species is not yet reported to FAO. Farmed production of M. nipponense in China was estimated to be 100 000 mt in 2000 (Miao and Ge 2002), confirming a forecast that total annual production of all freshwater prawn species would reach 200 000 mt early in the new millennium (New 2000a). Some believe that freshwater prawn farming may be more sustainable than marine shrimp farming (New, D'Abramo, Valenti and Singholka 2000). This renewed interest in freshwater prawn farming provided the stimulus for the preparation of a new FAO manual on the topic. In preparing this manual, the author has drawn heavily on information gained during the editing of a recent academic book on the topic (New and Valenti 2000). The author and the FAO Fisheries Department hope that it will prove useful in further encouraging the culture of freshwater prawns. Translations of the new manual into Arabic, Chinese, French and Spanish will be issued in 2002-2003. ________________________ * not elsewhere included.
Names, natural range, and characteristics of freshwater prawns.
Naming freshwater prawns (nomenclature) The natural home of freshwater prawns (distribution) Identifying Macrobrachium rosenbergii from other freshwater prawn species.
1.2 1.3 1.4.
The shape (external morphology) and other characteristics of freshwater prawns Life history Sources of further biological information.
Site selection.
Hatcheries and indoor nurseries.
Needs for good quality water Deciding how much water is needed Other requirements for hatchery sites.
Outdoor nurseries and grow-out facilities.
Choosing your site: topography and access Choosing your site: climate Choosing your site: water quality and supply Choosing your site: soil characteristics Choosing your site: power supplies Choosing your site: fry and consumables Choosing your site: labour Choosing your site: sympathetic authorities and technical assistance.
Obtaining and selecting egg-carrying females.
Obtaining berried females Genetic improvement.
Holding your broodstock in temperate zones Managing your broodstock.
F R E S H WAT E R P R AW N S.
Hatchery phase.
Buildings and equipment facilities.
Basic site and building requirements Equipment and the distribution of water and air.
Hatchery management.
Water treatment Starting your larval batch Routine work Feeding Hygiene, health and management problems Monitoring performance The greenwater system of freshwater prawn culture.
Harvesting postlarvae.
Postlarval holding and nursery phases.
Basic requirements and facilities.
Holding tanks Indoor (primary) nursery facilities Outdoor (secondary) nursery facilities Nursery cages.
5.2 5.3 5.4.
Holding postlarvae before sale Transporting postlarvae Managing nurseries.
Indoor (primary) nurseries Outdoor (secondary) nurseries Other systems.
Grow-out phase.
Site requirements and construction.
Defining the pond Supplying water to the ponds Discharging water from the ponds Aeration Miscellaneous.
Management of the grow-out phase.
Size variation Semi-intensive monoculture in tropical zones Monoculture in temperate zones Polyculture and integrated culture.
Feeding and fertilization.
TA B L E O F CO N T E N T S.
Feed type Measuring feed efficiency Feeding rate.
Health, predation and disease.
Watching for signs of problems Dealing with problems of predation Coping with diseases and other problems.
Monitoring performance and record keeping.
Harvesting and post-harvest handling.
Harvesting your market-sized prawns.
Cull harvesting Drain harvesting.
Handling your prawns after harvest and ensuring good product quality.
Handling prawns to be sold fresh Handling prawns to be sold frozen Handling for live sales.
Code of practice for harvesting, processing and handling prawns.
9.1 9.2 9.3 9.4.
Marketing your freshwater prawns alive Marketing your freshwater prawns fresh or frozen Marketing your freshwater prawns at your farm gate International opportunities and general marketing strategy.
10. 11. Key to larval stages of freshwater prawns (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) Natural beach filter for seawater Maturation diets for broodstock freshwater prawns Source, hatching and enrichment of Artemia Production of farm-made larval feeds Stock estimation Seine nets Size management Farm-made pond feeds Basic code for introductions Glossary of terms, abbreviations and conversions 145 147 151 153 167 169 173 177 185 191 193 203 205 207.
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS REFERENCES.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Body segments (somites) in Macrobrachium rosenbergii and appendage function Characteristics of water suitable for freshwater prawn hatcheries Artificial brackishwater (12 ppt) for M. rosenbergii hatcheries Diluting seawater and brine to make brackishwater for larval freshwater prawn culture Water quality requirements for freshwater prawn nursery and grow-out facilities Example of water requirements for ponds based on various assumptions Relationship between temperature, salinity and dissolved oxygen saturation levels Hatchery feeding schedule Alternative hatchery feeding schedule The major diseases known to affect freshwater prawns, and their exterior symptoms Prevention and treatment of freshwater prawn diseases Water discharge capacity of concrete pipes under various pressure heads Sizes of outlet pipes for ponds with monks Time taken to drain ponds with different drain pipe sizes Oxygen transfer efficiencies of basic types of aerator Lime requirements for treating the bottom of ponds between cycles Average stocking densities and yields in polyculture Examples of major ingredients in grow-out feeds Tentative specifications for semi-intensive freshwater prawn grow-out feeds General recommendations for handling and storing freshwater prawns 67 68 93 95 96 97 105 112 117 118 143 44 63 64 20 23 18 6 15 16.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Removal of iron and manganese Flow-through requirements for larval rearing tanks Grow-out water requirements Numbers of berried females required Activating biofilters Treatment of brackishwater Regular monitoring of larval water quality Alternative larval stocking strategies Recommendations for good larval water quality Maintenance schedule for recirculation systems Feeding BSN depends on tank volume, not the number of larvae in it Additional recommendations for recirculation system hygiene Notes on potential disease problems Definitions of farming intensity used in this manual Systems of management in grow-out ponds for freshwater prawns Application of rotenone and teaseed cake 14 17 22 28 53 54 55 57 59 62 63 66 69 101 102-103 104.
Measuring soil pH Reasons for not applying organic fertilizers Keeping rooted plants out of your ponds Size grading Polyculture of freshwater prawns with carps Examples of integrated freshwater prawn culture Example of feeding rate for freshwater prawns Examples of freshwater prawn (M. rosenbergii) growth and production rates.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. External appearance Large males Sexing juveniles Females with a BC male Male morphotypes Freshwater prawns compared to penaeid shrimp Another way of distinguishing carideans from penaeids Grow-out pond inlets and screens Simple pumps Expensive pumps Berried females Hatching system Airlift pumps Small hatcheries Partially covered larval tanks Hatchery layout Water flow through a recirculation system Spaces round tanks Cylindrico-conical larval tank Grouping tanks together Shared filter Individual recirculation systems Filter sock Turn-down drains Storage tanks Ring main air supply Tank taps Air blowers and emergency power supplies Water distribution Physical hatchery filters Close-up of a shared biological filter Types of biological filters White board Tank cleaning Reducing losses Observing larval quality Additional substrates in holding tanks 3 5 7 7 8 8 9 21 25 25 29 31 32-33 36-37 37 38 39 39 40 40 41 41 42 43 43 45 46 47 48 50 51 52 56 60 61 71-72 76.
Overhead air and water distribution systems Substrates Pond with standpipe drain Transporting postlarvae Substrate in a larval tank Large freshwater prawn farm Pond bottom profiles Improving pond banks Angles of pond bank slope Erosion Grass on pond banks Pond banks with integrated agriculture Increasing dissolved oxygen levels in incoming water Simple gravel filters Water distribution system to ponds Supplying water by gravity Grass minimizes erosion Controlling water entry Outlet structure Cast netting Draining Screening pond outlets Long-tail pump Long-tail pump being used Paddlewheel aerator Long-shaft aerator Long-shaft aerator in action Pond sedimentation Tilling the pond bottom Juvenile prawns Acclimatizing prawns before stocking Releasing prawns during stocking Weeds invade shallow areas Close-up of pond substrate Substrates placed vertically Substrates placed horizontally Integrated freshwater prawn farming Catching wild postlarvae Feed distribution Observing feed consumption Measuring transparency Simple gravel filter Protection from overland predators Large BC Macrobrachium rosenbergii being measured Relationship between total length and weight Seining Double seining Multiple seining Sorting prawns.
Keeping market-sized prawns alive during harvesting Keeping prawns in peak condition Checking prawn health Internal harvesting sump Harvesting with an internal sump Cull-harvesting Catching the last few prawns by hand Bird predation Kill-chilling harvested prawns Sorting during processing Packaging prawns attractively Recently harvested prawns Advertising freshwater prawns at the farm gate Selling prawns in a supermarket.
Introduction.
THE WORDS `PRAWN' AND `SHRIMP' are often used synonymously. Actual use is geographically dependent. For example, animals of the genus Macrobrachium are referred to as freshwater prawns in Australia and freshwater shrimp in the United States of America (USA). In its statistical data, FAO refers to the genus Macrobrachium as freshwater prawns but also uses the word prawn for many species of marine shrimp, including the banana prawn (Fenneropenaeus merguiensis), the giant tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon) and the kuruma prawn (Marsupenaeus japonicus) (FAO 2001). This manual is intended to be a practical guide to the farming of freshwater prawns and is meant primarily for extension, rather than research workers. Its contents are a synthesis of practical experience and published information. The manual also has some relevance for the enhancement of freshwater prawn fisheries, since this requires the provision of hatchery-reared animals for stocking purposes. The introduction of M. rosenbergii and related species into reservoirs and the enhancement of existing capture fisheries has had some current success, notably in Brazil, India and Thailand. Further developments will require hatchery-reared postlarvae (PL) and juveniles for stocking purposes. Although the new manual is primarily concerned with aquaculture, parts of it (particularly the sections on broodstock, hatchery management and marketing) are also relevant to the enhancement of freshwater prawn fisheries. Further reading on the topic of capture fisheries and enhancement is available in New, Singholka and Kutty (2000). Those interested in the science that supports freshwater prawn farming can find a comprehensive review in New and Valenti (2000). Although several species of freshwater prawns are currently being cultured, this manual deals exclusively with the farming of the major commercial species (Macrobrachium rosenbergii), which is indigenous to South and Southeast Asia, parts of Oceania and some Pacific islands. M. rosenbergii has been imported into many other tropical and subtropical areas of the world and is the species most favoured for farming purposes. The use of the words `freshwater prawns' and `prawns' in this manual, except where otherwise specifically qualified, refers to M. rosenbergii. This species remains by far the.
INTRODUCTION.
major subject of cultivation because a global market for it evolved during the 1990s and is currently being further developed. Other species of Macrobrachium are now also being farmed, mainly for domestic consumption, and modifications of the techniques described in this manual can be derived to support this development. Such modifications need to take account of the different environmental requirements of the other species, especially in the larval stages. Reference to the culture of other Macrobrachium spp. is contained in Kutty, Herman and Le Menn (2000). In the previous FAO manual on this topic, the hatchery and pond-rearing techniques described were generally based on those applied in freshwater prawn culture in Thailand in the early 1980s. Only one system of culture, namely the operation of flow-through hatcheries followed by monoculture in ponds, was fully described. This manual broadens the scope by drawing on experience in recirculation hatcheries and monoculture from other countries, notably Brazil and the USA, and by stressing the opportunities for alternative systems of grow-out, including polyculture and integrated culture After a brief section on the biology of M. rosenbergii, the manual deals with the selection of sites for hatchery and grow-out facilities. It then covers the maintenance of broodstock and the management of the hatchery, nursery and grow-out phases. Following a section on harvesting and the post-harvest handling of market-sized prawns, the manual includes a section on marketing, an important topic that was not covered in the previous document. The text of the manual concludes with some references to financial matters and a short bibliography for further reading. Several other important topics, such as the preparation of feed for freshwater prawn larvae, and a glossary, are provided in the annexes. General background information, which should be useful for extension workers and students is provided in the introduction and in Chapter.
Chapters 2-8 (especially sections 3-6) and the annexes contain the main technical content of the manual, which is of direct relevance for farmers as well as students and extension workers. The different audiences addressed by various parts of the manual are reflected by the writing style chosen for each section. As far as possible, the technical sections that are specific to the hatchery and growout management of freshwater prawns (especially the material presented in text `Boxes' are written in `cookbook' English, whereas more `scientific' language is used in Chapter 1 and some of the annexes, for example. The author and the FAO Fisheries Department hope that you will find the manual useful and stimulating, and would welcome constructive criticism, so that the manual may be improved in future editions.
THE FOLLOWING NOTES contain background information on the genus Macrobrachium.
and some basic details about the biology of M. rosenbergii. This section of the manual has mainly been derived from Holthuis (2000), the work of Ling (1969), and a review by Ismael and New (2000), and is intended to provide basic background information for extension workers and students.
1.1 Names, natural range, and characteristics of freshwater prawns.
NAMING FRESHWATER PRAWNS (NOMENCLATURE).
All the freshwater prawns that have been cultured so far belong to the genus Macrobrachium, Bate 1868, the largest genus of the family Palaemonidae. About 200 species have been described, almost all of which live in freshwater at least for part of their life. The giant river prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii, was one of the first species to become scientifically known, the first recognisable illustration appearing in 1705. The nomenclature of freshwater prawns, both on a generic and a species level has had quite a muddled history. In the past, generic names have included Cancer (Astacus) and Palaemon. Previous names of M. rosenbergii have included Palaemon carcinus, P. dacqueti, and P. rosenbergii and it was not until 1959 that its present scientific name, Macrobrachium rosenbergii (De Man 1879) became universally accepted. Some taxonomists recognize a western sub-species (found in the waters of the east coast of India, Bay of Bengal, Gulf of Thailand, Malaysia, and the Indonesian regions of Sumatra, Java and Kalimantan) and an eastern sub-species (inhabiting the Philippines, the Indonesian regions of Sulawesi and Irian Jaya, Papua New Guinea and northern Australia). These are referred to as Macrobrachium rosenbergii dacqueti (Sunier 1925) for the western form and Macrobrachium rosenbergii rosenbergii (De Man 1879) for the eastern form. However, from the perspective of freshwater prawn farmers, exact nomenclature.
has little relevance, especially because the species M. rosenbergii has been transferred within its natural geographical range and been introduced into many other zones where it may become established.
THE NATURAL HOME OF FRESHWATER PRAWNS (DISTRIBUTION).
Species of the freshwater prawn genus Macrobrachium are distributed throughout the tropical and subtropical zones of the world. Holthuis (1980) provides useful information on the distribution, local names, habitats and maximum sizes of commercial (fished and farmed) species of Macrobrachium. They are found in most inland freshwater areas including lakes, rivers, swamps, irrigation ditches, canals and ponds, as well as in estuarine areas. Most species require brackishwater in the initial stages of their life cycle (and therefore they are found in water that is directly or indirectly connected with the sea) although some complete their cycle in inland saline and freshwater lakes. Some species prefer rivers containing clear water, while others are found in extremely turbid conditions. M. rosenbergii is an example of the latter. There is a wide interspecific variation in maximum size and growth rate, M. rosenbergii, M. americanum, M. carcinus, M. malcolmsonii, M. choprai, M. vollenhovenii and M. lar being the largest species known. M. americanum (Cauque river prawn) is found naturally in western watersheds of the Americas while M. carcinus (painted river prawn) is found in those connected with the Atlantic. M. choprai (Ganges river prawn) is found in the Ganges and Brahmaputra river systems. M. lar (Monkey river prawn) is native from East Africa to the Marquesas Islands of the Pacific (and was introduced into Hawaii). M. malcolmsonii (monsoon river prawn) is found in the waters of Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. M. rosenbergii (giant river prawn) is indigenous in the whole of the South and Southeast Asian area as well as in northern Oceania and in the western Pacific islands. M. vollenhovenii (African river prawn) is naturally distributed in West Africa, from Senegal to Angola. Many Macrobrachium species have been transferred from their natural location to other parts of the world, initially for research purposes. M. rosenbergii remains the species most used for commercial farming and consequently is the one which has been introduced to more countries. Following its import into Hawaii from Malaysia in 1965, where the pioneer work of Ling (1969) was translated into a method for the mass production of postlarvae (PL) by Fujimura and Okamoto (1972), it has been introduced into almost every continent for farming purposes. M. rosenbergii is now farmed in many countries; the major producers (>200 mt) are Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Ecuador, India, Malaysia, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand (FAO 2002). More than thirty other countries reported production of this species in the year 2000. Viet Nam is also a major producer, according to New (2000b). In addition, there are also valuable capture fisheries for M. rosenbergii, for example in Bangladesh, India, and several countries in Southeast Asia.
IDENTIFYING MACROBRACHIUM ROSENBERGII FROM OTHER FRESHWATER PRAWN SPECIES.
Macrobrachium rosenbergii (Figure 1) can be distinguished from other species in the genus by the following characteristics (the morphological terms used below are explained in the glossary ­ Annex 11):.
t has a very long rostrum, with 11-14 dorsal teeth and 8-10 ventral teeth (the venhe tip of its telson reaches distinctly beyond the posterior spines of the telson;.
tral characteristics are especially important);.
cephalothorax (`head') abdomen (`tail').
The external features of Macrobrachium rosenbergii.
NOTE: OTHER CARIDEAN PRAWNS HAVE SIMILAR CHARACTERISTICS BUT SOME (E.G. PANDALUS, CRANGON, PALAEMON) ARE MARINE.
gills are below this portion of the carapace.
2nd abdominal somite (segment) (see also Figure 7).
pereiopods (walking legs).
SOURCE: EMANUELA D'ANTONI.
he adult male has very long second chelipeds in which all segments are elongate and he movable finger of the second chelipeds of the adult male is covered by a dense vel-.
have blunt spines;.
vet-like fur (except the extreme tip) but this fur is absent from the fixed finger and the rest of the cheliped; and.
t is the largest known of all Macrobrachium species, adult males having been report-.
ed with a total body length of up to 33 cm, and adult females of up to 29 cm.
1.2 The shape (external morphology) and other characteristics of freshwater prawns.
The following information deals with the general external anatomy of the freshwater prawn M. rosenbergii, and provides some notes on the function of various major parts of the body. Internal morphology (circulatory, respiratory, digestive, excretory, reproductive and nervous systems) is not covered in this manual, which concentrates on farming, but further information is available in the references cited in the introduction to this section. Freshwater prawn eggs of this species are slightly elliptical, with a long axis of 0.60.7 mm, and are bright orange in colour until 2-3 days before hatching when they become grey-black. This colour change occurs as the embryos utilize their food reserves. Most scientists accept that the larvae go through 11 distinct stages (Uno and Kwon 1969) before metamorphosis, each with several distinguishing features which are described and illustrated in Annex.
However, from stage VI onwards their size is variable, which has led to some workers, notably Ling (1969) to describe only eight stages. Stage I larvae.
(zoeae) are just under 2 mm long (from the tip of the rostrum to the tip of the telson). Larvae swim upside down by using their thoracic appendages and are positively attracted to light. By stage XI they are about 7.7 mm long. Newly metamorphosed postlarvae (PL) are also about 7.7 mm long and are characterized by the fact that they move and swim in the same way as adult prawns. They are generally translucent and have a light orangepink head area. The body of postlarval and adult prawns consists of the cephalothorax (`head') and the abdomen (`tail'). The bodies of freshwater prawns are divided into twenty segments (known as somites). There are 14 segments in the head, which are fused together and invisible under a large dorsal and lateral shield, known as the carapace. The carapace is hard and smooth, except for two spines on either side; one (the antennal spine) is just below the orbit and the other (the hepatic spine) is lower down and behind the antennal spine. The carapace ends at the front in a long beak or rostrum, which is slender and curved upwards. The rostrum extends further forward than the antennal scale and has 11-14 teeth on the top and 8-10 underneath (Figure 1). The first two of the dorsal (top side) teeth appear behind the eye socket (orbit). The front portion of the cephalothorax, known as the cephalon, has six segments and includes the eyes and five pairs of appendages. The final three of these six segments can be seen if the animal is turned upside down and the appendages of the thorax (see below) are moved aside. The cephalon segments therefore support, from the front of the animal:.
he stalked eyes; he first antennae, which each have three-segment peduncles (stalks) from which he second antennae, which each have five-segment peduncles and a single, long flahe mandibles, which are short and hard and are used to grind food; he first maxillae, which are plate-