Checklist of the parasites of fishes of Bangladesh.
by J. Richard Arthur 6798 Hillside Drive Sparwood, British Columbia Canada an d Abu Tweb A. Ahmed Department of Zoology University of Dhaka Dhaka Bangladesh.
The designations employ e d and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country , territory , city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104854-1.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval sy ste m , or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy ing or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copy r ight owner. Applications for such permission with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy . © FAO 2002.
PREPARATIO N OF THIS DOCUMENT.
T h is checklist is part of the FAO's continuing effort to address the need for information on the occurrence of diseases and pathogens of aquatic animals in the Asia-Pacific Region. A previous checklist, published as FAO Fisheries T ech n ical Paper No. 369, has summarized the parasites of fishes of the Philippines. T h ese documents support the FAO/NACA regional strategy for the Development of Health Certification and Quarantine Guidelines for the Responsible Movement of Live Aquatic Animals in Asia, a programme involving 21 Asian nations, FAO, the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), the Office International des Épizooties (OIE) and regional and international specialists. One of the goals identified under this strategy is the development of a comprehensive information database on aquatic animal health, the Aquatic Animal Pathogen and Quarantine Information System (AAPQIS; www.enaca.org/aapqis/). Information provided via AAPQIS and through these checklists is intended to assist aquatic animal health workers, quarantine officers and policy makers in developing national strategies to minimize the risks associated with movement of pathogens of aquatic animals, and to make informed assessments on the possible threats presented by proposed movements of individual species of live fish and shellfish between countries. Further information on the regional programme is found in the "Asia Regional T ech n ical Guidelines on Health Management of Live Aquatic Animals and the Beijing Consensus and Implementation Strategy" (FAO Fisheries T ech n ical Paper No. 402).
Distribution: Authors FAO Fisheries Officers Regional Fisheries Councils and Commissions FAO Fish Health Projects.
Asia Regional Fish Health Institutions Arthur, J.R.; Ahmed, A.T.A. Checklist of the parasites of fishes of Bangladesh. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 369/1. Rome, FAO. 2002. 77 p.
ABSTRACT This checklist summarizes information on the parasites of Bangladeshi fishes contained in the world literature dating from the earliest known records (Southwell and Prashad, 1918a,b) to the end of 2000. Information is presented in the form of parasite-host and host-parasite lists. Included are 147 named species of parasites (not including 20 nomina nuda), distributed among the higher taxa as follows: Protozoa - 1, Myxozoa - 1, Trematoda - 55, Monogenea - 6, Cestoda - 23, Nematoda - 40, Acanthocephala - 17, Hirudinea - 1, Branchiura - 1, Copepoda - 1 and Isopoda -.
Also included are many records of parasites not identified to species level. The Parasite-Host List is organized on a taxonomic basis and provides information for each parasite species on the environment (fresh water, brackish water, marine), the location (site of infection) in or on its host(s), the species of host(s) infected, the known geographic distribution (by administrative division) in Bangladesh, and the published sources for each host and locality record. The Host-Parasite List is organized according to the taxonomy of the hosts, and includes for each host, the English language and local (Bengali) common names, environment (fresh water, brackish water, marine), status in Bangladesh (native or exotic), and information on the known distribution in Bangladesh of the parasites. Both lists are accompanied by remarks and footnotes, as warranted, giving specific information on points of systematics, nomenclature, possible misidentifications, introductions, pathogenicity, etc. Citations are included for all references and a supplementary list of references contains other literature on Bangladeshi fish parasites. Parasite and host indices are included. The following new taxonomic combinations are made: Prosorhynchoides aspinosiensis (Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 1971) n. comb. for Neobucephalopsis aspinosiensis Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 1971; and Prosorhynchoides clupisomius (Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 1976) n. comb. for Neobucephalopsis clupisomius Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 1976. The parasite fauna of fishes of Bangladesh remains poorly known. Parasites have been reported from only 85 of the 528 species of marine and freshwater fish occurring in the waters of Bangladesh. The situation is complicated by the large number of reports that are based on apparent misidentifications, the existence of a plethora of poorly described species, and the relatedness of the Bangladeshi fish parasite fauna to that of the larger Indian subregion, which is also poorly known for many of the same reasons.
CONT E NT S Page INTRODUCTION PARASITE-HOST LIST HOST-PARASITE LIST R EF ER ENC ES SUPPLEMENTARY REFERENCES PARASITE INDEX HOST INDEX 1 4 43 61 71 72 76.
INTRO DUC TIO N.
T h e study of fish parasites in the territory of what is now known as Bangladesh has a relatively short history, dating back to a few scattered records contained in the works of T h o m as Southwell and colleagues, working at the first quarter of the 20 th Century in what was then known as British India (T h ese are summarized in the series The Fauna of British India, including Ceylon and Burma ­ see for example, Southwell 1930).1 A few reports were made during the period following the separation of India and Pakistan in 1947, from the territory known as East Pakistan. However, most records date from the separation of the People's Republic of Bangladesh from Pakistan in 1971, and are mainly the result of the efforts of a few Bangladeshi scientists and their students (A.K.M. Bashirullah of the University of Dacca in the 1970s, and more recently, A.T .A. Ahmed and J. D'Silva of the University of Dhaka, and K.J. Chandra and M.B.R. Chowdhury of Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh). In compiling this checklist, we have attempted to list only original reports appearing in the literature for each species. P r ev io us listings of the parasites of fishes of Bangladesh are those of Ahmed (1979, 1981) for all helminths, Ahmed and Ezaz ( 1 9 9 7 ) for the helminths of freshwater catfishes, and Chandra (1992b) for the Nematoda. A special problem was encountered with the papers of Ahmed (1981) and Ahmed and Ezaz (1997). Both papers included results of original research as well as information taken from the published literature. I n both cases, it was not possible to completely distinguish records based on original findings from those derived from the published work of other scientists. In cataloguing these papers, all records have been entered. In compiling this checklist, a large number the parasite taxa reported in the literature for Bangladesh were determined to.
The territory of Bangladesh encompasses most of what was then called the state of East Bengal (created by the division of Bengal in 1905 into West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa (within present-day India) and East Bengal (Assam).
be species inquirendae or nomina nuda. Also, many apparent misidentifications have been made. Alt h o ugh a detailed review of each species was beyond the scope of this study, we have noted those taxa that we believe are unlikely to occur in the waters of Bangladesh, in the hope that future workers will examine these taxonomic problems more closely. T o a large extent, the many problems posed by the literature for Bangladesh are probably due to the difficulty that local scientists have in accessing scientific literature. I n many cases, scientists have apparently relied heavily on the Yamaguti volumes (Systema Helminthum) f o r species identification. New species have too often been established based on inadequate and inaccurate description, and/or insufficient material (a small number of specimens, or in dioceious forms, specimens of only one sex), often without critical comparisons with previously described taxa. As a result, although considerable effort has been expended on parasite surveys and taxonomic studies, it is still impossible to obtain an accurate picture of the parasite fauna of Bangladeshi fishes. T h is checklist must, therefore, be used with caution, both when attempting to identify parasites, and in zoogeographic analyses. W e hope that this work will form the basis for the critical taxonomic study and revision that are needed, based on collection of new, properly prepared material, which will eventually lead to a more accurate picture of the parasite fauna of the fishes of Bangladesh. Because Bangladesh is a deltic country and is subject to extensive flooding, it is possible for marine and euryhaline fishes to move far upstream, bringing with them much of their marine parasite faunas. Feedin g by freshwater carnivorous fishes on marine or anadromous fishes may result in the temporary transfer of gastro-intestinal parasites (" p seudo p ar asit ism " or accidental infection). In a number of cases, this appears to have resulted in typically marine helminth genera being reported from freshwater hosts.
In the literature dealing with the parasites of fishes of Bangladesh, there appear many incorrect spellings of parasite names, host names and species author's names, and incorrect attributions of dates of species authorship. Where erroneous spellings of parasite genus or species names have been consistently applied, these are noted using footnotes. Occasio n al typographical errors, misspellings of species authors' names, incorrect species attributions, and incorrect dates are not noted. Sim ilar ly , misspellings of host species names, with the few exceptions where these have been widely applied, have been corrected without comment using information obtained from FishBase (Froese and Pauly 2001). T h e Parasite - H o s t List is a taxonomically arranged listing of all parasites reported from the fishes of Bangladesh. T h e higher classification used is as follows: for the Protista and Myxozoa, that of Lom and Dyková (1992); for the T r em at o da, that of Gibson (1996); for the Monogenea, that of Boeger and Kritsky (1993); for the Cestoidea, that of Khalil et al. (1994); for the Nematoda, that of Anderson et al. (1974-1983) and Moravec (1998); for the Acanthocephala, that of Amin (1985, 1987); for the Copepoda and Branchiura, that of Kabata (1979, 1988); for the Isopoda, that of Rafi (1988); and for the Mollusca and Hirudinea, that used by McDonald and Margolis (1995). Ot h er valuable references include the synopses of fish nematodes of the Indian subcontinent by Soota (1983) and Sood (1989). T h e Parasite - H o s t List contains information for all parasite species reported from the fishes of Bangladesh. For each parasite, the currently recognized scie n t i f i c name , including authors and dates, and any synonyms under which original records appeared, are given. T h is is followed by the e n vi ro n m e n t in which the parasite normally completes its life cycle, indicated as fresh water (F), brackish water (B) or marine (M). As the life cycles of Bangladeshi fish parasites are for the most part unknown, this information is drawn primarily from non-Bangladeshi sources or from information on collection locality and/or.
host biology. T h e Location gives the site of infection where the parasite is normally found in or on the host. Under Hosts, the hosts are listed alphabetically by their currently recognized scientific names. In parentheses, following each host name, are given the numbers for the references (Re co rds ) reporting the parasite from the host in question. T h e distribution (Dist.) provides a summary of the reported distribution of the parasite in Bangladesh, and is given alphabetically by major administrative unit (Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi and Sylhet Divisions), and for the Bay of Bengal.2 I n many cases, accurate information on distribution is lacking, due to imprecise collection information being provided by authors; in those cases where no information is given, the distribution is simply indicated as Bangladesh. Un less otherwise indicated by the authors(s), fishes examined for parasites that were obtained from local markets are considered to have originated from the division in which the market was located. Ho wev er , readers should be aware that fish obtained from markets in larger cities, such as Dhaka, may well have originated from other divisions or from the Bay of Bengal. Under Re co rds are given the numbered individual references containing the parasite records, each followed by detailed information on the locality (ies) (administrative divisions) to which they pertain. Under Re m a rk s are given comments on various aspects, such as synonymies, pathogenicity, life cycles, zoonotic importance and introductions. Mo r e specific notations on individual records are given as footnote s . T he Host-Parasite List is organized phylogenetically following the classification of fishes given by in the onlin e Catalog of Fishes by W.N. Eschmeyer (Eschmeyer 2001), with the genera and species within individual families arranged alphabetically. Information on the scientific and common names, status and environment.
Records for the Bay of Bengal include only those pertaining to the territorial waters of Bangladesh. There exist in the literature many other parasite records, mainly the result of work by Indian scientists, from fishes collected in other parts of the Bay of Bengal.
o f fishes was obtained from the species database of FishBase (Froese and Pauly 2001). For each host, the following information is given: the currently recognized scie n t i f i c name , including species author(s), followed by any synonyms under which original parasite records were made, the FishBase recognized English common name , the Be n g a l i common name (where available), the host's Status in Bangladesh (native or exotic), and its typical Environme n t (fresh water, brackish water, marine). T h is is followed by a listing of the parasite s reported for the host in question, arranged by higher taxon and listed alphabetically. Following each parasite name, the distribution is summarized by administrative division. Records that involve possible parasite misidentifications are indicated by a question mark preceding the parasite's name. Finally, where appropriate, Re m a rk s and footnote s are included to provide information on such topics as host taxonomy, distribution and introductions. An additional useful reference is Freshwater Fishes of Bangladesh (Rahman 1989). Under Re f e re n ce s are listed all the papers containing the records, as well as other works cited in the text. A short Supple m e n t a ry Re f e re n ce s lists some additional articles dealing with Bangladeshi fisheries parasitology but not containing any original reports. Not included in this checklist are unpublished records of fish parasites contained in the many postgr aduat e (M.Sc. and Ph.D.) theses produced in Bangladesh. A Pa ra s i t e Inde x and a Host Inde x complete the volume. T h e parasite fauna of the fishes of Bangladesh is poorly known. T o date, a total of 147 named species of parasites (not including 20 n o m in a nuda), (1 Protozoa, 1 Myxozoa, 55 T r em at o da, 6 Monogenea, 23 Cestoda, 40 Nematoda, 17 Acanthocephala, 1 Hirudinea, 1 Branchiura, 1 Copepoda and 1 Isopoda) have been reported. Co n t ain ed in this checklist are records for parasites from a total of 85 fish species. As over 500 species of fish occur in the country 3, there remain many years of.
basic systematic and survey work to be conducted before the parasite fauna of Bangladeshi fishes will be thoroughly documented. We would like to thank a number of colleagues who kindly provided critical comments on sections of the manuscript, key references, and/or taxonomic advice. T h ese include T .E. McDonald (Monogenea, Isopoda), D.I. Gibson and R.A. Bray (T r em at o da) , J.S. Mackiewicz (Caryophyllidae), J.N. Caira (T et r ap h y llidea) , I. Beveridge (T r y p an o r h y n ch a) and F. Moravec (Nematoda). T h e assistance of Drs R.P. Subasinghe, S.E. McGladdery, D.J. Marcogliese, D.I. Gibson and K.J. Chandra in obtaining essential literature is gratefully acknowledged. W e especially thank Dr. R.P. Subasinghe (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome), for arranging publication of this volume. J. Richard Arthur Sparwood, Canada Abu T web A. Ahmed Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Fr oe se and Pauly (2001) list a total of 517 fish species for Bangladesh (304 marine, 200 fresh water, and 13 listed in both.
categories); in compiling this checklist, records for an additional 11 species were encountered, bringing the total number to at least 528 species.
PARASITE-HOST LIST.
KINGDOM PROTISTA SUBKINGDOM PROTOZOA PHYLUM MASTIGOPHORA CLASS KINETOPLASTIDEA ORDER KINETOPLASTIDA SUBORDER BODONINA FAMILY BODONIDAE FAMILY ICHTHYOPHTHIRIIDAE Ichthyophthirius multifiliis Fouquet, 18765 (F) Location: body surface Hosts: Catla catla (4) Cirrhinus cirrhosus (2) Labeo rohita (4) fish (1,3,5) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Hossain and Barua 1991 (-);.
Hossain and Khan 1992 (-);.
Chowdhury 1993 (-)6;.
Banu et al. 1993 (Dhaka),.
1999 (-) Remarks: Hossain and Barua (1991) noted that ichthyophthiriosis is the most common protozoan disease found in Bangladesh.
Ichthyobodo sp. (F) Syn.: Costia sp. Location: not specified Host: fish Dist.: Bangladesh Record: Chowdhury 19934.
PHYL UM CILIOPHORA CLASS KINETOPHRAGMINOPHOREA SUBCLASS HYPOSTOMATA ORDE R CYRTOPHORIDA FAMILY CHILODONELLIDAE.
Ichthyophthirius sp. (F) ?Includes: " white spot" auctorum Location: not specified Hosts: Cirrhinus cirrhosus (1) fish (2) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Collis 1993 (Dhaka)7;.
Hossain 1993 (-) Remarks: We tentatively refer the above records of " white spot" to Ichthyophthirius.
S UB CL AS S PERITRICHIA ORDER PERITRICHIDA.
C hilodonella sp. (F) Location: gills, skin Hosts: Catla catla (1,2) Cyprinus carpio (2) Oreochromis niloticus niloticus (2) fish (3) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Hossain and Khan 1992 (-);.
Banu et al. 1993 (Dhaka),.
1999 (-).
SUBORDER SESSILINA FAMILY EPISTYLIDIDAE.
Apiosoma sp. (F) Location: not specified Host: fish Dist.: Bangladesh Record: Banu et al. 1999.
CL AS S OLIGOHYMENOPHOREA SUBCLASS HYMENOSTOMATA ORDER HYMENOSTOMATIDA.
SUBORDER MOBILINA.
SUBORDER OPHRYOGLENINA.
Chowdhury (1993) tentatively identified Costia as a probable cause of disease in Bangladeshi fish.
The parasite species name was misspelled "multifilis" by Hossain and Barua (1991), Chowdhury (1993) and Banu et al. ( 1999) . 6 Chowdhury (1993) listed "Ichthyophthirius multifilis (?)" as a probable pathogen causing disease of fish in Bangladesh. 7 The host identification was given as "mrigal.".
FAMIL Y TRICHODINIDAE.
T richodina sp. (F) Location: gills, skin Hosts: Catla catla (6) Channa punctata (3) Cirrhinus cirrhosus (6) Clarias batrachus (6) C. gariepinus (6) Ctenopharyngodon idellus (1,6) Cyprinus carpio (6) Hypopthalmichthys molitrix (6) Labeo rohita (6) Mastacembelus sp. (3) carp (2) fish (4,5,7) Dist.: Chittagong, Dhaka, Rajshahi Records:.
Hossain and Khan 1992 (-);.
Anon. 1992 (-),.
1993 (Chittagong, Rajshahi);.
Chowdhury 1993 (-)8;.
Hossain 1993 (-);.
Banu et al. 1993 (Dhaka),.
1999 (-).
Records:.
Sanaullah and Ahmed 1980 (Chittagong, Dhaka);.
Ahmed 1982 (-), 3.1993 (-);.
Hossain and Khan 1992 (-);.
Sanaullah 1993 (-);.
Hossain 1993 (-);.
Anon. 1993 (Rajshahi)9;.
Banu et al. 1993 (Dhaka),.
1999 (-) Remarks: Sanaullah and Ahmed (1980) reported on the pathology of gill myxoboliasis causing heavy mortalities in cultured Indian major carps.
Thelohanellus dogieli Akhmerov, 1955 (F) Location: epidermis at base of fins Host: Labeo rohita Dist.: Dhaka Record: Hossain et al. 1978.
Unidentified Myxobolidae.
T ripartiella sp. (F) Location: not specified Host: Anabas testudineus Dist.: Chittagong Record: Anon. 1993.
PHYLUM MYXOZOA CLASS MYXOSPOREA ORDER BIVALVULIDA.
Myxobolidae gen. sp. (F) Includes: " gill myxoboliasis" Location: gills Host: Catla catla Dist.: Chittagong Record: Golder et al. 1983 Remarks: This report is based on the results of a survey of fish farmers completed by Golder et al. (1983). While " rui, " " mrigal" and " carpio" were also present along with " catla" in ponds showing gill myxoboliasis, it is not clear if these other cyprinids were also infected.
Unidentified Protozoa SUBORDER PLATYSPORINA FAMILY MYXOBOLIDAE Protozoa gen. sp. (F) Location: skin, muscles Hosts: Catla catla Heteropneustes fossilis Dist.: Bangladesh Record: Anon. 1974 (-).
Myxobolus sp. (F) Location: gills, skin Hosts: Barbodes gonionotus (7) Catla catla (1,7,8) Cirrhinus cirrhosus (1,4,8) Clarias batrachus (8) Ctenopharyngodon idellus (8) Labeo rohita (1,2,8) fish (3,5,6,9) Dist.: Chittagong, Dhaka, Rajshahi.
KINGDOM ANIMALIA SUBKINGDOM EUMETAZOA PHYL UM PLATYHELMINTHES.
Chowdhury (1993) tentatively identified Trichodina as a cause of "sliminess" in Bangladeshi fish.
The record of Anon. (1993) involves a tentative parasite identification.
CL AS S TREMATODA SUBCLASS DIGENEA ORDER STRIGEIDA SUPERFAMILY CLINOSTOMOIDEA FAMIL Y CLINOSTOMIDAE.
C linostomum complanatum (Rudolphi, 1814) (F) Braun, 1899 metacercaria Syn.: Clinostomum marginatum (Rudolphi, 1819) Location: skin, fins, gills, muscle Hosts: Clarias batrachus (2) Heteropneustes fossilis (1) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Chandra and Banerjee 1993b (Dhaka);.
Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-) Remarks: The synonymy follows Gibson (1996).
Masiluñgan, 1935 metacercaria Location: liver, muscles, kidney, pharyngeal wall, external surface of alimentary canal Hosts: Channa punctata (2,3,4,5) C. striata (1) Heteropneustes fossilis (2) Mystus tengara (2) Nandus nandus (2) Ompok pabda (2) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Hossain et al. 1982 (Dhaka);.
Chandra 1983a (Dhaka),.
1984a (Dhaka),.
1984b (Dhaka);.
Huq et al. 1983 (Dhaka).
Euclinostomum sp. metacercaria (F) Location: liver Hosts: Ompok pabda (2) Heteropneustes fossilis (1) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Amin et al. 1982 (Dhaka);.
Hussain and Ali 1986 (Dhaka).
Clinostomum giganticum Agarwal, (F) metacercaria Location: body cavity Host: Nandus nandus Dist.: Dhaka Record: Chandra and Banerjee 1993b.
SUPERFAMILY DIPLOSTOMOIDEA FAMILY DIPLOSTOMIDAE.
Clinostomum sp. metacercaria (F) Location: body cavity, muscle Hosts: Clarias batrachus (2) Heteropneustes fossilis (1) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Islam et al. 1982 (Dhaka);.
Banu et al. 1993 (Dhaka).
N eascus sp. metacercaria (F) Location: [skin] Hosts: Catla catla Cirrhinus cirrhosus Labeo rohita Dist. : Chittagong R ecord: Sanaullah 198411.
Euclinostomum heterostomum (Rudolphi, (F) 1809) Travassos, 1928 metacercaria Location: liver Hosts: Channa punctata C. striata Dist.: Dhaka Record: Chandra and Banerjee 1993b.
Posthodiplostomum minimum (F) 1921) Dubois, 1936 metacercaria Location: muscle, viscera Host: Clarias batrachus Dist.: Bangladesh Record: Ahmed and Ezaz 1997.
(MacCallum,.
S UPE RFAMIL Y GYMNOPHALLOIDEA FAMIL Y BUCEPHALIDAE and.
Euclinostomum (F).
multicaecum.
The species name was misspelled "multicasecum" by Hossain et al. (1982). 11 Tentative parasite identification (given as "black spot disease" "...caused by ...Ne asc us (Posthodiplostomum?)...").
Bucephalus mystusi Chandra and (F) 1993 Location: intestine Host: Sperata aor Dist.: Dhaka Record: Chandra and Banerjee 1993a.
Location: intestine Host: Eutropiichthys murius Dist.: Dhaka, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Bashirullah and Hafizuddin 1976 (Dhaka); Ahmed 1981 (-); Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-).
Bucephalus polymorphus Baer, 1827 (F) Location: stomach Host: Atropus atropos Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Bashirullah 1973a Remarks: As Bucephalus polymorphus is a parasite of European freshwater fishes (see Hoffman 1998), this report from a marine fish from Bangladesh is considered a misidentification.
Prosorhynchoides sp. (F) Syn.: Bucephalopsis sp. Neobucephalopsis sp. Location: intestine Hosts: Eutropiichthys murius (1,2,3) Sperata aor (3) Dist.: Dhaka?, Sylhet? Records:.
Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet);.
Ahmed 1981 (-);.
Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-) Remarks: The synonymy follows Srivastava and Chauhan (1973) and is supported by Dr. R.M. Overstreet (pers. comm.).
Bucephalus sp. (F) Location: intestine Hosts: Silonia silondia (3,4) Sperata aor (1,2,3,4) Dist.: Dhaka, Sylhet? Records:.
Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet);.
Ahmed 1981 (-);.
Chandra 1992a (Dhaka),.
1993b (Dhaka).
FAMILY FAUSTULIDAE.
Prosorhynchoides aspinosiensis (Bashirullah (F) and Hafizuddin, 1971) n. comb. Syn.: Neobucephalopsis aspinosiensis Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 197112 Location: intestine Host: Clupisoma garua Dist.: Dhaka, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah and Hafizuddin 1971 (Dhaka); Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Ahmed 1981 (-); Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-).
Faustula brevichrus (Srivastava, 1935) (M) Yamaguti, 1958 Location: intestine Host: Tenualosa ilisha Dist.: Chittagong, Bay of Bengal Records: Bashirullah 1973a (Bay of Bengal); Zaman et al. 1992b (Chittagong), 1994 (Chittagong); D'Silva and Khatoon 1997 (Bay of Bengal) Remarks: This species was redescribed by D'Silva and Khatoon (1997).
Faustula sp. (M) Location: intestine Host: Hilsa kelee Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Bashirullah 1973a.
Prosorhynchoides clupisomius (Bashirullah (F) and Hafizuddin, 1976) n. comb. Syn.: Neobucephalopsis clupisomius Bashirullah and Hafizuddin, 197613.
FAMILY FELLODISTOMIDAE.
Steringotrema sp. (F).
Neobucephalopsis clupisomius Bashirullah, 1973 (as "Neobucephalopsis clupisomius Bashirullah & Hafizuddin, 1973").
The species name misspelled as "aspinosinensis" by Ahmed and Ezaz (1997). 13 Ba shir ulla h (1973a) inadvertently created the nomen nudum.
Location: intestine Host: Puntius sophore Dist.: Dhaka?, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Ahmed 1981 (-) Remarks: As members of this genus are typically parasites of marine teleosts, this record from a freshwater cyprinid is rather dubius.
Location: stomach Host: Dussumieria acuta Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Ahmed et al. 1986.
FAMILY DEROGENIDAE S UB FAMIL Y GONOCERCINAE.
SUPERFAMILY HEMIUROIDEA FAMILY ACCACOELIIDAE S UB FAMIL Y ACCACOELIINAE Gonocera crassa Manter, 1934 (M) Location: intestine Host: Ompok bimaculatus Dist.: Dhaka Records: Khanum et al. 1996 (Dhaka); Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-) Remarks: This digenean is a stomach parasite of marine fishes. Its report from a freshwater silurid catfish of Bangladesh likely involves a misidentification. Gibson (1976) considered Gonocerca crassa a probable synonym of G. phycidis Manter, 1925.
Rhynchopharynx paradoxa Odhner, 1928 (M) Location: stomach, intestine Host: Macrognathus aculeatus Dist: Bangladesh Record: Khanum and Parveen 1997 Remarks: Rhynchopharynx is a monospecific genus that is known only from the ocean sunfish (Mola mola), a species widely distributed in the world's warm and temperate oceans (see Bray and Gibson 1977). We consider the above record from a freshwater fish of Bangladesh to involve a misidentification.
SUBFAMILY HALIPEGINAE.
FAMILY BUNOCOTYLIDAE SUBFAMILY APHANURINAE.
Genarchopsis bangladensis Bashirullah and (F) Elahi, 197214 Location: intestine Host: Channa punctata Dist.: Dhaka, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah and Elahi 1972a (Dhaka); Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Ahmed 1981 (-).
Aphanurus stossichi (Monticelli, 1891) (M) Looss, 1907 Location: stomach Hosts: Dussumieria acuta (2) Tenualosa ilisha (1,3,4,5) Dist.: Chittagong, Bay of Bengal Records:.
Bashirullah 1973a (Bay of Bengal);.
Ahmed et al. 1986 (Bay of Bengal);.
Zaman et al. 1992b (Chittagong),.
1994 (Chittagong);.
D'Silva and Khatoon 1997 (Bay of Bengal) Remarks: This species was redescribed by D'Silva and Khatoon (1997).
Genarchopsis bashiri Hafizuddin and (F) Khan, 1973 Location: intestine Host: Heteropneustes fossilis Dist.: Dhaka Records: Hafizuddin and Khan 1973a (Dhaka); Ahmed and Ezaz 1997 (-).
SUBFAMILY OPISTHADENINAE.
Genarchopsis dasus (Gupta, 1951) (F) Yamaguti, 1958 Syn.: Ophiocorchis dasus Gupta, 1951 Location: stomach, intestine Hosts: Channa punctata (1,2).
Opisthadena sp. (M).
Bashirullah (1973a) and Ahmed (1981) erroneously gave the species name as "bengalensis.".
Glossogobius giuris (1,2,3) Dist: Dhaka Records:.
Ahmed 1981 (-);.
Ahmed and Saha 1983 (Dhaka);.
Chandra and Banerjee 1993b (Dhaka).
Chandra 1992a (Dhaka),.
1993b (Dhaka).
FAMILY DIDYMOZOIDAE.
Genarchopsis lobata (Srivastava, 1933) (F) Yamaguti, 1954 Location: intestine Host: Channa gachua Dist.: Dhaka?, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Ahmed 1981 (-).
Genarchopsis macrocotyle Coil and (F) Kuntz, 1960 Location: intestine Host: Channa punctata Dist.: Dhaka Record: Coil and Kuntz 1960.
Philopinna sp. (F) Location: muscle Hosts: Channa punctata (2,3) Heteropneustes fossilis (1) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Amin et al. 1982 (Dhaka);.
Hossain et al. 1982 (Dhaka);.
Huq et al. 1983 (Dhaka) Remarks: The genus Philopinna was established by Yamaguti (1936) for P. higai Yamaguti, 1936, a parasite of the fins and orbit of Sarcocheilichthys variegatus, a Japanese freshwater fish. Didymozoids are typically tissue parasites of marine fishes.
FAMILY HEMIURIDAE SUBFAMILY DINURINAE.
Genarchopsis ozakii Bashirullah and (F) Elahi, 197215 Location: stomach, intestine Host: Channa punctata Dist.: Dhaka, Sylhet? Records: Bashirullah and Elahi 1972a (Dhaka); Bashirullah 1973a (Dhaka &/or Sylhet); Ahmed 1981 (-).
Dinurinae gen. sp. (M) Location: intestine Host: Rastrelliger kanagurta Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Bashirullah 1973a.
SUBFAMILY ELYTROPHALLINAE Genarchopsis wallagoni Chandra and (F) Banerjee, 1993 Location: intestine Host: Wallago attu Dist.: Dhaka Record: Chandra and Banerjee 1993b.
L ecithocladium excisum (Rudolphi, 1819) Lühe, 1901 Location: intestine Host: Parastromateus niger Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Bashirullah 1973a.
Genarchopsis sp. (F) Location: stomach, intestine Hosts: Clupisoma garua (3) Glossogobius giuris (1) Silonia silondia (2,3) Dist.: Dhaka Records:.
Ahmed and Begum 1978 (Dhaka); 2.
The species name was misspelled as "ozaki" by Bashirullah (1973a) and Ahmed (1981).
Remarks: The taxonomic history and host and geographic range of Lecithocladium excisum were reviewed by Gibson and Bray (1986), who concluded that its confirmed distribution was the Mediterranean and Black seas and the Northeast Atlantic region. As these authors doubted the occurrence of L. excisum in the Indian Ocean, this report from a marine fish of the Bay of Bengal requires substantiation. The life cycle in the Northeast Atlantic was studied by Køie (1991). Cercariae found in naturally infected gastropods (Philine aperta).
were used to experimentally infect various genera of marine copepods. Ctenophores and polychaetes naturally infected with metacercariae were considered likely to act as transport hosts. Adults occur in the stomach of mackerel (Scomber scomberus, S. japonicus) and immature specimens in Trachurus trachurus (see Gibson and Bray 1986).
Lecithocladium sp. (M) Location: intestine Host: Pampus argenteus Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Bashirullah 1973a.
Lecithocladium harpodontis Srivastava, 1937 (M) Syn.: Lecithocladium ilishae Bashirullah and D'Silva, 1973 Location: stomach Host: Tenualosa ilisha Dist.: Chittagong, Bay of Bengal Records: Bashirullah and D'Silva 1973 (Bay of Bengal); Bashirullah 1973a (Bay of Bengal); Zaman et al. 1992b (Chittagong), 1994 (Chittagong) Remarks: The synonymy follows Gibson and Bray (1986). These authors noted that because there are many poorly described species of Lecithocladium in the Indo-Malay Region, the status of species in this part of the world is highly confused.
SUBFAMILY HEMIURINAE.
Hemiurus appendiculatus (Rudolphi, 1802) (M) Looss, 1899 Location: stomach Host: Dussumieria acuta Dist.: Bay of Bengal Record: Ahmed et al. 1986 Remarks: Gibson (1996) noted that Hem