FAO Fisheries Report No. 698.
FIPP/R698 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
EXPERT CONSULTATION ON IDENTIFYING, ASSESSING AND REPORTING ON SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHING INDUSTRY.
Rome, 3­6 December 2002.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the EXPERT CONSULTATION ON IDENTIFYING, ASSESSING AND REPORTING ON SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHING INDUSTRY Rome, 3­6 December 2002.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concer ning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104890-8.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written per mission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Repr oduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such per mission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.or g © FAO 2003.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This document is the final report of the Expert Consultation on Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fishing Industry which was held in Rome from 3 to 6 December 2002.
Distribution: All FAO Members List of participants Other interested Nations and national and international organizations FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fishery Officers.
FAO. Report of the Expert Consultation on Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fishing Industry. Rome, 3-6 December 2002. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 698. Rome, FAO. 2003. 81p. ABSTRACT The Expert Consultation on Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fishing Industry met at FAO Headquarters for four days starting 3 December 2002. Fourteen experts, from as many countries, invited in their individual capacity, attended the Consultation. They elected Dr Trond Bjorndal as the Chair and Ms Sita Kuruvilla as vice-chair and adopted an agenda that included two main issues: (i) the review of a draft guide for identifying, assessing and reporting on fishery subsidies; and, (ii) the comparison of the magnitude and effects of subsidies in the fisheries sector. The experts found that, with some few modifications, the draft guide constituted an excellent support for subsidy studies and recommended that it be used. To further expand the usefulness of the guide the experts recommended that FAO work on: (i) the long-term effects of subsidies, (ii) resource pricing; and, (iii) the effects of government inaction. They also adopted eight conventions for using the guide. These conventions are intended to facilitate the international comparisons of subsidy studies. The experts considered it important that available methodologies be used to assess impacts flowing from actions taken by recipient of subsidies on environment, trade, economic growth and social conditions. The Consultation concluded that FAO should promote the development and use of appropriate models for the evaluation of impacts of subsidies through actual case studies.
TABLE OF CONTENTS Paragraphs.
INTRODUCTION OPENING OF THE CONSULTATION ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE BACKGROUND AND PREPARATIONS REVIEW OF "GUIDE FOR IDENTIFYING, ASSESSING AND REPORTING ON SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHERIES SECTOR" COMPARING THE MAGNITUDE AND THE EFFECTS OF SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHERIES SECTOR CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTION OF THE REPORT.
APPENDIXES A B C D E Agenda List of Documents List of Participants Opening Statement by Mr Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, FAO Fisheries Department Draft Guide for Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fisheries Sector (by Lena Westlund, FAO Consultant).
Page 9 10 11 14 17.
1 INTRODUCTION.
The Expert Consultation on Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fishing Industry met in FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy from 3-6 December 2002.
The Expert Consultation was attended by 14 experts and 3 observers. They are listed in Appendix C. The documents placed before the experts are listed in Appendix B. OPENING OF THE CONSULTATION.
The Expert Consultation was opened by Mr Ichiro Nomura, the Assistant Director General of Fisheries. In welcoming the participants Mr Nomura noted that subsidies to the fishing industry continue to be a concern in international meetings on fisheries and on the environment. Therefore it is understandable that FAO Members want to find out more about this controversial policy instrument. He went on to describe some of the work carried out during the last two years, providing some details about the background to the development of the draft Guide on identifying, assessing and reporting on subsidies in the fishing industry. He encouraged the experts to work hard to improve the Guide and to advise the Organization on how to expand the work to include also the evaluation of impacts on sustainability, trade and development. Mr Nomura's Opening Statement is attached as Appendix D. ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON.
The Expert Consultation elected Dr Trond Bjorndal as its Chair and Ms Sita Kuruvilla as its vice-Chair. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE.
The Expert Consultation adopted the agenda and timetable as contained in Appendix A to this report. BACKGROUND AND PREPARATIONS.
In trying on the one hand to implement the recommendation made by the FAO Committee of Fisheries (COFI) in 2001 and, on the other hand, to address the conclusions of the first FAO Expert Consultation on fishery subsidies1 it became apparent that the lack of detailed data on the nature, magnitude and impact of subsidies on the sector constituted a formidable obstacle to progress. The FAO Fisheries Department then decided as a first technical step, to try to develop a methodology for generating quantitative data of relevance for assessing the impact of subsidies. A Guide helping to identify, assess and report on subsidies ­ without going into their potential secondary effects outside the recipient enterprises ­ could constitute the first step in a strategy that in a second and subsequent step would help to develop quantitative indicators of the importance of these secondary effects (on trade, environment and development) as well as facilitate their analysis.
Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries (Rome, 28 November-1 December 2000) FAO Fisheries Report No.638.
In the course of 2002, FAO Fisheries Department of FAO developed a draft "Guide for Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fisheries Sector" (the Guide). The work was undertaken as follows: · · · · · · a first preliminary draft was prepared; approval was obtained to test the draft Guide by conducting a study of fishery subsidies in four Member Countries (a transition economy country, a low income country, an upper middle income country and a developed country); letters of agreements were signed with offices/organizations in the concerned countries for the execution prototype studies; FI provided through missions to the field technical backstopping and supervision to the contracted national organizations/institutions in the use of the draft Guide for the preparation of prototype studies2; the draft Guide was rewritten based on the experience derived from the prototype studies; and the second version of the draft Guide was peer-reviewed and the peer review became the basis for the third version submitted to this Consultation.
REVIEW OF "GUIDE FOR IDENTIFYING, ASSESSING AND REPORTING ON SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHERIES SECTOR".
The Consultation decided to conduct the discussion according to the suggestions provided in document: "Guide for discussing of the draft Guide for identifying, assessing and reporting on subsidies in the fisheries sector" (FI:ECFS/2002/3). The Guide is reproduced in Appendix E.
Ms Lena Westlund, principal author of the Guide, at the invitation of the Chair, made a presentation of issues that emerged in the course of developing the Guide. This was followed by a general discussion of the context and purpose of the Guide. The following paragraphs summarize the observations made and conclusions reached in the course of these discussions. 10. Subsidies are not studied in a vacuum. It is important that the data and information that is collected about subsidies be selected so that it becomes useful not only for fulfilling the analysis specified in the guide but also so that it is amenable for use in studies aiming to assess and evaluate the impact of subsidies on sustainability, economic development and trade. This has implications also for the way information is presented 11. However, at the same time the Consultation recognized the fact that the Guide is not normative in respect of subsidies. While it provides guidance for assessing the costs to the provider and the benefits to the receiver, it provides no methodologies for evaluating whether subsidies have impacts on social, economic, environmental, trade or other characteristics of the economies in which they are used. Information generated by using the Guide would need to be further evaluated ­ and complemented by other types of information ­ before judgements about impact can be made.
The report resulting from the study carried out in Trinidad and Tobago is attached as Information document FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 4 - Study on Subsidies in The Fisheries Sector of Trinidad and Tobago.
3 12. The Guide provides a framework for how to define subsidies but leaves the user free to select which government policies to consider as subsidies and which not to consider as subsidies. There was a wide consensus amongst the experts that this is not a constructive approach. Two remedies were suggested. First, it was suggested that the Guide should also make clear to its users what, from the point of view of economic theory, could or ought to be considered as a subsidy and to facilitate international comparisons. Second, the Guide should also provide information as to what should be considered as a subsidy to the fisheries sector, given international practice. It was recognized that international practice is influenced by institutional arrangements as well as by public sector resource availability and that any international comparisons must recognize such differences. 13. The Consultation also considered the question of international comparisons of the magnitude of subsidies and their assessment. It recognized that both in respect of criteria for identifying subsidies, as well as for benchmarks, to assess their values, more work needs to be done. Possibly the task will be easier in respect of agreeing to criteria for identifying subsidies than to agree on benchmarks for their assessments. 14. The Consultation reviewed the concepts of `positive versus negative' and `good versus bad' subsidies. It noted that amongst economists there is a shared understanding of the connotation of these terms. But, as that is not the case for those who deal with this issue and are not of the economic profession, it was agreed to try to avoid using these terms and, where useful, replace the "positive versus negative" terminology with `revenue enhancing/decreasing and `cost enhancing/decreasing'. 15. The Consultation also noted that it may not be sufficient to note the effect on the recipient only. In order to get a grasp of the total outcomes of a policy it is necessary to look also at the economic effects on the industry and on society as a whole. 16. In discussing Chapter 4 of the Guide (What is a fisheries subsidy?) the Consultation noted that the very wide set of public policies considered, meant that the de facto definition of subsidies was much wider in scope than that applied in the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures. This was noted with approval as the Consultation held the view that this wider definition is useful for subsequent evaluation of impacts on the environment. 17. In Chapter 4, the Guide makes use of the concept of "specificity" in identifying if a policy measure is a subsidy or not. The Guide designates a policy measure as `specific" if it is not "normal". Some experts felt that common sense, economic theory and analysis show that some policy measures ­ although applicable to a whole economy ­ in fact have impacts on recipients that eventually lead to effects that are undesirable. Therefore such policy measures, although normal in the economy concerned, could be considered as subsidies. 18. It was pointed out, and acknowledged by the Consultation, that in many ways developing countries represent a special situation and that this must be considered when evaluating the impacts of subsidies. 19. Furthermore the Consultation agreed that support to the fishery sector funded through foreign aid should be considered as subsidy. 20. The Consultation had an extensive discussion of the Guide's four categories of subsidies (Chapter 5): (1) direct financial transfers; (2) services and indirect financial.
4 transfers; (3) interventions with different short and long-term effects; and, (4) lack of intervention. While it was recognized that the first two categories are easier to work with, it was agreed as important to keep the four categories in the Guide. Furthermore it was concluded that: · · subsidies included in categories 1 and 2 also can have long-term effects subsidies in categories 1 and 2 generally can be measured in monetary terms.
21. There was also general agreement that the Guide should not be rigid in the attempt to classify subsidies into different categories. The categories are meant to be helpful to those using the Guide. Therefore the purpose of the categories should be presented clearly in the Guide. 22. It was agreed that it is useful to split category 2 into sub-categories of which there should be at least two; direct transfers and services (including, inter alia, costs of fishery management). On the other hand, no definite advice could be given about the maximum duration of the concept "short-term". It was felt more appropriate to let the circumstances decide this limit. The Consultation could not identify a general rule for separating direct effects from second-stage effects and indirect consequences. 23. The Consultation agreed that impact on the economic results of up-stream or downstream activities ­ should not be considered by the Guide. The indirect consequences ­ in the shape of externalities ­ should be identified but not assessed or quantified through the Guide. This should be addressed in the follow-up work attempting to assess the impacts of subsidies on environment, development and trade. 24. In the course of the discussion of Chapter 6 (Assessing subsidies) it became clear that with respect of the period covered in the identification of subsidies most of the experts in the Consultation favoured the approach taken in the Guide, that is to calculate the yearly volume, or value, of subsidies. In addition, the long-term effects must be addressed to the degree this is possible. 25. The Consultation also noted that in respect of infrastructure (in particular harbours and similar large fixed assets) and other services, the procedure for estimating the value to the user, recipient must be very carefully done. This means, inter alia, that it is not the intended purpose of a facility that is important ­ it is its actual use. For example a harbour built for fishing vessels ­ that turns out to be used exclusively by pleasure craft ­ will not have had any effects on the fishing industry and should therefore not be considered as a subsidy. 26. In respect of infrastructure, it was agreed that in the Guide it would be useful to reserve the term "infrastructure" for physical infrastructure only and should not be used to describe institutions and government services. 27. With respect to opportunity costs of the government resources used, it was agreed that in respect of major government supplied infrastructure (harbours) and services (loans) the opportunity cost of capital should preferably be calculated. 28. Free or below market price access to fishing grounds was discussed extensively. The issue is complicated by: (i) the distinction between cost-recovery of fishery management costs.
5 and a payment for the access to the resource, and by (ii) the issue of what is a normal access fee. 29. The Consultation agreed that the starting point for the discussion is that the "normal" case is that management costs and research and development costs should be recovered and, if they are not, then this amounts to a subsidy provided to the sector. In this context, however, the Consultation noted that when the value of this subsidy to the industry is assessed care should be taken. 30. The Consultation then discussed what could be a norm for estimating what can be expected to be a reasonable "pure" fee for the access, which is a fee that does not include payment for management services. It noted that such a fee will be a portion of the resource rent. However, for practical reasons the Consultation quantified the access fee as a percentage of the landed value of catch, not as a percentage of the resource rent. The Consultation therefore suggested that the Guide should: · · · where possible investigate each fishery to see what resource rents are generated; where no information could be obtained, a range of 3­5 % of the landed value could be used in the first instance as an indicator of the appropriate use fee and of the value of the subsidy provided if not collected finally, the Guide should acknowledge that for some fisheries a zero access fee would be appropriate, and therefore no resource rent subsidy is involved.
31. The Guide gives some examples of the difficulties encountered when government facilities or services are used also by other firms than those in the fishery sector. In the Guide, allocation keys are the ratios used to divide the costs to the producer ­ and the benefits to the recipients ­ between the fisheries sector and the rest of the economy. Allocation keys were discussed. The Consultation recognized that the users of the Guide would have to be pragmatic in respect of defining allocation keys. 32. The Consultation, after some discussion concluded that it is reasonable to value access to resources in foreign countries differently from access to resources in national waters. 33. The Consultation recognized that assessing category 3 and category 4 subsidies is a difficult task. It may be particularly complicated in fisheries exploited by more than one country and in those subject to international fisheries agreements. The advice provided in the Guide in respect of these categories of subsidies should be strengthened. It would be useful to undertake analytical work aiming to clarify how subsidies in categories 3 and 4 impact on recipients. 34. The Consultation reviewed Chapter 7 of the Guide; "costs and earnings analysis ­ the impact of industry profits". It found that costs and earnings information concerning subsidy recipients is needed. Normally such information will be presented on an industry basis. It may be useful to consider how the annual information developed through the use of the Guide, can be placed into the context of a longer period. 35. In reviewing Chapter 8 of the Guide - comparative analysis ­ the Consultation noted that the ratios proposed in the Guide would have a national and an international use. The ratios provided by the guide are intended for use in a national context. It was agreed that further work would be needed before these rations could be used in international comparisons.
36. Before the Consultation concluded its discussion of the Guide, Ms Sita Kuruvilla described how an earlier version of the Guide had been used by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago to identify, assess and report on subsidies. The Consultation noted the substantial amount of work done and the comprehensive information produced and commended the government for the effort. 37. In concluding its review of the draft "Guide for identifying, assessing and reporting on subsidies in the fisheries sector", the Consultation expressed satisfaction at the excellent work done in developing the Guide. It noted that it will be useful for the various Intergovernmental Organizations that do work in this area to agree on a common method and reporting format. It was further recognized that the Guide is limited in scope as it does not permit the user to assess the degree to which subsidies reach the objectives established by governments, as those objectives go beyond effects on the economic results of recipient enterprises. COMPARING THE MAGNITUDE AND THE EFFECTS OF SUBSIDIES IN THE FISHERIES SECTOR 38. The Consultation considered how to promote a standardized use of the Guide. It reviewed a number of conventions aiming to facilitate the comparison of studies based on the Guide. The conventions concern the use of methodology in the study as well as the report produced as a result of the study. 39. The Consultation agreed to propose the following conventions: First convention: specify geographical and sub-sector scope of the study; Second convention: list subsidies that have been identified and analyzed in the study; Third convention: specify the benchmarks used for quantifying subsidies; Fourth convention: allocation keys for joint subsidies to be clearly specified in the study; Fifth convention: include administrative costs incurred by the provider as part of the cost of the subsidy to the provider; Sixth convention: specify when opportunity costs to the subsidy provider have been included in the estimate of subsidies; Seventh convention: base the value of direct financial transfers on the actual government expenditure ­ depreciated over time when appropriate ­ and the financial costs that the recipients may have avoided by the receiving the transfer. Eighth convention: consider goods and services provided to the recipient to have a subsidy value corresponding to the difference between what the recipient would have paid for the equivalent goods and/or services if provided in the market and what he/she in fact paid to the public provider. 40. The Consultation then turned to the question of how to evaluate the various impacts of subsidies. 41. The document: "What makes a subsidy environmentally harmful: developing a checklist based on the conditionality of subsidies" was presented to the Consultation by Mr Anthony Cox, of the OECD secretariat. It was pointed out that the checklist is intended to be used in several economic sectors including fisheries, that it is a tool which may be used to rank subsidies according to their environmental effects but that it does not substitute in-depth.
7 study which would be needed to thoroughly document those effects. In fact, already in the OECD Workshop where the proposal was first made, some modifications had been made to the checklist which would make it more appropriate for fisheries. The Consultation was informed that in respect of fisheries, the OECD secretariat will now go ahead with case studies and with work on making the "policy filter" concept more explicit and precise. 42. The Consultation recognized the potential usefulness of the checklist but considered it important to work directly on applying available methodologies to assessing the impacts created by the actions of recipients of subsidies on the environment, trade, economic growth, social conditions. 43. The Consultation furthermore considered that, if FAO decides to develop a checklist for ranking subsidies according to their impacts, this work should be undertaken in close Consultation with relevant international organizations. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 44. In order to avoid duplication of work and provide the occasion for synergies to occur amongst Intergovernmental Organizations addressing issues related to the use of subsidies in fisheries, the observers were invited to inform the Consultation of their relevant programmes of work. 45. The observer from the CPPS, Mr Adolfo Jalil, stressed the importance that the CPPS attaches to work aiming to provide information of the impacts of subsidies on trade and environment. The CPPS is promoting work on these matters through recently established working groups involving member countries. He stated that on this subject the CPPS would like to establish a framework for technical collaboration with FAO. 46. The observer from the OECD, Mr Anthony Cox, referred to the long history of OECD's work on subsidies and fisheries and mentioned that the last in this series of work are a study on trade liberalization and fisheries, and a study on fisheries management costs. As a follow-up to the recent OECD Workshop on Environmentally Harmful Subsidies, the fisheries secretariat will undertake case studies using the checklist (see paragraph 41) and work on the associated policy filter. 47. The observer from UNEP, Ms Anja von Moltke, stated that UNEP's work on fisheries has gained importance as a result of the Doha Ministerial Declaration. Part of the present work programme tries to document the interaction between subsidies, overcapacity and overfishing. Several country studies and informal workshops involving stakeholders including relevant organizations were conducted to address these issues. Future work will focus on analyzing the impacts of subsidies under different management conditions and providing guidance to countries for the development of sustainable fisheries policies. 48. Following these presentations the Consultation addressed the question of what would be appropriate follow-up and continuation on subsidies and fisheries. 49. The Consultation concluded that the Guide is a most appropriate tool to use in the study of subsidies and is ready for use. The experts encouraged FAO to assist Members in undertaking studies based on the Guide and to make those reports public. Finally, it was felt.
8 to be important that FAO be informed of the experiences derived in its use as, at some time later, it may be appropriate to undertake a revision of the Guide. 50. Simultaneously, FAO should work to improve guidance on how to identify and assess subsidies classified in categories 3 and.
Initially this work might aim to provide quantitative assessments. Also, it is important that guidance be provided on how to place the annual analysis into a multi-year framework. 51. The Consultation specifically urged FAO to work on the following issues: (i) the longterm effects of subsidies; (ii) resource pricing, and (iii) the effects of government inaction. 52. The Consultation recognized that the data generated by the application of the Guide can be used to carry out empirical analyses for the purpose of estimating impacts. Essentially it is a matter of determining the stimulus to the firm, assessing the firm's reaction to that stimulus, and then determining the short-term and long-term effects on fishing capacity, on fish stocks, trade, etc. The Consultation strongly recommended that this type of analysis be undertaken. 53. The Consultation concluded that FAO should promote development and use of appropriate models for the evaluation of impacts of subsidies through actual case studies. 54. Regarding environmental impacts, various methods are available. They include applying econometric and bio-economic models. Models will need to be adjusted to handle different kinds of subsidies, inter alia management costs as well as the dynamics of fishing effort and fish stocks. The Consultation recognized that considerable effort will be needed in terms of model development and data collection. It is unlikely that one model can be used to assess all possible types of impacts, rather there will be a need to tailor models to the type of impact studied. 55. Regarding the impacts on trade, a different model approach will be required. Global competitiveness analysis, as used in the international trade literature, allows immediate use of subsidy data (in conjunction with data on input-output coefficients for harvesting and processing activities) to assess the impact of subsidies on fisheries trade. Because of its partial equilibrium approach, it is relatively easy to perform comparative static or sensitivity analysis around important parameters of fisheries activities. 56. The Consultation stated that case studies, based on models outlined above, would be appropriate to analyse both the environmental impact and the impact on trade of subsidies and recommends such case studies be undertaken. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 57. The report was adopted on 6 December 2002.
9 APPENDIX A AGENDA.
Opening of the Expert Consultation Administrative arrangements for the meeting Election of Chairman Review of "Guide for identifying, assessing and reporting on subsidies in the fisheries sector" Comparing the magnitude and the effects of subsidies in the fisheries sector. Conclusions and recommendations Adoption of the report.
10 APPENDIX B LIST OF DOCUMENTS.
FI:ECFS/2002/1 FI:ECFS/2002/2 FI:ECFS/2002/3 FI:ECFS/2002/4 FI:ECFS/2002/5 FI:ECFS/2002/Inf.1 FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 2 FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 3 FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 4 FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 5.
Provisional Agenda Introduction to the Draft Guide for Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fisheries Sector Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fisheries sector Guide for discussion of the Draft Guide for Identifying Draft guide for Identifying, Assessing and Reporting on Subsidies in the Fisheries Sector Comparing the magnitude and the effects of subsidies in the fisheries sector List of documents List of participants Prospectus Study on Subsidies in the Fisheries Sector of Trinidad & Tobago Report of the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries (Rome, 28 November-1 December 2000) FAO Fisheries Report No.638 Papers presented at the Expert Consultation on Economic Incentives and Responsible Fisheries (Rome, 28 November-1 December 2000) FAO Fisheries Report No.638/Suppl. What makes a subsidy Environmentally Harmful: Developing a checklist based on the conditionality of subsidies. Author: Jan Pieters. Presented at the OECD Workshop on Environmentally Harmful Subsidies (Paris, 7-8 November 2002) Report of the Ad Hoc Meeting of Intergovernmental Organizations on Work Programmes Related to Subsidies in Fisheries (Rome, 21-22 may 2001). FAO Fisheries Report No. 649 Report of the Second Ad Hoc Meeting of Intergovernmental Organizations on Work Programmes Related to Subsidies in Fisheries (Rome, 4-5 July 2002). FAO Fisheries Report No. 688.
FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 6.
FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 7.
FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 8.
FI:ECFS/2002/Inf. 9.
11 APPENDIX C LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.
CAMEROON NJIFONJOU, Oumarou Fisheries Economist SRHOL-IRAD, PMB 77 Limbe Cameroon Tel.: (237) 9987616 Fax: (237) 3332376 E-mail: njifonjo@caramail.com CANADA SCHRANK, William E. Professor Department of Economics Memorial University St. John's, Newfoundland, A1C 5S7 Canada Tel. 902,245 6749 Fax: 902.245 5141 E-mail:wschrank@mun.ca; w.schrank@ns.sympatico.ca CHINA.
ICELAND MATTHIASSON, Thorolfur Geir Associate Professor Faculty of Economics and Business University of Iceland, Iceland Tel. (354)5671510/(354)525 4530 Fax: (354)5526806 E-mail: totimatt@hi.is INDIA DATTA, Samar K. Professor and Chairman Center for Management in Agriculture (CMA) Indian Institute of Management (IIM) Vastrapur, Ahmedabad 380015 Gujarat, India Tel. (91)796324818 Fax: (91)796306896 E-mail: sdutta@iimadh.ernet.in; samardatta@hotmail.com INDONESIA.
ZHANG, Linxiu Professor and Deputy Director Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy (CCAP) Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Building 917, Datun Road, North Asian Games Village, Beijing 100101, China Tel. (86.10) 64856834/64889440 Fax: (86.10) 64856533 E-mail: lxzhang@public.bta.net.cn.
JUSUF, Gellwynn Advisor, Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Gd. Humpuss. Medan Merdeka Timur No. 16, Jakarta 10110 Indonesia Tel. (62-21) 3522515 Fax : (62-21)3522515 E-mail: