ISSN 1020-5292.
FAO TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES.
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT FISHERIES MANAGEMENT.
2.. The ecosysttem approach 2 The ecosys em approach tto ffiisheriies o sher es.
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT FISHERIES.
2.. The ecosysttem apprroach 2 The ecosys em a pp oach tto ffiisherriies o she es.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104897-5.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
Preparation of this document.
hese guidelines have been finalized by the FAO Fishery Resources D i v i s i o n (FIR) based on the draft developed during the Expert Consultation on Ecosystem-based Fisheries Management, Reykjavik, Iceland, 16­19 September 2002. Experts contributing to the original draft included Johann Bell, Doug Butterworth, Kevern Cochrane, Robin Cook, Philippe Cury, Serge Garcia, Henrik Gislason, Sebastian Mathew, Carlos Moreno, Hiroshi Okamura, Jake Rice, Keith Sainsbury (Chair), Birane Samb, Jóhann Sigurjónsson, Michael Sissenwine, Derek Staples, Gunnar Stefánsson, Keven Stokes, Sergi Tudela, John Willy Valdemarsen and Rolf Willman. Final editing and compilation were undertaken by Derek Staples with assistance from Kevern Cochrane and Serge Garcia. It must be stressed that these Guidelines have no formal legal status. They are intended to provide support for the implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Furthermore, in order to present the management process in all its complexity and diversity, the wording and structure of these Guidelines do not strictly follow the language and the structure of the Code. Therefore, any eventual differences in the terminology employed should not be understood as an intention to reinterpret the Code. At the time of writing, there was little practical experience in implementing EAF anywhere in the world. These guidelines, therefore, should be considered as preliminary, to be revised regularly in the light of practical experience as it becomes available. Distribution All FAO Members and Associate Members Interested Nations and International Organizations FAO Fisheries Department FAO Fisheries Officers in FAO Regional Offices Interested Non-governmental Organizations.
FAO Fisheries Department. The ecosystem approach to fisheries. FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries. No. 4, Suppl.
Rome, FAO. 2003. 112 p.
hese guidelines have been produced to supplement the FAO Code o f Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The Code and many international agreements and conferences highlight the many benefits that can be achieved by adopting an ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF) and elaborate a number of agreed principles and concepts relating to EAF. These guidelines attempt to make EAF operational by recognizing that this approach is a way to implement many of the provisions of the Code and achieve sustainable development in a fisheries context. They provide guidance on how to translate the economic, social and ecological policy goals and aspirations of sustainable development into operational objectives, indicators and performance measures. They are not seen as a replacement for, but rather an extension of, current fisheries management practices that need to be broadened to take into account the biotic, abiotic and human components of ecosystems in which fisheries operate. EAF will require that current fisheries management processes include a broader range of users of marine ecosystems (including both extractive and non-extractive users) in deliberations and decision-making and, through improved participatory processes, broader assessment and consensus among users, whose objectives frequently compete. The process will need to take into account more effectively the interactions between fisheries and ecosystems, and the fact that both are affected by natural long-term variability as well as by other, non-fishery uses. Most importunately, the approach aims to ensure that future generations will benefit from the full range of goods and services that ecosystems can provide by dealing with issues in a much more holistic way, rather than by focusing on only certain target species or species groups, as has often been the case until now.
These guidelines also examine other aspects of current fisheries management approaches that will need to be broadened to implement EAF. They include the measures and incentives available to managers to assist in meeting operational objectives. They are a re-assessment of the legal and institutional infrastructure associated with fisheries management at regional and national levels, as well as ways to improve data collection, research and analyses. Although there are many gaps in our current knowledge of ecosystems and how they function, these guidelines stress that uncertainty should not prevent the development of operational objectives aimed at improving human well-being as well as protecting and improving the status of marine coastal ecosystems. The guidelines recognize the differences in current capacity and knowledge that exist among different countries and attempt to provide a practical approach to implementing EAF by considering these differences. The guidelines outline a certain number of impediments that may prevent achieving the significant longer-term benefits to be gained from adopting EAF. These impediments include a lack of investment in the management process, lack of adequate training and education, gaps in knowledge and lack of participation by the main stakeholders. As experience grows and as solutions to these major challenges become available, they will be published vi subsequent editions of these guidelines. in.
Preparation of this document Abstract Abbreviations and acronyms Background Executive summary.
Introduction 1.1 The need for and benefits of an ecosystem approach to fisheries 1.2 What is an ecosystem approach to fisheries? 1.2.1 Principles and concepts 1.3 Making EAF operational 1.4 Moving towards EAF management 1.4.1 The fisheries management process 1.4.2 Biological and environmental concepts and constraints 1.4.3 Technological considerations 1.4.4 Social and economic dimensions 1.4.5 Institutional concepts and functions 1.4.6 Time scales 1.4.7 Precautionary approach 1.4.8 Special requirements of developing countries.
Ecosystem approach to fisheries data and information requirements and use 2.1 Policy formulation 2.2 Developing management plans 2.3 Monitoring, implementing and performance reviews 2.4 Uncertainty and the role of research.
Management measures and approaches 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Options to manage fishing 3.2.1 Technical measures 3.2.2 Input (effort) and output (catch) control iii v x 1 5 11 11 12 14 15 17 18 18 19 20 21 22 22 22 25 25 26 27 28 29 29 29 29 33.
3.2.3 Ecosystem manipulation 3.2.4 Rights-based management approaches 3.3 Creating incentives for EAF 3.4 Assessing costs and benefits of EAF 3.4.1 EAF management costs and who pays 3.4.2 EAF cost-benefit analysis 3.5 Other considerations.
Management processes 4.1 Developing an EAF management plan 4.1.1 Consultation 4.1.2 Defining the scope of a fishery management plan under EAF 4.1.3 Background information compilation and analysis 4.1.4 Setting objectives 4.1.5 Formulation of rules 4.1.6 Monitoring, assessment and review process 4.2 Legal and institutional aspects of EAF 4.2.1 Legal 4.2.2 Institutional 4.2.3 Educating and informing stakeholders 4.2.4 Effective administrative structure viii .3 Effective monitoring, control and surveillance 4.
Research for an improved EAF 5.1 Ecosystems and fishery impact assessments 5.2 Socio-economic considerations 5.3 Assessment of management measures 5.4 Assessment and improving the management process 5.5 Monitoring and assessments.
Threats to implementing EAF Annex.
Institutional foundation to the ecosystem approach to fisheries 1 EAF and the concept of sustainable development 2 Institutional path to EAF 3 EAF elements in the Code of Conduct.
Principles of relevance to an ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF) Avoiding overfishing Ensuring reversibility and rebuilding Minimizing fisheries impact Considering species interactions Ensuring compatibility Applying the precautionary approach Improving human well-being and equity Allocating user rights Promoting sectoral integration Broadening stakeholders participation Maintaining ecosystem integrity Annex.
Economic valuation Annex.
Linkages between some basic data requirements, indicators (suggested examples) and operational objectives for a hypothetical fishery Annex.
Economic instruments for an ecosystem approach to fisheries Glossary.
List of Boxes, Figures and Tables Box 1 Making EAF operational 2 System of environmental and economic accounts (SEEA) 3 Suggested elements for a fishery management plan under EAF 4 Indicators, reference points and performance measures 5 Decision rules and EAF 6 Management strategy evaluation Figure 1 Developing EAF 2 Hierarchical tree framework for identifying major issues in a fishery 3 Identification of specific issues 4 A qualitative risk assessment ot identify high priority issues Table 1 Classification of total economic value for wetlands.
Abbreviations and acronyms.
1982 Convention United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 BRD by-catch reduction device C&C command and control measures CBD 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity (see http://www.biodiv.org/doc/legal/ cbd-en.pdf) CCAMLR Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Code of Conduct FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Cx P O Conference of the Parties cpue catch per unit effort EAF ecosystem approach to fisheries EBFM ecosystem-based fisheries management EEZ exclusive economic zone ESD ecologically sustainable development.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FM fisheries management FSA Agreement for the Implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995) GEF Global Environment Facility GMO genetically modified organism ITQ individual transferable quota LME large marine ecosystem MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships MCS monitoring, control and surveillance MPA marine protected area MSY maximum sustainable yield NAFO International Commission for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries NGO non-governmental organization.
PIA prior impact assessment SEEA system of environmental and economic accounts SNA system of national accounts TAC total allowable catch TED turtle exclusion device TEV total economic value TROM target resource-orientated management TURFs xii territorial use rights in fishing UNCED United Nations Conference on Environmental Development VITQs value-based individual transferable quotas WCED World Commission on Environment and Development (1984-87) WHAT World Humanities Action Trust WSSD World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 2002.
rom ancient times, fishing has been a major source of food for humanity and a provider of employment and economic benefits to those engaged in this activity. However, with increased knowledge and the dynamic development of fisheries, it was realized that living aquatic resources, although renewable, are not infinite and need to be properly managed, if their contribution to the nutritional, economic and social well-being of the growing world's population was to be sustained. The adoption in 1982 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea provided a new framework for the better management of marine resources. The new legal regime of the oceans gave coastal States rights and responsibilities for the management and use of fishery resources within the areas of their national jurisdiction, which embrace some 90 percent of the world's marine fisheries. In recent years, world fisheries have become a dynamically developing sector of the food industry, and many States have striven to take advantage of their new opportunities by investing in modern fishing fleets and processing factories in response to growing international demand for fish and fishery products. It became clear, however, that many fisheries resources could not sustain an often uncontrolled increase of exploitation. Clear signs of over-exploitation of important fish stocks, modifications of e c o s y s t e m s , significant economic losses, and international conflicts on management and fish trade threatened the long-term sustainability of fisheries and the contribution of fisheries to food supply. Therefore, the Nineteenth Session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI), held in March 1991, recommended that new approaches to fisheries management embracing conservation and environmental, as well as social and economic, considerations were urgently needed. FAO was asked to develop the concept of responsible fisheries and elaborate a Code of Conduct to foster its application. Subsequently, the Government of Mexico, in collaboration with FAO, organized an International Conference on Responsible Fishing in Cancún in May 1992. The Declaration of Cancún endorsed at that Conference was brought to the attention of the UNCED Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, which supported the preparation of a Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
The FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing, held in September 1992, further recommended the elaboration of a Code to address the issues regarding high seas fisheries. The One Hundred and Second Session of the FAO Council, held in November 1992, discussed the elaboration of the Code, recommending that priority be given to high seas issues and requested that proposals for the Code be presented to the 1993 session of the Committee on Fisheries. The Twentieth Session of COFI, held in March 1993, examined in general the proposed framework and content for such a Code, including the elaboration of guidelines, and endorsed a time frame for the further elaboration of the Code. It also requested FAO to prepare, on a "fast track" basis, as part of the Code, proposals to prevent reflagging of fishing vessels which affect conservation and management measures on the high seas. This resulted in the FAO Conference, at its Twenty-seventh Session in November 1993, adopting the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, which, according to FAO Conference Resolution 15/93, forms an integral part of the Code. The Code was formulated so as to be interpreted and applied in conformity with the relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, as well as with the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law 2 of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, 1995, and in the light of, inter alia, the 1992 Declaration of Cancún and the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, in particular Chapter 17 of Agenda 21. The development of the Code was carried out by FAO in consultation and collaboration with relevant United Nations Agencies and other international organizations, including non-governmental organizations. The Code of Conduct consists of five introductory articles: Nature and Scope; Objectives; Relationship with Other International Instruments; Implementation, Monitoring and Updating and Special Requirements of Developing Countries. These introductory articles are followed by an article on General Principles, which precedes the six thematic articles on Fisheries Management, Fishing Operations, Aquaculture Development, Integration of Fisheries into Coastal Area Management, Post-Harvest Practices and Trade, and Fisheries Research. As already mentioned, the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International.
Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas forms an integral part of the Code. The Code is voluntary. However, certain parts of it are based on relevant rules of international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. The Code also contains provisions that may be or have already been given binding effect by means of other obligatory legal instruments amongst the Parties, such as the Agreement to Promote Compliance with Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, 1993. The Twenty-eighth Session of the Conference in Resolution 4/95 adopted the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries on 31 October 1995. The same Resolution requested FAO inter alia to elaborate appropriate technical guidelines in support of the implementation of the Code in collaboration with members and interested relevant organizations. The concepts and principles of an EAF are not new, as they are contained in a number of international instruments, agreements and conference that have already been negotiated, adopted or are in the process of being implemented. These include:.
· the 1972 World Conference on Human Environment; · the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention; · the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
and its Agenda 21;.
· the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity; · the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement; and · the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
A summary of the content of these instruments is given in Annex.
More specifically, the Reykjavik Declaration (2001) requested that FAO prepare.
" ... g u i d e l i n e s for best practices with regard to introducing ecosystem considerations into fisheries management.".
Even more recently, the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD, Johannesburg, South Africa, 2002) adopted a Political Declaration and a Plan of Implementation in relation to capture fisheries. In the Declaration, the Heads of States agreed to:.
develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools, including the ecosystem approach, the elimination of destructive practices, the establishment of marine protected areas ... and the integration of marine and coastal areas into key sectors (31c).
Although the concepts underpinning EAF are not new, there has been little experience in attempting to implement them. These guidelines attempt to translate the requests for an ecosystem approach to fisheries into operational guidelines that can be applied to marine capture fisheries. While recognizing that EAF is relevant to fisheries development, trade, research, aquaculture, inland and marine capture fisheries, the current document focuses on marine capture fisheries. It should be read as a supplement to the FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries (No. 4, ROme, 1997, 82 pp.), hereafter referred to as the FM Guidelines.
Executive summary.
he broad principles and approach for effective and responsible fisheries management are contained in the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, many of which relate to an ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF). EAF is, in effect, a means of implementing many of the provisions of the Code and provides a way to achieve sustainable development in a fisheries context. The principles pertaining to EAF are not new. They are already included in a number of international agreements and conference documents, including the 1972 World Conference on Human Environment; the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention (LOS); the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) and its Agenda 21; the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity; the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement; the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries; the 2001 Reykjavik Declaration; and the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD). However, although the principles are not new, there has been little prior practical experience in implementing them. The guidelines, therefore, attempt to translate these higher-level principles into operational objectives and measures capable of delivering on EAF in a broad range of social and economic settings, particularly in developing countries. There have been increasing demands for a practical set of guidelines for implementing EAF as a result of heightened awareness of the importance of interactions among fishery resources, and between fishery resources and the ecosystems within which they exist. A further incentive has been the recognition of the multiple objectives and values of fishery resources and marine ecosystems within the context of sustainable development. In addition, it is considered essential to disseminate information about the poor state of many the world's fisheries along with recent advances in science that highlight both knowledge and uncertainties about the functional value of ecosystems (i.e. the goods and services they are capable of providing). In developing the guidelines, a comparison was made between what was needed to implement EAF with what is already required under current fisheries management practices. These comparisons focused on the dominant management paradigm in many medium- to large-scale commercial fisheries, namely to maintain the target resource base by controlling the size and operations of the fishing.
activity (referred to as a target-oriented approach to management (TROM)). This focus does not, however, ignore the fact that many small-scale, multi-species fisheries in both developing and developed countries are often undertaken with little intervention beyond development support, or are based on more traditional management methods. The guidelines recognize that there is a need to improve current fisheries management. The interactions that occur between fisheries and ecosystems, and the fact that both are affected by natural long-term variability as well as by other, non-fishery uses, must be more effectively taken into consideration. The purpose of an ecosystem approach to fisheries, therefore is to plan, develop and manage fisheries in a manner that addresses the multiple needs and desires of societies, without jeopardizing the options for future generations to benefit from the full range of goods and services provided by marine ecosystem. From this purpose, the definition of EAF follows. An ecosystem approach to fisheries strives to balance diverse societal objectives, by taking into account the knowledge and uncertainties about biotic, abiotic and human components of ecosystems and their interactions and applying an integrated approach to fisheries within ecologically meaningful boundaries. Both the purpose and the definition recognize that EAF is a means to implement sustainable development concepts into fisheries by addressing both human and ecological well-being. They merge two related but potentially converging 6 paradigms. The first is ecosystem management that focuses on protecting and conserving ecosystem structure and functions by managing the biophysical components of ecosystem (e.g. introducing marine protected areas (MPAs)), and the second is fisheries management that focuses on providing food and income/livelihoods for humans by managing fisheries activities. EAF recognizes the broader uses and users of the marine environment (including fishing) and the need to accommodate and reconcile the many objectives of these users so that future generations can also derive the full range of goods and services provided by the ecosystem. This approach also recognizes that man is an essential component of the ecosystem in which fishing takes place, and it focuses on the interactions within the system. EAF attempts to deal with issues in a holistic way, a feature often lacking in current fishery management practices that focus on individual species or species groups. The ecosystem is a functional unit comprising dynamic complexes of plants, animals (including humans), micro-organisms and the non-living environment. Ecosystems exist on many scales, which are frequently defined in terms of the.
question being asked. However for ecosystems to be a functional management unit they need to be geographically-based with ecologically meaningful boundaries. EAF is neither inconsistent with, nor a replacement for current fisheries management approaches (e.g. as described in the FM Guidelines), and is likely to be adopted as an incremental extension of current fisheries management approaches. To provide continuity between current fisheries management practices and EAF, this publication use the FM Guidelines as a template, reinforcing those sections most pertinent to EAF and adding to them as appropriate to ensure that they give due attention to the extra dimensions required by EAF. The structure of these EAF Guidelines therefore follows that of the FM Guidelines. The guidelines initially focus on the need for broader sets of data and information to support EAF. While recognizing that the availability of relevant information will vary widely among countries, considerable relevant information is nonetheless available. Some of this data comes from outside the conventional fisheries area, frequently from fishers and local people especially in developing countries where traditional knowledge of ecosystems and the fishery should be collected and made available for use by others. Many of the measures available to managers to implement EAF are based on those currently used for TROM fisheries management, but have been broadened to include a greater use of economic incentives and ecosystem manipulations. Current measures such as effort, catch, technical gear and area-based controls must be broadened to address a wider range of issues than simply management of the target species of the fishery. These guidelines describe how the current management process would change under EAF. Although the EAF management process uses essentially the same cycle of planning, implementation and evaluation, there is a need to provide for better consultation with a broader range of stakeholders, and for a more rigorous setting of operational objectives, decision rules and evaluation of management performance. The approach described here encourages the participation of all relevant stakeholders, translating high-level policy goals into day-to-day management activities. Competing goals and aspirations should be debated to promote consensus. Participatory processes that allow consultation and input from an initial group of stakeholders must be developed in order to: · identify the fishery, area and all relevant stakeholders;.
· identify broad social, economic and ecological (including the fisheries.
resource) issues for the fishery, based on the broad international and national policy goals and aspirations; · set broad objectives for these issues;.
· break down broad issues into issues specific enough to be addressed by an.
identified management measure(s);.
· rank the issues based on the risk they pose to the fishery; · set agreed operational objectives for the high-priority social, economic and.
ecological issues identified in step 5 and develop linked indicators and performance measures; · formulate management decision rules; and.
· monitor the fishery using the selected indicators, and regularly evaluate the.
performance of management in meeting operational objectives ­ by inference, because of the linkages developed between policy goals and operational objectives, this will provide an assessment on how well management is achieving the broader policy goals. Moving from high-level policy goals to operational objectives is a major challenge in areas where the goals deal with concepts such as ecosystem integrity, ecosystem health and biodiversity. It must be stressed, however, that operational objectives such as protection of critical habitats must be developed, or EAF will fail. Although there is lack of knowledge concerning ecosystem functioning and structure, uncertainty must not prevent the development of operational goals based on the best available knowledge. The process moves from higher-level goals to operational objectives whether applied to data-poor fisheries with low 8 scientific and management capacity, or to fisheries rich in data and capacity. In examining the legal and institutional aspects of EAF, the guidelines point out that, although the basic guiding principles and concepts are largely contained in already agreed international instruments and conference documents, the detailed requirement for operational EAF are not well covered in binding international fisheries law at present. They are mainly reflected in voluntary instruments such as the Code of Conduct. As a result, few regional fisheries bodies and arrangements make explicit recognition of EAF in their conventions. Similarly, EAF is not frequently an integral part of national fisheries policy and legislation. For EAF to be implemented, legislation will need to be reviewed and improved as appropriate. EAF may require more complex sets of rules or regulations that recognize and cater for the impacts of fisheries on other sectors and the impact of those sectors on fisheries. E A F requires adherence to the same principles of transparent and participatory management that already guide many current management practices.
Given the broader stakeholder base under EAF, there will frequently be a need for institutions to coordinate better consultation, cooperation and joint decisionmaking between fisheries operating in the same geographical area, and between the fisheries and other sectors that interact with them. For example, where one fishery causes a decline in one or more prey species of a predator targeted by another fishery, there must be an institution or arrangement to coordinate the management actions of both fisheries, including the reconciliation of the different objectives of the two. This recognizes the true nature and extent of access and allocation of resources within an ecosystem, often neglected or ignored in fisheries management practices. A transition to EAF will be greatly facilitated if adequate attention is given to t h e education and training of all those involved, including fishers, the management agency officials and staff and other stakeholders. The administrative structures and functions, including monitoring, control and surveillance, will have to be adapted as necessary. A start should be made now in the implementation of EAF, where it has not already begun, based on existing knowledge. However, implementation and effectiveness will undoubtedly benefit from reducing important uncertainties, and further research is needed for this purpose. These guidelines identify a number of essential areas for further research, including better understanding of ecosystem structure and function and how fisheries affect them; integrating social, economic and ecological considerations into decision-making; improving the management measures available to implement EAF; understanding the management process better; and improving monitoring and assessments. While it is generally recognized that EAF will generate important benefits, there are a number of major threats to smooth implementation of EAF. A lack of investment in the process will certainly hinder progress and could mean failure in the end. It will also take considerable resources to reconcile the often competing objectives of the different stakeholders, possibly aggravated by the difficulties of ensuring effective participation of all stakeholders in the development and implementation of EAF. Insufficient biological and ecological knowledge will continue to be a constraint, a