Forestry outlook study for Africa: opportunities and challenges towards 2020.
The character of forests is changing as a consequence of the individual and collective - and often conflicting ­ objectives of the multitude of actors impact the landscape. This is compounded by rapid economic, social, political, institutional, technological and environmental changes in the recent decades. In fact, what happens in the forest sector today is often more influenced by what happens outside than within. As globalisation progresses and economies become more integrated, the opportunities and challenges for the forest sector are unfolding rapidly. Understanding the nature of these changes and developing appropriate responses is thus critical to enable the forest sector to enhance its contribution to society's well-being. It is in this context that FAO initiated a series of global and regional outlook studies to provide the broader and longer term prospects for the forest sector. The Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA), initiated on the recommendations of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and the Near East Forestry Commission, is one of the series of such regional outlook studies. The main objective of FOSA is to indicate what is likely to happen in the next two decades if the current trends persist and the priorities and strategies that may be pursued to enhance forestry's contribution to sustainable development. In addition to providing a regional overview, FOSA explicitly takes into account subregional specifics and throws light into the potentials and challenges for forestry development in each of the five subregions in Africa. FOSA was a true participatory effort involving all the African countries and leading organizations concerned with forests and forestry in the region. Also, in the process of undertaking the study substantial efforts were made to build up country capacity in outlook studies and strategic planning. More than providing a set of numbers, FOSA's aim is to catalyse the process of looking forward, enabling the countries to see where they stand in the context of the long term changes and how they could take advantage of their strengths and address the various challenges. Some of the recent initiatives like the National Forest Programme Facility would take advantage of the knowledge base provided by FOSA. In one way, the FOSA process provides a strong base for several other initiatives in the forest sector and to put them in the larger context of the evolving relationship between society and forests. FAO in partnership with the countries and other organizations will continue to strive to build up the national capacity of the countries in strategic planning, enabling the countries to see the long term opportunities and constraints and to adjust and adapt to the changes.
M. Hosny El-Lakany Assistant Director-General Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
FOREWORD ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ABBREVIATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii vii ix xi.
INTRODUCTION Africa in transition FOSA objectives Structure of the report 1 1 1 2.
FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE IN AFRICA: CURRENT TRENDS The state of forest resources and their management Forest cover and changes therein Management of natural forests and woodlands Forest plantations Trees outside forests Wildlife management Supply of goods and services from forests Industrial wood and wood products Woodfuel Non-wood forest products Environmental values Cultural values Conclusion 3 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 8 9 9 11 11 12.
FACTORS AFFECTING THE FOREST SECTOR Political and Institutional changes Decentralization and community participation Private sector involvement Increasing civil society involvement Resolving conflicts Demographic changes Population growth Urbanization Impact of HIV/AIDS Changes in the age structure Movement of people within and between countries Economic changes Gross domestic product and its growth Income distribution and poverty Sectoral shifts in income and employment Agricultural development Growth of the informal sector Impact of economic liberalization Foreign direct investment External debt Global and regional changes affecting forests and forestry Technological changes Global changes Technological changes in African forestry Environmental concerns and their impact on forestry Conclusion 13 13 13 15 15 15 16 16 16 17 17 18 18 18 19 19 20 20 21 21 22 22 23 23 24 25 25.
FUTURE SCENARIOS Defining the scenarios Public sector dominance Market forces Informal sector The fortress scenario The Great Transition Scenarios: the real world situation 27 27 28 30 32 33 34 36.
CONSEQUENCES FOR FOREST GOODS AND SERVICES Forest cover and its condition Sustainable management of forests and woodlands Shifts in sources of wood supplies Forest plantations Trees outside forests Woodfuel situation Industrial roundwood and wood products Sawnwood production and consumption Panel products Printing and writing paper Africa in the global trade in wood and wood products Future of non-wood forest products Wildlife-based tourism: opportunities and constraints Changes in the extent of protected areas Qualitative changes in management Benefits from the management of national parks and game reserves Provison of environmental services Role of Africa in the provision of global public goods Land availability Carbon trading in the market forces scenario Carbon trading: the future Role of forestry in poverty alleviation Conclusion 37 37 39 39 39 40 40 42 42 43 44 45 46 47 47 47 48 49 50 51 51 51 52 53.
THE GREAT TRANSITION: PRIORITIES AND STRATEGIES FOR FORESTRY Priorities for the forest sector Forestry and poverty alleviation Forestry in enhancing environmental values Subregional priorities Moving towards the Great Transition Revitalizing the public sector Strengthening of market forces Suppor t to the informal sector Conclusion 55 55 55 56 56 56 56 58 58 59.
SUMMARY AND FOLLOW-UP Some key findings Factors affecting the forest sector and their impact Emerging paradigm shift Shifts in priorities Strategies FOSA follow-up REFERENCES 61 61 61 62 62 62 63 65.
Acknowledgements.
The Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA) is a major partnership effort and its successful completion has been entirely due to the cooperation and commitment of all African countries and several institutions and individuals. FAO is indebted to all of them and wishes to acknowledge its gratitude to the following for their guidance, support and collaboration in undertaking the study. All the African governments have actively participated and shaped the FOSA process through their nominated national focal points. The country outlook papers prepared by the national focal points formed the foundation of the FOSA process. The African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and the Near East Forestry Commission have been instrumental in articulating the various issues confronting the forest sector and guiding the study. The success of the process has been largely due to the strong commitment and interest of the members of these Commissions. From the inception of FOSA in 1998, the African Development Bank has been the key partner of FAO in undertaking the study. The African Development Bank with financial support from the Swedish Trust Funds prepared a baseline study as well as thematic studies in support of FOSA and provided significant technical and financial support for FOSA. The other important partner in implementing FOSA has been the European Commission, whose support to the regional projects on data collection and analysis and sustainable forest management provided a strong information base for FOSA. The United Nations Economic Commission for Africa provided substantial technical and organizational support in implementing FOSA. Through undertaking specific thematic studies a number of organizations like the Center for International Forestry Research and the World Bank provided immense support to the FOSAprocess and this is gratefully acknowledged. Interaction with the United Nation's Environment Programme helped to establish synergy between FOSAand the African Environment Outlook Study. The study process including the preparation of the reports benefited considerably from the inputs provided by the FOSA subregional consultants, F. Owino, M. Chihambakwe, A. Ndinga, A. Onibon, O. Sy, H. Sidhoum, S. Dondyas, and F. Odoum, who were instrumental in preparing the draft subregional reports. Several others have contributed in the study process at various stages including: A. Contreras-Hermosilla (for preparing the paper on institutional aspects), M. Chipeta, G. Kowero and M. Spillsbury (for contributing the paper on forestry research issues in sub-Saharan Africa), A. Karsenty and B. Cristofini (for technical inputs in defining the outlook methodologies), L. Coll, G. Maurice and A. Rufino (in assisting in the questionnaire survey) A. Rytkönen (for estimating the production and consumption of forest products), R. Czudek (for preparing a working paper on wildlife management) and J. Broadhead, J. Bahdon and A. Whiteman (for assessing the trends in woodfuel consumption).
The FOSA External Advisory Group comprising of A. Odijide (Chairperson), H. Coetzee (Vice Chairperson), M. Cisse, F. Banahane, J. Kaboggoza and H. O. Abdel Nour played a key role in guiding the study and in reviewing the various draft reports. FAO's internal Advisory Group consisting of E.H. Sène, F. Ndekere and F. Castaneda helped to mobilise in-house expertise and guided the study in all its stages. During the various stages of preparation of the study a number of consultants provided substantial technical support. These include S. Ryder, R. Khan and J. Lyke. Editing and formatting were undertaken by L. Wearne, P. Mattews, M. Perri, C. Tonini and M. Guardia. Translation of the documents were made by S. Tiné, C. Chavanne, A. Duperron, F. Farineau-Khayat and R. Al Chikh. The FAO Representations provided substantial support in facilitating the preparation of the country outlook papers and in organizing the regional and subregional meetings. Several FAO staff members played important roles in the formulation and implementation of FOSA, especially in developing the structure of the report, reviewing the draft reports and in providing additional inputs. These include A. Whiteman, O.Serrano, M. Loyche-Wilkie, F. Castaneda, O. Dubois, D. Reeb, J. Carle, O. Souvannavong, C. Palmberg, S. Syaka, D. Williamson, D. Rugabira, S. Walter, L. Russo, M. Trossero and T. Michaelson. The Forestry Library Staff, especially F. Monti and A. Caponi provided substantial support through making available various reports and publications. S. Dembner and A. Perlis provided valuable advice and support in editing and finalising the various FOSAreports. The implementation of FOSA including the preparation of the regional and subregional reports was shouldered by a team consisting of C.T.S.Nair, J.L. Blanchez, T.P. So, J. Lejeune and S. Braatz, in Rome P. Lowe, and A. Ndeso-Atanga in Accra and M. Laverdiere in Harare, which worked under the overall guidance of H. El-Lakany, L. Ljungman, M. Martin, P. Kone and H.O. Abdel Nour. This team was supported by a very committed group of administrative staff consisting of J. Saich-Simoni, R. Cardilli-Merli, G. Brocard, S. Lozzi and D. Mercuri. FAO wishes to acknowledge the individual and collective contribution made by all the above in undertaking this study.
Abbreviations.
CAMPFIRE CDM CEMAC CEPGL CGIAR CIFOR COMESA EAS ECA ECCAS ECOWAS FAO FDI FOSA IGAD MAP NEPAD SADC SEI UEMOA UNCTAD UNEP UNICEF WAGP Communal Areas Management for Indigenous Resources Clean Development Mechanism Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (Communauté économique et monétaire de l'Afrique Centrale) Community of the Great Lakes Countries (Communauté économique des pays des Grands Lacs) Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research Center for International Forestry Research Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa East African Community Economic Commission for Africa Economic Community for Central African States Economic Community for West African States Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Foreign Direct Investment Forestry Outlook Study for Africa Intergovernmental Authority on Development Millennium Partnership for African Recovery Programme New Partnership for Africa's Development Southern African Development Community Stockholm Environment Institute West African Monetary and Economic Union (Union économique et monétaire ouest-africaine) United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Children's Fund West African Gas Pipeline.
Executive summary.
Forests and wildlife play a very significant role in the lives of African people. Apart from their economic importance, they also have critical environmental, social, cultural and spiritual values. The society-forest interaction in Africa has been undergoing rapid change, and further change is expected during the next two decades in response to the impact of a number of factors. This report provides a regional overview of the emerging trends, their consequences and the options available.
CURRENT SITUATION.
The current situation with regard to forestry in Africa can be summarized as follows: · the total forest cover in Africa is estimated at 650 million ha, accounting for 21.8 percent of the total land area and 16.8 percent of global forest cover. However, as in the case of other geographical regions, the distribution of forests in Africa is uneven. North and West Africa are the least forested subregions in Africa, largely as a result of their extremely arid conditions, whereas Central Africa is the most forested subregion; · although Africa has only 16.8 percent of the world's forest cover, it accounted for 56 percent of the forest cover decrease between 1990 and 2000. Three countries ­ the Sudan, Zambia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo ­ accounted for almost 44 percent of the reduction in forest cover; · political, social and economic changes have overshadowed efforts to implement sustainable management, and very little natural forest area is sustainably managed in Africa. Some attempts are under way to introduce reduced-impact logging, but they are in the very early stages; · Africa has an estimated area of 8 million ha of forest plantations, accounting for about 4.3 percent of the global plantation area. These plantations are concentrated mainly in a few countries. South Africa, Algeria, Nigeria, the Sudan and Morocco together have an area of 4.1 million ha, or 52 percent of the plantation area in Africa. Plantation activity is negligible in countries where there are still large tracts of natural forests (for example Angola, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the.
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon); as supplies of wood and non-wood forest products from natural forests decline, trees outside forests ­ grown in homesteads and as woodlots-have become a major source of these products. This is particularly the case with home gardens in the humid-zone countries of Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and several West African countries; forests in protected areas cover approximately 5 percent of Africa's total forest area. The proportion of land under protection varies among subregions and countries. East Africa has the largest proportion of its land under protection (more than 12 percent). An increase in the extent of protected areas is seldom matched by comparable improvements in management. Problems such as encroachment, illegal logging, collection of fuelwood and other products, grazing and particularly poaching persist. Civil strife is a major factor contributing to the decimation of wildlife, especially in Central and East Africa; Africa's share in roundwood production increased from 340 million m3 in 1980 to 699 million m3 in 2000, accounting for 20.2 percent of global roundwood production. However, the share of industrial wood is very small, since 91 percent of roundwood is used as fuel. Africa's share of the global production of wood products decreases as the degree of processing increases. A few countries, especially South Africa and some in Central and West Africa, produce most of Africa's industrial roundwood; much of Africa's formal trade takes place with countries outside the region. Trade in forest products between African countries is negligible; the involvement of local communities and entrepreneurs as owners of logging operations in Africa is very limited. A substantial proportion of the timber industry is dominated by outside interests; African non-wood forest products include a range of items such as gums and resins, honey and beeswax, medicinal and aromatic plants, dying and tanning materials, bamboo and rattan, bushmeat and fodder. Although they play a major role in the rural economy of Africa, information on their.
overall contribution is patchy and incomplete at best, except for a few species and products of commercial importance; · African forests are often more important for their environmental services. Their role in protecting watersheds and arresting land degradation is particularly significant ­ and especially critical in the uplands of East and Southern Africa and in arid areas in all the subregions.
DRIVING FORCES.
· except for a few countries, Africa is primarily dependent on agriculture and other land-based activities. Continued dependence on land and low levels of productivity will increase pressure on forest land.
CONSEQUENCES.
African forestry is influenced by many factors, most of them external to the sector. These factors generally fall into two broad categories: those that affect forests and forestry directly, such as demographic, economic and technological changes, which are traditionally used in modeling production, consumption, etc., and those that are more fundamental but harder to measure, such as political and institutional changes. The main factors that will affect African forestry can be summarized as follows: · fundamental changes in African systems of government are taking place. Democratic processes are taking hold. The need to decentralize authority and promote participatory approaches to natural resource management is broadly accepted; · civil society's demand for transparency and good governance is growing and changing the course of development. It will take time before the full impact of these changes can be seen; · notwithstanding the impact of HIV/AIDS population is projected to grow to 1186 million, an increase of 388 million since 2000. Some countries that are already densely populated and where productivity of the land is low will be particularly affected by population growth, accelerating resource degradation; · rapid urbanization means that almost 54 percent of the African population will live in urban areas by 2020; · the HIV/AIDS pandemic will strain the resources of all the key actors; · the small size of the formal economy, the low per capita income and the correspondingly low rates of savings and investment will hold economic growth down to under 4 percent per year, which means growth in per capita income will be negligible; · the highly uneven distribution of income and the extent of poverty are unlikely to diminish significantly during the next two decades;.
Africa is undergoing fundamental political and institutional changes that could gain momentum during the next two decades with a potential to affect forests and forestry positively. However, in the immediate future a number of negative factors tend to have an overwhelming impact. Population growth will create intense pressure on forests and woodlands. Economic growth will be sluggish in all but a few countries. Poverty will continue to plague Africa, exacerbated by drought and disease, especially HIV/AIDS. Major structural changes in the economies are unlikely, and dependence on land will persist. Improvement in agricultural productivity will be slow, causing forest clearing for agricultural expansion. The institutional environment is dominated by a public sector whose capacity is continually being eroded, a poorly developed market mechanism controlled by a small private sector with short-term profit maximization as the main objective, and a growing informal sector whose limited access to resources and technology results in overexploitation of resources. The majority of the people are unempowered and thus unable to play a positive role. The overall impact of such a situation on forests and forestry in the next two decades will be as follows: · continued loss of forest cover, at roughly the current rates; · negligible efforts to apply sustainable forest management; · increasing demand for woodfuel, which in the context of high urban consumption would deplete forest and woodland resources in the vicinity of urban centres; · Africa's wood products sector is dominated by "low value adding" industries catering largely to external demand. Growth of high value adding industries will be sluggish and Africa is likely to remain an importer of products such as newsprint and printing and writing paper; · most wood and other products are exported without any value addition, undermining the potential for enhancing employment and income; · a decline in the state of the environment,.
particularly exacerbation of the water crisis because of the deterioration of watersheds, with other negative effects such as declining quantity and quality of water supplies and increased siltation of reservoirs and other irrigation facilities; · depletion of non-wood forest products, particularly medicinal plants; · increased conflicts in wildlife management, undermining the potential for expansion of wildlife-based tourism. On the other hand, fundamental policy and institutional reforms could unleash major changes in economies, with a potential to shift forestry development into the Great Transition scenario. Ongoing efforts such as the New Partnership for Africa's Development, which emphasize the strengthening of democratic processes, conflict resolution, enhanced transparency, improved governance, poverty eradication, the building up of human resources and increased regional and subregional integration, clearly indicate the commitment to a radical change from past trends. Accomplishing the Great Transition will depend on translating the various initiatives into concrete action.
PRIORITIES AND STRATEGIES.
Forestry strategies in Africa therefore need to facilitate the Great Transition, addressing the immediate problems but at the same time preparing to meet the challenges of a changed situation. The broad priorities for the forest sector for the next two decades will be: · poverty alleviation; and · environmental protection. Poverty alleviation will require focusing on the production of basic-needs goods and the generation of basic-needs income, while environmental protection.
will focus on rehabilitating watersheds and degraded land, arresting desertification and protecting biodiversity. The basic approach to accomplish this will be to empower all the key actors, which will involve: · revitalization of the public sector by redefining its responsibilities and enabling it to play a lead role in creating the conditions necessary for all stakeholders to function effectively; · support to market forces by fostering the transparent and efficient functioning of the private sector; · improvement in the efficiency of the informal sector by providing an appropriate institutional and legal framework. Strengthening the public, private, and informal sectors of the economy will empower all economic actors and help to improve the ability to implement sustainable forest management. The next two decades will see considerable changes in forestry as Africa undergoes political, institutional and economic transition. As democratic systems become widely established, an upturn in key economic and social variables can be expected after 2010. Until then, forestry and other economic sectors will have to focus on combating poverty by providing essential goods and services and protecting the environment. If political and social changes continue as expected, the economic situation will improve significantly after 2010. This would require reexamination of the priorities outlined here. While environmental protection will continue to be a key priority, a shift towards the production of goods and services appropriate to higher income levels may become necessary.
THE FOSA PROCESS.
The Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA) was undertaken as a highly participatory initiative involving all the countries and key organizations in Africa. Considering the enormous diversity encompassing Africa, the study adopted a subregional approach, dividing Africa into five subregions. Country involvement To help provide country inputs, each of the 47 countries nominated a national focal point.These national focal points participated in subregional planning meetings and helped to define the objectives, implementation process and products of FOSA. Drawing upon inputs from a variety of sources, and often supported by a working group of key stakeholders, each national focal point prepared a country outlook paper, which were key inputs to the FOSA process. Consultation process A second round of subregional meetings discussed the draft country outlook papers and worked out the approach for developing the subregional reports. FAO appointed forestry experts from the subregions to prepare the draft subregional reports.These drafts were reviewed during a regional technical review meeting hosted by the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa in September 2001. Revised regional and subregional reports prepared on the basis of comments from the technical review meeting were discussed and endorsed by the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and the Near East Forestry Commission. Other partners While FAO shouldered the responsibility for coordination and implementation of the FOSA, several international, regional and subregional organizations contributed substantially to the study. The European Commission-supported project on data collection and analysis provided necessary background information.The African Development Bank through a Swedish Trust Fund prepared the baseline study, "Population, Income and Forest Resources", which furnished the background information on critical demographic, economic and social parameters. Using the trust fund facility, the African Development Bank also prepared two thematic papers for each subregion ­ one on driving forces and the other on key issues in forestry. Linkages were created with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to establish synergy with the ongoing Global and Africa Environment Outlook studies. The World Bank commissioned a study on institutional issues, addressing decentralization, community participation, privatization, and corruption and illegal activities. The Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) contributed a paper on science and technology issues that focuses on research priorities and the capacity for undertaking research. In undertaking the FOSA, FAO took advantage of the enormous information at its disposal, including the Forest Resource Assessment 2000 and the forest products statistics.FAO also undertook studies projecting the production and consumption of wood and wood products and the consumption of woodfuel in Africa to the year 2030. Further, a questionnaire survey was undertaken to elicit civil society's perception on the forestry situation in Africa. Technical support An Advisory Group consisting of African forestry experts provided technical guidance for FOSA. FAO also established an Internal Advisory Committee to oversee progress of FOSA implementation and to provide technical support.
Introduction.
AFRICA IN TRANSITION BOX 1 AFRICAN FORESTRY: SOME QUESTIONS.
· Is the current rate of deforestation in response to the growing demand for land and products likely to persist? · Can African forests meet growing demands for products and services sustainably? · What role can forests play in alleviating poverty? · Are we likely to see a different kind of forestry, which is environmentally viable, economically efficient and socially and culturally acceptable? · Can increased awareness of the importance of forests be translated into effective action and perceptible change? · How is African forestry adapting to the forces of globalization, avoiding the pitfalls and making full use of emerging oppor tunities? · How can Africa most effectively capitalize on its unique wildlife resources?.
Africa is undergoing rapid political, economic and social transition. Initiatives are under way to bring about an African renaissance, which will take advantage of the continent's unique social, cultural and spiritual values to realise the vast potential of its human and natural resources. The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is one recent effort to articulate a comprehensive approach to addressing Africa's problems and to provide a new vision for the continent. Forests are expected to play a critical role in supporting this transition. It is in this context that the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and the Near East Forestry Commission initiated the Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA), to be coordinated by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) as a collaborative effort involving all African countries, the African Development Bank, the European Commission and various regional and subregional organizations.
FOSA OBJECTIVES.
BOX 2 FOSA SUBREGIONS.
The primary objective of FOSA is to provide a longterm perspective for the development of the forest sector in African countries within the context of wider economic, social, institutional and technological changes, using 2020 as the reference year. FOSA analyses the trends and emerging economic, social and political forces that will shape the sector during the next two decades. Based on this analysis, it will indicate the options to improve forestry's contribution to sustainable development. FOSA is designed to complement African countries' other forest-related strategic planning initiatives, in particular their national forest programmes. FOSA has been implemented as a consultative process involving all the key stakeholders, in particular the countries. Wide-ranging discussions were held to develop a shared vision of what could be done to realize the full potential of forestry in Africa. The main products of FOSA are five subregional outlook reports and a regional overview report. This regional report, which draws on the five subregional.
North Africa.
West Africa.
East Africa.
North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia East Africa: Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, Somalia, United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda Southern Africa: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe Central Africa: Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe West Africa: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Côte d'Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo.
Central Africa.
Southern Africa.
outlook reports, outlines the continent-wide situation and outlook, and provides an indication of where African forestry stands in the global context.
STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT.
Chapter 2 describes the key features of the forest sector in general, focusing particularly on the state of resources and their management, and on the provision of goods and services. Chapter 3 outlines the political, institutional, economic, technological and environmental factors influencing the forest sector and their implications for the future. Considering the.
potential impact of external factors, chapter 4 discusses the various scenarios that currently exist and how they could evolve during the next two decades. The implications of currently prevailing scenarios for forestry, especially with regard to the state of resources and the provision of goods and services during the next two decades, are discussed in chapter.
Chapter 6 focuses on priorities and strategies that are important in the context of moving to the more desirable scenario of the Great Transition. Key findings and follow-up measures are indicated in the final chapter.
Forestry and wildlife i