Microbiological Risk Assessment Series, No. 3.
Hazard Characterization for Pathogens in Food and Water.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations World Health Organization 2003.
For further information on joint FAO/WHO activities on microbiological risk assessment, please contact: Food Quality and Standards Service Food and Nutrition Division Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale delle Terme di Caracalla I-00100 Rome, Italy Fax: +39 06 57054593 E-mail: nutrition@fao.org Web site: http://www.fao.org/es/esn or Food Safety Department World Health Organization 20, Avenue Appia CH-1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland Fax: +41 22 7914807 E-mail: foodsafety@who.int Web site: http://www.who.int/foodsafety.
Cover design: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization. Cover picture: © Dennis Kunkel Microscopy, Inc.
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data Hazard characterization for pathogens in food and water : guidelines. (Microbiological risk assessment series ; no. 3) 1.Food microbiology 2.Water microbiology 3.Risk assessment - methods 4.Models, Statistical 5.Guidelines I.Joint FAO/WHO Secretariat on Risk Assessment of Microbiological Hazards in Food II.Series. ISBN 92 4 156237 4 (WHO) ISBN 92 5 104940 8 (FAO) ISSN 1726-5274 (LC/NLM classification: QW 85).
All rights reserved. Requests for permission to reproduce or translate the material contained in this publication - whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution - should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy, or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org or to Publications, Marketing and Dissemination, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland, or by facsimile to +41 22 791 4806, or by email to permissions@who.int.
© FAO/WHO 2003.
Abbreviations used in the text Foreword Preface Acknowledgements Contributors.
INTRODUCTION.
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Background Hazard characterization in context Purpose of the guidelines Scope v vii.
THE PROCESS OF HAZARD CHARACTERIZATION.
2.1 Context 2.2 Principles.
PROCESS INITIATION.
DATA COLLECTION AND EVALUATION.
4.1 Human studies 4.1.1 Outbreak investigations 4.1.2 Surveillance and annual health statistics 4.1.3 Volunteer feeding studies 4.1.4 Biomarkers 4.1.5 Intervention studies 4.2 Animal studies 4.3 In vitro studies 4.4 Expert elicitation 4.5 Data evaluation.
DESCRIPTIVE CHARACTERIZATION.
5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 Information related to the disease process Information related to the pathogen Information related to the host Information related to the matrix Dose-response relationship.
DOSE-RESPONSE MODELLING.
6.1 The infectious disease process 6.1.1 Exposure 6.1.2 Infection 6.1.3 Illness 6.1.4 Sequelae and mortality 6.2 Modelling concepts 6.2.1 Threshold vs non-threshold mechanisms 6.2.2 Independent action vs synergistic action 6.3 Selection of models 6.3.1 Dose-infection models 6.3.2 Infection-illness models 6.3.3 Dose-illness models 6.3.4 Sequelae and mortality 6.4 Extrapolation 6.4.1 Low dose extrapolation 6.4.2 Extrapolation in the pathogen-host-matrix triangle 6.5 Fitting dose response models to data 6.5.1 Fitting method 6.5.2 Selection of the best fitting model or models 6.5.3 Uncertainty analysis.
7.1 Validation of dose-response models 7.2 Peer and public review.
PRESENTATION OF RESULTS.
REFERENCES CITED APPENDIXES A. Outline of information to include in a hazard characterization B. Glossary.
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE TEXT.
CAC CFU FAO FDA GDWQ JEMRA MCMC MRA PCR USDA WHO FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission Colony forming unit Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food and Drug Administration [of the United States of America] Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment Markov chain Monte Carlo methods Microbiological risk assessment Polymerase chain reaction United States Department of Agriculture World Health Organization.
A glossary of technical terms used in the text appears as Appendix B.
The Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and of the World Health Organization (WHO) have expressed concern regarding the level of safety of food at both national and the international levels. Increasing foodborne disease incidence over the last decades seems, in many countries, to be related to an increase in disease caused by microorganisms in food. This concern has been voiced in meetings of the Governing Bodies of both Organizations and in the Codex Alimentarius Commission. It is not easy to decide whether the suggested increase is real or an artefact of changes in other areas, such as improved disease surveillance or better detection methods for microorganisms in foods. However, the important issue is whether new tools or revised and improved actions can contribute to our ability to lower the disease burden and provide safer food. Fortunately, new tools that can facilitate actions seem to be on their way. Over the past decade, risk analysis ­ a process consisting of risk assessment, risk management and risk communication ­ has emerged as a structured model for improving our food control systems, with the objectives of producing safer food, reducing the numbers of foodborne illnesses and facilitating domestic and international trade in food. Furthermore, we are moving towards a more holistic approach to food safety, where the entire food chain needs to be considered in efforts to produce safer food. As with any model, tools are needed for the implementation of the risk analysis paradigm. Risk assessment is the science-based component of risk analysis. Science today provides us with in-depth information on life in the world we live in. It has allowed us to accumulate a wealth of knowledge on microscopic organisms, their growth, survival and death, even their genetic make-up. It has given us an understanding of food production, processing and preservation, and the link between the microscopic and the macroscopic worlds and how we can benefit from as well as suffer from these microorganisms. Risk assessment provides us with a framework for organizing all this data and information and to better understand the interaction between microorganisms, foods and human illness. It provides us with the ability to estimate the risk to human health from specific microorganisms in foods and gives us a tool with which we can compare and evaluate different scenarios, as well as identify what types of data are necessary for estimating and optimizing mitigating interventions. Microbiological risk assessment (MRA) can be considered a tool for use in the management of the risks posed by foodborne pathogens and in the elaboration of standards for food in international trade. However, undertaking an MRA, particularly quantitative MRA, is recognized as a resource-intensive task requiring a multidisciplinary approach. Yet, foodborne illness is among the most widespread public health problems, creating social and economic burdens as well as human suffering, making it a concern that all countries need to address. As risk assessment can also be used to justify the introduction of more stringent standards for imported foods, a knowledge of MRA is important for trade purposes, and there is a need to provide countries with the tools for understanding and, if possible, undertaking MRA. This need, combined with that of the Codex Alimentarius for risk-related.
scientific advice, led FAO and WHO to undertake a programme of activities on MRA at the international level. The Food Quality and Standards Service, FAO, and the Food Safety Department, WHO, are the lead units responsible for this initiative. The two groups have worked together to develop the area of MRA at the international level for application at both national and international levels. This work has been greatly facilitated by the contribution of people from around the world with expertize in microbiology, mathematical modelling, epidemiology and food technology, to name but a few disciplines. This Microbiological Risk Assessment Series provides a range of data and information to those who need to understand or undertake MRA. It comprises risk assessments of particular pathogen-commodity combinations, interpretative summaries of the risk assessments, guidelines for undertaking and using risk assessment, and reports addressing other pertinent aspects of MRA. We hope that this series will provide a greater insight into MRA, how it is undertaken and how it can be used. We strongly believe that this is an area that should be developed in the international sphere, and from the present work already have clear indications that an international approach and early agreement in this area will strengthen the future potential for use of this tool in all parts of the world, as well as in international standard setting. We would welcome comments and feedback on any of the documents within this series so that we can endeavour to provide Member States, Codex Alimentarius and other users of this material with the information they need to use risk-based tools, with the ultimate objective of ensuring that safe food is available for all consumers.
Jean-Louis Jouve Food Quality and Standards Service FAO.
Jørgen Schlundt Food Safety Department WHO.
The process of developing hazard characterization guidelines was initiated at a workshop hosted by the WHO Collaborating Centre for Food Safety, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands, 13­18 June 2000. The workshop participants were scientists actively involved in hazard characterization of food or waterborne pathogens in humans or animals. The document drafted during this workshop was reviewed at a series of expert meetings concerned with food and water safety, including: · · Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Assessment of Microbiological Hazards in Foods, FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy, 17­21 July 2000. WHO Meeting on Effective Approaches to Regulating Microbiological Drinking Water Quality, Glenelg, Adelaide, Australia, 14­18 May 2001.
A subsequent draft of the guidelines, incorporating these comments, was posted on the FAO and WHO Web sites, with a request for public comments. The draft guidelines were also circulated for peer review. The guidelines were then finalized, taking into consideration all comments received. These guidelines have been written for an informed audience, and may be used in different contexts. In an international context, the guidelines will provide guidance for hazard characterizations conducted by the Ad hoc Joint Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment and in the development of the WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (GDWQ). At the national level, they will provide guidance for hazard characterizations conducted for government and regulatory authorities.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization would like to express their appreciation to all those who contributed to the preparation of this document through the provision of their time and expertize, data and other relevant information and by reviewing the document and providing comments.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World health Organization nor of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The designations "developed" and "developing" economies are intended for statistical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgement about the stage reached by a particular country, country territory or area in the development process. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the World Health Organization nor of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations nor of their affiliated organization(s). The World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations do not warrant that the information contained in this publication is complete and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use.
Responsible technical units:.
Food Quality and Standards Service Food and Nutrition Division Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food Safety Department World Health Organization.
CONTRIBUTORS.
PARTICIPANTS AT THE BILTHOVEN WORKSHOP Robert L. Buchanan James D. Campbell Cynthia L. Chappel Eric D. Ebel Paul Gale Charles N. Haas Arie H. Havelaar Jaap Jansen Louise Kelly Anna Lammerding Roland Lindqvist Christine Moe Roberta A. Morales Mark Powell Stephen Schaub Wout Slob Mary Alice Smith Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, United States Food and Drug Administration, United States of America. Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, United States of America. Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Texas School of Public Health, United States of America. United States Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service, United States of America. The National Centre for Environmental Toxicology, United Kingdom. Drexel University, School of Environmental Engineering and Policy, United States of America. WHO Collaborating Centre for Food Safety, National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. Inspectorate for Health Protection, Commodities and Veterinary Public Health, the Netherlands. Department of Risk Research, Veterinary Laboratories Agency, United Kingdom. Microbial Food Safety, Risk Assessment, Health Canada, Canada. National Food Administration, Sweden. Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, United States of America. Research Triangle Institute, United States of America. United States Department of Agriculture, United States of America. United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States of America. National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. University of Georgia, United States of America.
Peter F.M. Teunis Sue Ferenc Jocelyne Rocourt Johan Garssen Fumiko Kasuga Katsuhisa Takumi Andrea S. Vicari REVIEWERS Robert L. Buchanan Charles N. Haas Georg Kapperud Joan B. Rose Robert V. Tauxe Mark D. Sobsey Peter F.M. Teunis Desmond Till.
National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) Risk Science Institute, United States of America. Laboratoire des Listeria, Institut Pasteur, France. National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Japan. National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. North Carolina State University, United States of America. Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, United States Food and Drug Administration, United States of America. Drexel University, United States of America. National Institute of Public Health, Norway. College of Marine Sciences, University of South Florida, United States of America. Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States of America. Division of Environmental Science and Engineering, University of North Carolina, United States of America. National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands. Institute of Environmental Science & Research Ltd, Porirua, New Zealand.
TECHNICAL COORDINATOR Arie H. Havelaar WHO Collaborating Centre for Food Safety, National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, the Netherlands THE JOINT FAO/WHO SECRETARIAT ON RISK ASSESSMENT OF MICROBIOLOGICAL HAZARDS IN FOODS Jamie Bartram Peter Karim Ben Embarek Sarah Cahill Maria de Lourdes Costarrica Françoise Fontannaz Allan Hogue Jean-Louis Jouve Hector Lupin Jocelyne Rocourt Jørgen Schlundt Hajime Toyofuku TECHNICAL LANGUAGE EDITING Thorgeir Lawrence, Iceland WHO WHO FAO FAO WHO WHO (until July 2001) FAO (from June 2001) FAO WHO (from January 2001) WHO WHO.
Hazard characterization for pathogens in food and water.
INTRODUCTION.
1.1 BACKGROUND.
Microbiological risk assessment (MRA) is an emerging tool for the evaluation of the safety of food and water supplies. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have a central role in developing and standardizing MRA at an international level, to inform risk management at both national and international levels. Elaboration of guidelines, such as these on Hazard Characterization for Pathogens in Food and Water, are important in achieving these tasks. The guidelines are primarily intended for a multidisciplinary audience, directly involved in developing and reviewing MRA documents at an international or national level. They will also be of use to risk managers who base their decisions on the risk assessment results, and need to be aware of the underlying principles and assumptions behind these assessments. Hazard characterizations of microbiological pathogens in food and water are considered together in this document because the two cannot be effectively managed or understood in isolation from one another, despite historical differences in approaches. Water is both an ingredient of foodstuffs and an independent vehicle for human exposure to microbiological hazards through drinking, recreational activities or contact with aerosols. Pathways for human exposure to pathogens may involve both food and water, as illustrated in recent illness outbreaks resulting from wastewater re-use in the irrigation of fruits and vegetables. Reducing the public health impact of pathogens requires an understanding of the contributions of all primary routes of exposure. The use of a common approach for the characterization of microbiological hazards in food and water will foster this understanding, assist effective risk analysis and improve the protection of public health. Ad hoc Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment (JEMRA) conduct risk assessments of foodborne microbiological hazards at the international level. Risk management responsibilities for food in international trade are generally assigned to Codex Alimentarius Committees. JEMRA aims to provide a scientific basis for the relevant risk management deliberations of the Codex Alimentarius, whose purpose is to develop food standards, guidelines and related texts aimed at protecting consumer health and ensuring food fair trade practices. The JEMRA risk assessment reports also provide risk assessment information to FAO, WHO and Codex member countries. International guidance on water quality and human health is provided by WHO through a series of guidelines. These include Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (GDWQ), Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater and Excreta in Agriculture and Aquaculture, and Guidelines for Safe Recreational Water Environments. These guidelines are based upon critical review of the best available scientific evidence and consensus, and derived by integrating information concerning adverse health effects with information concerning the effectiveness of safeguards under both normal and stressed conditions of operation (Fewtrell and Bartram, 2001). Their outputs are generalized standards for safety management that may include guidance both for good practice and for verifications (both analytical and inspection-.
Introduction.
based). These may then be adapted to take account of social, economic and environmental factors at local or national levels. Consequently, these guidelines provide the scientific basis for risk management activities of national and local policy-makers, assist in setting standards, and provide an international point of reference for the evaluation of water safety.
1.2 HAZARD CHARACTERIZATION IN CONTEXT.
Risk analysis is a process comprising: risk assessment ­ the scientific evaluation of known or potential adverse health effects; risk management ­ evaluating, selecting and implementing policy alternatives; and risk communication ­ exchange of information amongst all interested parties. Although functional separation between these three components is important, there is increasing recognition of the necessity for interaction between them (FAO/WHO, 2002b; WHO, 2000b).
Hazard Identification.
Hazard Characterization.
Exposure Assessment.
Risk Characterization.
Figure.
Components of a microbiological risk assessment.
Risk assessment for microbiological hazards in foods is defined by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) as a scientifically based process consisting of four components (Figure 1): hazard identification, exposure assessment, hazard characterization, and risk characterization. · Hazard identification is predominantly a qualitative process intended to identify microorganisms or microbial toxins of concern in food or water. It can include information on the hazard of concern as well as relevant related data, such as clinical and surveillance data. Exposure assessment should provide an estimate, with associated uncertainty, of the occurrence and level of the pathogen in a specified portion of food at the time of consumption, or in a specified volume of water using a production-to-.
consumption approach. While a mean value may be used, more accurate estimates will include an estimate of the distribution of exposures. This will typically include identification of the annual food and water consumption frequencies and weights or volumes for a given population or subpopulations(s), and should combine the information to estimate the population exposure to pathogens through a certain food or water commodity. · Hazard characterization provides a description of the adverse health effects that may result from ingestion of a microorganism. When data are available, the hazard characterization should present quantitative information in terms of a doseresponse relationship and the probability of adverse outcomes. Risk characterization is the integration of the three previous steps to obtain a risk estimate (i.e. an estimate of the likelihood and severity of the adverse health effects that would occur in a given population, with associated uncertainties).
The goal of a risk assessment may be to provide an estimate of the level of illness from a pathogen in a given population, but may also be limited to evaluation of one or several step(s) in a food production or processing system. When requesting a risk assessment, the risk manager should be specific with regard to the problem with which the risk manager needs to deal, the questions to be addressed by the risk assessment, and an indication of the measures the manager would consider or has available for the reduction of illness.
1.3 PURPOSE OF THE GUIDELINES.
This present document is intended to provide a practical framework and a structured approach for the characterization of microbiological hazards, either in the context of a full microbiological risk assessment or as a stand-alone process. It is aimed at assisting governmental and research scientists to identify the points to be addressed, the methodology for incorporating data from different sources, and the methodology of dose-response modelling. These guidelines are not a comprehensive source of information for hazard characterization. The expertize required spans several scientific disciplines, and a multidisciplinary team is essential to the endeavour. The issues involved are complex, in particular the methodology for dose-response modelling. Rather than specifying technical details, which are evolving at a rapid pace, reference is made to additional sources of information where appropriate. Modelling decisions may require consultation with experienced statisticians, mathematicians or experts in other scientific disciplines. These guidelines are not intended to be prescriptive, nor do they identify pre-selected, compelling options. On some issues, an approach is advocated based on a consensus view of experts (e.g. the single-hit theory, bias-neutral approach to modelling ­ see Section 6.3.1) to provide guidance on the current science in hazard characterization. On other issues, the available options are compared and the decision on the approach appropriate to the situation is left to the analyst. In both of these situations, transparency requires that the approach and the supporting rationale be documented in the hazard characterization.
In the case of a hazard characterization conducted as a part of a complete risk assessment of pathogens in the food chain, the documentation developed by Codex Alimentarius on MRA provides the needed context. These present guidelines are intended to complement and provide additional detail to Codex documents, which provide more general guidance on MRA (e.g. CAC, 1999) In the case of a hazard characterization conducted as a part of a complete risk assessment of pathogens in drinking water, GDWQ and the supporting background documents provide the necessary context. In addition they provide information on the role of hazard characterization in the derivation of health-based targets for drinking-water quality.
These guidelines are limited to hazard characterization, considered either as a stand-alone process or as a component of MRA. They primarily address the effects on individual hosts of exposure to microbial pathogens. They do not consider the accumulation of individual risks over a population, nor risks of secondary transmission or the dynamic aspects thereof. These are elements of the risk characterization process. These guidelines are limited to a consideration of the science of hazard characterization. No attempt is made to address risk management or risk communication issues, except to describe the interactions necessary to maximize the utility of the hazard characterization exercise (e.g. data collection, questions that need resolution, presentation of hazard characterization results). Issues related to establishing an appropriate level of protection are considered to be within the scope of risk management, and are not considered herein. These guidelines are for the application of hazard characterization to microbial hazards in water and food. To date, most work has been aimed at pathogenic bacteria and viruses, and some parasitic protozoa. The principles outlined here, and in particular the descriptive methods, may also be applicable to other effects of single exposures to microorganisms or their toxins, including sequelae and chronic infections, such as by Helicobacter pylori. Effects of chronic exposure (e.g. to mycotoxins or algal toxins) may require another approach, which is more related to hazard characterization of toxic chemicals. These guidelines focus on the adverse impact of a hazard as a result of ingestion of contaminated food and water. The adverse health effects that may occur as a result of exposure via other routes (e.g. through inhalation exposure) are not explicitly considered, but the basic principles outlined here might also be appropriate for characterizing alternative routes of exposure.
2.1 CONTEXT.
Hazard characterizations can be conducted as stand-alone processes or as component of risk assessment. A hazard characterization for a particular pathogen may serve as a common module or building block for risk assessments conducted for a variety of purposes and in an assortment of commodities. A hazard characterization developed in one country may serve the needs of risk managers in another country when combined with an exposure assessment specific to that country. A hazard characterization developed for water exposure may be adapted to a food exposure scenario by taking into consideration the food matrix effects. In general, hazard characterizations are fairly adaptable between risk assessments for the same pathogen. At the same time, exposure assessments are highly specific to the production, processing and consumption patterns within a country or region. Hazard characterization, either as part of a risk assessment or as a stand-alone process, is iterative. Frequently the lessons learned lead to refinement of the initial question (or problem statement), leading in turn to further analysis. These guidelines for the characterization of hazards in food and water follow a structured, six-step approach, as outlined in Figure 2 and described in detail in subsequent chapters.
Process Initiation.
Data Collection and Evaluation.
Descriptive Characterization.
Dose- Response Modeling.
Presentation of Results.
Figure.
Process flow diagram for hazard characterization of pathogens.
The process of hazard characterization.
2.2 PRINCIPLES.
Risk assessment and hazard characterization for microbial hazards should provide risk managers with a "best estimate" of the risk and the dose-response relationship, as free from bias as possible. Worst-case scenarios and deliberately conservative estimates reduce the utility of the risk estimate for cost­benefit or cost­effectiveness studies and decrease our ability to describe the uncertainty of the risk estimates. Uncertainty and variability should be tracked through the model to the extent possible, and included in the final estimate. Independence and separation of hazard characterization from risk management are essential principles. Nevertheless, interaction between managers and assessors is also necessary to ensure the utility of the product to policy-makers and to ensure that the risk managers understand the principles and assumptions underlying the hazard characterization. Transparency in hazard characterization requires full documentation of the process, including sources of data and their evaluation, and any assumptions made.
PROCESS INITIATION.
Before beginning a risk assessment, the purpose and scope are established (i.e. problem formulation), but it may be useful to revisit these at the initiation of the hazard characterization step. The knowledge gained in previous work may, for example, indicate the need to refine the initial scope. That refinement often requires interaction with the risk managers to ensure that changes in the scope do not affect the utility of the final results. The initiation of a hazard characterization requires a systematic planning stage to identify the context, purpose, scope and focus of the study to be carried out. Risk assessors should consider aspects of the pathogen, host, and food­water matrix (Figure 3).
Figure.
The epidemiology triangle (modified from Coleman and Marks, 1998).
Addressing the following list of questions may help structure or refine the problem under consideration: · · · · What are the characteristics of the pathogen that affect its ability to cause disease in the host (e.g. infectivity, pathogenicity, virulence)? What adverse health effects may be associated with exposure to the pathogen (from mild and self-limiting symptoms, to life-threatening conditions)? Who is susceptible to infection (individual/subpopulation/population)? What are the characteristics of the exposed population that may affect its susceptibility (age, immune status, concurrent illness, medical treatment, genetic background, pregnancy, nutritional status, social status, behavioural traits)? How frequently does infection give rise to clinical disease? What are the short- and long-term consequences (morbidity, mortality, sequelae, years of life lost, impairment of quality of life)? What are the most important routes of transmission?.
Process initiation.
How does the response of the organism to environmental stress (heat, drying, pH, etc.) affect its ability to cause infection and illness? How does the matrix (food or water) affect the ability of the organism to cause infection and illness? Are multiple exposures independent or is some form of immune response likely?.
In addition to the above parameters, it may be appropriate to include consideration of certain possible prevention or protection strategies, or both, such as immunization of a population against hepatitis A or typhoid fever. These structuring questions need to be considered prior to the onset of hazard characterization. They are best formulated following a communication process between the assessors and the users of the hazard characterization results (risk managers). These questions will orient the collection, collation and ev