EIFAC Occasional Paper No. 36.
ISSN 0258-6096.
EUROPEAN INLAND FISHERIES ADVISORY COMMISSION INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE EXPLORATION OF THE SEA.
Report of the thirteenth session of the.
JOINT EIFAC/ICES WORKING GROUP ON EELS.
Copenhagen, Denmark, 28-31 August 2001.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the thirteenth session of the JOINT EIFAC/ICES WORKING GROUP ON EELS Copenhagen, Denmark, 28-31 August 2001.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104941-6.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2003.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This report summarizes the presentations, discussions and recommendations of the Thirteenth Session of the Joint EIFAC/ICES Working Group on Eels, which took place in Copenhagen, Denmark, from 28 to 31 August 2001.
FAO European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission; International Council for the Exploration of the Sea Report of the thirteenth session of the Joint EIFAC/ICES Working Group on Eels. Copenhagen, Denmark, 28-31 August 2001. EIFAC Occasional Paper. No. 36. Rome, FAO. 2003. 62pp. ABSTRACT The EIFAC/ICES Working Group on Eels met at ICES headquarters, from 2831 August 2001, to finish the work initiated at its 1999 meeting on defining biological reference points for European eel management use. The review of available information revealed that the European eel stock is in decline and that fisheries is outside safe biological limits. Anthropogenic factors (exploitation, habitat loss, increased predation, contamination and transfer of parasites and diseases) as well as natural processes (climate change) have contributed to the decline. Latest recruitment data (spring 2001) indicated a further deterioration of the status of the stock. As management at local level has failed to address the global decline of the stock, the implementation of an international stock recovery plan is of utmost urgency. The Working Group recommended that an international commission for the management of the European eel stock be formed, to organize monitoring and research on eel stocks and fisheries, and to serve as a clearing house for regular exchange of information regarding landings and resource status.
Distribution: ICES Participants to the Working Group FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fishery Officers EIFAC Mailing List.
1 1 INTRODUCTION.
At the 87th Statutory Meeting of ICES (2000) and at the 21st meeting of the EIFAC in Budapest, Hungary, it was decided that: The EIFAC/ICES Working Group on Eels {WGEEL} (Chair: W. Dekker, Netherlands) will meet at ICES Headquarters, from 28-31 August 2001 to finish the work initiated at its 1999 meeting on defining biological reference points for European eel management use. The Group should address the following terms of reference · In response to the 1998 EC request on providing escapement targets and other biological reference points on European eel for management use the Group should: a) assess trends in recruitment and their causes and the effects on stock and yield of the species; b) investigate the impact of fisheries on spawner escapement in selected systems; c) define relevant units where escapement targets would be applicable; d) where information warrants, propose preliminary biologically-based escapement goals for selected systems; · · propose management actions leading to the required escapement; report progress in work on improvements in the scientific basis for advice on management of European eel fisheries; inter alia on a) development of harvest rate models for eel fisheries in data-rich systems; b) assessment of density-dependent processes (growth and mortality) and their impact on spawner escapement; c) development of reference points for management use in data-poor systems; d) developments of procedures to verify effects of eel fisheries management measures, in data-rich and data-poor systems; e) assessment of the (positive) impacts of management measures not directly related to exploitation, e.g. fish passes, habitat improvement, re-stocking, etc. Nineteen experts attended the meeting, representing ten countries. Additionally, ICES and EIFAC officers participated. The list of participants is given in the Appendix. During the meeting of the Working Group, it was felt that ongoing management and research of eel necessitated consideration of some major issues that were not fully included in the Terms of Reference. It was decided not to exclude these items from the discussions and consequently this report also contains some discussion not directly related to the TORs. This applies in particular to management of eel stocks by measures other than regulation of exploitation, i.e. management of other anthropogenic impacts and by re-stocking. The structure of the report essentially follows the Terms of Reference for the meeting, with additional sections on issues not related to exploitation inserted where appropriate. 2 2.1 2.1.1 TRENDS IN RECRUITMENT, FISHERY YIELD AND IMPACT FACTORS Trends in recruitment Recruitment data series.
There are relatively few data sets which provide information on the recruitment of the European eel and these do not always adequately describe the size or pigment stages (glass eel or elver) of the recruitment material. Available time-series from 19 river catchments in 12 countries were examined for trends (Table I). The data analysed were derived from both.
2 fishery-dependent sources (i.e. catch records) and fishery-independent surveys across much of the geographic range of the European eel, and cover varying time intervals. Trends were examined over the entire duration for which data were available, in particular for the period after 1980, to investigate more recent possible changes. The sources of the data are clearly differentiated in Table I. No upward trends were observed in any of these European data sets. Over the last two decades of all time-series, downward trends were evident, reflecting the rapid decrease after the high levels of the 1970s. Over the 1980s, the trend was downwards with the exception of the Erne in north-western Ireland in which no trend was apparent. In the 1990s most series have shown fairly stable low levels. The recent years show a continued decrease and the 2001 level is the lowest on record for all series where data has been reported.
10 Viskan (S) Bann (N.Irl) DenOever (NL) 1 1950 1960 Ems (D) Erne (Irl/N.Irl) Vilaine (F) 1970 1980 1990 2000.
Figure.
Time-series of glass-eel monitoring in European rivers, for which data series extend to 2001. Each series has been scaled to the 1979-1994 average. 2.1.2 Causes of the decline in recruitment.
Several explanations have been put forward for the observed decline. As the timing and extent of the decline varies substantially ­ with a major decrease of recruitment in the Scandinavian area starting as early as in the forties and fifties whereas most continental monitoring stations see the largest decline in the eighties ­ it is unlikely that a single factor can explain everything. The present knowledge is not sufficient to decide between the alternative explanations and the following is a listing of hypotheses without any judgements of their relative merits.
3 A basic division is into anthropogenic and natural causes. For the latter the main hypothesis is a connection between the recruitment decline and a decadale scale change in the oceanic circulation (Castonguay et al., 1994). The parallel decline of the recruitment of the American eel in some of it's distribution area, and the correlation between recruitment and the North Atlantic Oscillation Anomaly supports this model (ICES, 2001). Other natural causes that have been discussed are different diseases ­ viral infections or the swimbladder parasite Anguillicola crassus. This parasite spread rapidly in the European eel population in the early eighties. Infection causes swimbladder dysfunction and may impair the migration of mature eels. Predation by the greatly increased European populations of cormorants or other predators has also been discussed. Fishing and habitat loss are the main anthropogenic factors. The impact of the eel fishery is discussed in Chapter.
A large part of the European inland water habitat has been made inaccessible to eels by hydroelectric dams or other obstructions to upstream migration (Chapter 3.3). Even where recruits can pass in eel ladders, or are trapped and transported upstream, the loss of escapement can be substantial due to a high mortality when the silver eels pass through turbines during the downstream migration. In addition to the loss of habitat by obstructions, large areas of wetland have been lost through draining and land reclamation. Even very small streams and ponds are suitable yellow eel habitats. The total change of available inland areas for eel is unknown, the process has occurred gradually, mainly during the second half of the twentieth century. The spread of environmental contaminants may contribute to the recruitment failure. The burden of persistent contaminants in inland and coastal waters has increased both in amount and number during the early period of decline, but during the more recent decline in the eighties the trend has been the reversed. Eels accumulate organochlorines and other fat soluble substances readily, and this may impair the migration and affect the survival of the larvae. A concern expressed more recently is the spread of endocrine disruptors. 2.2 2.2.1 Trends in stock and yield Landings statistics.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, Rome, Italy) maintains a database of fishing yields. Additionally, the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ICES (Copenhagen, Denmark) maintains a database of landings of marine, Atlantic fishing yields. As the data in the ICES database exclude the major yield from the stock at forehand, i.e. the inland catches, preference was given to the FAO data. Official landing statistics for many countries comprise only about half of the true catches in the 1980s and 1990s (ICES, 1988; Moriarty and Dekker, 1997), because of illegal and unreported catches, as well as lack of coverage of many areas in several countries. However, to some extend trends in the reported data will reflect true changes in fishing yields. FAO eel landing statistics are presented in Table II and Figure.
The data show a clear decrease of yield during the last 20 years in Denmark, Netherlands, Italy, France and Portugal. In Sweden, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom a less pronounced decrease is observed. In Ireland a marked increase in catches has taken place possibly because the eel fishery was developed over this period. In Norway the catches seem to be stable. The FAO catch return data do not necessarily reflect the status of the eel stock. Effort can be variable and underreporting the catches is a serious problem in most countries.
Figure.
Landing statistics of the European eel in the past 50 years, as reported by FAO data base, with minor corrections.
2.2.2 Impact of recruitment decline on stock and yield Impact on glass eel fisheries In England and Wales, only hand-held dip nets are permitted for the capture of glass eels/elvers and fishing is concentrated in areas of high recruitment/easy capture, principally in estuaries of the River Severn and other rivers draining into the Bristol Channel. The number of licenses purchased per year was fairly constant at ~1 000 until 1994, but then rose to a peak at ~2 500 in 1997-98 as catch values increased due to demand for seed stock from new eel farms in China (Figure 3). Licence numbers subsequently declined to <1 500 in 2000 (data not included in Figure 3) as a result of farm-overproduction and imposition of import quotas by the Chinese. Provisional information suggests licence sales in 2001 were particularly low due to restrictions on access to fishing sites because of foot-and-mouth disease regulations. There are few reliable catch records for eel in England and Wales. Catch returns are required from commercial licensees in some areas, but return rates are sometimes low. Commercial catches are commonly believed to be under-reported, as fishermen are reluctant to disclose such information due to perceived income tax implications. Catch data (available returns combined with estimates) have been collated by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) and reported annually (Figure 4). It should be noted that these data are considered to be very incomplete and of variable accuracy, both as a consequence of the factors outlined above and because assessment methods have varied between regions and from year to year. As the great majority of eels caught in England and Wales are exported, estimates of the catch have also been possible from customs and excise export records (Knights et al., 2001). Separating exports of recruits (glass eel and elver) from yellow/silver eels (not readily apparent from customs records) has necessitated estimating the quantities and total values of glass eels on the basis of their relatively much higher value per unit weight. Adjustments have.
5 also had to be made to allow for imports/trans-shipments of glass eels. The customs and excise records have sometimes appeared to be incomplete or erroneous (especially in recent years following liberalization of inter-EU trade). Further complications have arisen from the fact that some exporters have not declared all shipments or the sources of eels. However, despite these caveats, the export data generally provide a reasonable match with the trends in catch data (Figure 4), as well as being in broad agreement with data on recruitment, catches and markets elsewhere in Europe.
3000 2500 No. of nets 2000 1500 1000 500 0 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989.
No. of nets kg/net.
30 25 20 15 10 5 0 kg/net.
Figure.
Glass eel fishing effort (no. of licensed nets) and CPUE (from export data) as kg/net, 1980-1999.
70 60 50 Catch (t) 40 30 20 10 0 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990.
MAFF, etc NETT EXPORTS.
Figure.
Glass eel catches (t) from MAFF/Environment Agency and export data, 1972-2000.
6 Impact on yellow eel fisheries The quality of the eel catch data and the large and varying lag between arrival as glass-eels and recruitment to the fishery makes it difficult to demonstrate a causal link between recruitment and yield in the fisheries statistics. A case where long and relatively good quality data sets exist is the Swedish silver eel fishery in the Baltic (Svärdson, 1976). As an index for the recruitment to the Baltic the monitoring of recruits caught at an eel-ladder in a major river on the Swedish west coast (Göta Älv) has been used. The catch in the Baltic is dominated by females and a typical age at maturing is 15-25 years. Figure 5 shows the two data series. The decrease in recruitment clearly precedes the decrease in catch.
Catch (Baltic) Recruitment (Göta Älv).
Recruitment (kg).
Figure.
Time series of eel catches in the Swedish Baltic, including the Sound, and the recruitment immigration in a river on the Swedish west coast. The scattered points are annual values and the lines show 5 year FFT averages. No correction has been made for changes in fishing effort. Stock in England and Wales The decline in recruitment since 1980 has occurred almost all over the distribution area in synchrony (Dekker, 2000a). In the British Isles, however, the decline was much less pronounced. Additionally, the situation in England and Wales deviates from the remaining areas, in the sense that exploitation of the yellow eel stock is only marginal. Recruitment in England and Wales has declined from peak values in the late 1970s, mirroring the changes seen elsewhere in Europe. Quantitative assessments of changes in eel stocks over the past 20 years have generally been hampered by a lack of robust time-series data. Surveys carried out in 1999 (Knights et al., 2001) on three catchments (Rivers Frome,.
Catch (ton).
7 Piddle and Dee) subject to low levels of exploitation, and for which reliable data from the 1970s and 1980s exist indicated the following: · In the Frome and Piddle there has been a decline in biomass and in density, the decline being greater in terms of biomass. There appears to have been a decline in the number of glass eels entering the rivers as the number of eel < 150 mm is very low. The sex ratio in both rivers has changed from being previously male dominated to one where females now dominate the mature population. In the Dee, there was no indication of a significant change in either density or biomass, nor in the size structure of the population.
Examination of less robust data sets for a number of other rivers, indicated no statistically significant decline in stocks of yellow eels or changes in population structure over the last 20-30 years. However, the absence of widespread detectable changes in yellow eel standing crop/population structure should not lead to an assumption that recruitment is necessarily adequate, as in the majority of instances the programmes were not set up or designed to monitor change. In addition, given the relative longevity of eel, declining recruitment will have a delayed effect on the densities of eel in freshwater systems and the resulting spawner escapement. Thus the recent (and ongoing) decline in recruitment could lead to changes in the future. 2.3 Trends in restocking Data were obtained from a number of countries, separately for glass eels/elvers and for bootlace eels. The size of `bootlace eel' varies between countries. Most data available were on a weight basis. Weights were converted to numbers, using estimates of average individual weights of the eels stocked. These were 3.5 g for Denmark, 33 g for the Netherlands, 20 g for (eastern) Germany, and 50 g for Sweden. An overall number of 3 000 glass eels per kg was applied. Recent time series available were available from (eastern) Germany, Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark and Northern Ireland. For Poland, an older time series was available. These are presented in Tables III and IV. In addition, some anecdotal information on restockings is available. A downward trend in the level of re-stocking glass eels is observed since the early 1980s, down to 15 percent of former level (Figure 6). The level of re-stocking with bootlace eels has increased since then by 250 percent (Figure 7). The combined level of re-stocking (glass eels and bootlace eels) has decreased to 25 percent of the early 1980-level. Data from the Netherlands and Northern Ireland are available on the amount of intra-catchment restocking as compared to inter-catchment stocking (Table V). The percentage of intracatchment stocking in the Netherlands increased in the 1990s to an average of 40.7 percent since 1990. In Northern Ireland the river Erne is re-stocked by intra-catchment transfers only. The percentage of intra-catchment re-stocking in Lough Neagh decreased from the early 1980s, to an average of 84.3 percent since 1990. Re-stockings in the Republic of Ireland are dominated by the Shannon. Intracatchment re-stocking of glass eels and bootlace eels in the river Shannon occur since 1958. The current average rate is 1.2 million recruits per year. The majority of these re-stocked eels are just pigmented. The only data available for France are from the river Rhone. Barral (2001) estimates the total weight of re-stockings in the Rhone since 1978 at 22 000 kg (total over all years), 94 percent from intra-catchment stocking of bootlace eels (mainly 50-100 g) and the remainder.
8 from glass eel stockings from the Atlantic. Probably these Rhone data are underestimated due to incomplete recordings. Ciccotti (1997) describes the re-stockings in Italy, dating from centuries ago in the valli di Commacchio. In 1978-1982 re-stockings amounted to 0.4 million bootlace eel on average, imported from France. From 1990 onwards re-stocking practices have been abandoned. In the whole of Italy on average 35.2 million glass eels were stocked in 19881990. The origin of these glass eels is unknown. Additional stocking of 17.5 t of bootlace eels occurred but there is no information available on the sizes and numbers of these eels. There are no current stockings in England and Wales. Historically these occurred on small scale, probably more than 15 years ago and intra-catchment. Intra-catchment re-stocking of un-specified sizes of eels in Norway have been described for the Imsa river only during 1983-1996. These amounted to 0.2-13 kg and were lower than 1.0 kg since 1994. Re-stocking of eels does not occur in Portugal and Spain.
80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 1945 D east NL S PO N.Irl.
Figure.
Re-stocking of glass eels in the Eastern part of Germany (D east), the Netherlands (NL), Sweden (S), Poland (PO, until 1967) and Northern Ireland (IR North). There is no information on re-stocking available for Western Germany, Belgium, Finland, the remainder of the Baltic states, North-African states and states along the Eastern Mediterranean Sea. Of all these countries where time series are lacking, probably only Italy, Ireland and the Western part of Germany are relevant for the totals. The Italian data in 1988-1990 show a level of re-stocking glass eels/elvers comparable with the cumulated data for Eastern Germany, the Netherlands, Northern Ireland, Denmark and Sweden. Applying the same trend in reduction of re-stocking to the Italian data, and considering that the current re-stockings of glass eels in the remaining countries probably do not exceed 5 million/year, this will give an estimate of the current re-stockings of ca. 30 million glass eels (10 tonnes) per year in Europe.
9 This is considerable less than the 33 tonnes mentioned by Moriarty and Dekker (1997). An unknown percentage of this amount concerns intra-catchment re-stocking but available data suggest that this may be substantial.
D east NL S DK.
Figure.
Numbers of bootlace eels re-stocked in the Eastern part of Germany (D east), the Netherlands (NL), Sweden (S) and Denmark (DK). 2.4 Trends in aquaculture.
Aquaculture of the European eel ranges from highly industrialized, indoor facilities in northern Europe, through extensive culture in artificial ponds in southern Europe, to re-stocking of foreign glass eel in semi-natural outdoor waters for fisheries in northern Europe. All aquaculture fully depends on seed stock derived from the wild population, since artificial reproduction fails in the young larval stage. Additionally, aquaculture plants are used for quarantine of foreign glass eel to be re-stocked in outdoor waters (e.g. Sweden) and transports of half-products in-between aquaculture and fisheries occurs in and between countries (France, Italy). Obviously, the distinction between aquaculture and fisheries is hard to define. For aquaculture production, no consistent long running time series exist. Data are available from FAO, from the Federation of European Aquaculture Producers, from previous meeting of the working group and from Kamstra (1999). An overview of the estimates is compiled in Table VI. In addition to the aquaculture in Europe, Eastern Asia (originally Japan, but recently predominantly China) has a large aquaculture industry, also culturing European eel. Aquaculture of the European eel has started much later than the culture of the Japanese eel. In 1970, the European production was estimated at 3 400 tonnes, while the culture of the Japanese eel amounted 17 000 tonnes. In the early 1970s, European eels were cultured in Japan for a small number of years, with little result (Egusa, 1979). Since the mid-1980s Japanese culture of European eel has risen from 3 000 tonnes to 10 000 tonnes.
nowadays. The European culture of the European eel is now estimated at 10 000 tonnes (Kamstra, 1999). This is to be compared to 40 000 tonnes of Japanese eel being cultured. The aquaculture production in Europe is concentrated in Denmark, the Netherlands and Italy. The aquaculture in Denmark and the Netherlands is technically speaking highly developed and produces an increasing part of the total, while Italy has intensive as well as extensive culture systems, the latter with a declining production. The landings from fisheries reported by FAO have declined from ca. 20 000 tonnes in 1970 to less than 10 000 tonnes nowadays (Section 2.2.1). This has coincided with a rise in European aquaculture production from almost nil in 1970 to 10 000 tonnes nowadays. This suggests that the total production in Europe has remained level. However, fisheries production is known to be almost twice the reported statistics, due to underreporting. Additionally, the rapid expansion of the East Asian production and consumption has resulted in the eel trade now being a global market, in which the apparently level European production is only one of the smaller constituents.
Figure.
Trends in aquaculture production of the European eel.
3 ANTHROPOGENIC IMPACTS ON THE EEL STOCK 3.1 Impact of fisheries on spawner escapement The maturing stages of eel have never been observed in the wild, but are undoubtedly purely oceanic in nature. Escapement of silver eel from the continent provides the best indicator of oceanic spawning stock biomass, but silver eel escaping the continental fisheries are probably more correctly defined as pre-spawners. There are no means available to assess potential losses between silver eel emigrating from freshwater and the oceanic spawning phase in the life cycle. Consequently, discussion will focus on the impact of fisheries on silver eel escapement.
11 The information available with regard to the impact of fisheries on silver eel escapement is very limited relative to the number of fisheries operating and there are few estimates of fishing mortality. Where available, mortality data have been provided, but these are inconsistent; both, instantaneous values and estimated losses over the freshwater phase have been included (see also Knights et al., 2001). The data tend to be restricted to larger intensive fisheries that are not necessarily typical of the overall situation across the range of the species (Dekker, 2000a). These larger fisheries are geographically discrete, with the major glass eel fisheries mainly in the Biscay area and SW England, the freshwater yellow/silver eel fisheries concentrated in mainland Europe and Ireland, and fisheries in the Baltic focussing on silver eel more than elsewhere. The larger fisheries contribute only a small proportion of the total European catch (~5 percent, Dekker, 2000a). It is thus important to recognize that the following examples do not provide full insight into escapement processes of the species over its whole geographic range. 3.1.1 Impacts of emigrant silver eel fisheries on escapement The most significant silver eel fisheries are based in the Baltic (using pound nets and similar passive devices) and in Lough Neagh, N. Ireland (using silver eel traps on the River Bann). A conservative estimate of overall escapement of silver eel from European waters is 553 tonnes (Moriarty and Dekker, 1997), but a Procrustean estimate based on all available evidence amounts to 1753 tonnes (Dekker, 2000c). Although there are no firm data, actual escapement is believed to be high in some river-based silver eel fisheries, due to inherent gear inefficiencies and current management actions to promote escapement (see below). In the Baltic, where silver eel dominates the catches, Wickström and Hamrin (1997) estimated using mark-recapture/mean recapture rates by commercial fishermen of between 35 and 49 percent, but could be as high as 69 to 76 percent. In the western Baltic, Pedersen and Dieperink (2000) reported recaptured rates of Carlin tagged silver eel in three pound net fisheries. Recapture rates varied between 19 and 38 percent and was dependent on the location and size of the fishery. The results indicate a high level of fishing mortality in the Baltic Sea which is further supported by the relatively short time interval between release and recapture of less than 16 days. These fisheries thus exploit the larger, more fecund, females. In addition, there are concerns about the ability of stocked eel to migrate successfully out of the Baltic. The value of the above escapement estimates with regard to ensuring an adequate spawning stock biomass is restricted, due to low geographical coverage. It is impractical to set separate escapement targets for either sex, but it is emphasized that females being larger and older at migration are more vulnerable to capture (and turbine mortality in power stations) than males. Therefore, increased emphasis should be given to protecting females. It seems reasonable to assume that density dependent processes do not operate in the oceanic migration towards the supposed spawning places. As such the percentage decline in silver eel escapement probably produces similar decreases in spawning stock biomass on the spawning grounds. 3.1.2 Impacts of yellow/silver eel fisheries on spawner escapement The major yellow/silver eel fisheries are the Italian lagoons and the fyke net/long-line fisheries of the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark and N.Ireland. There are few reliable data sets with regard to effects on spawner escapement. The Italian lagoon fisheries are mainly closed and stocked systems and escapement can generally be regarded as zero. Estimates for the mortality rate in the IJsselmeer fishery are extremely high (F = 1.0; Dekker, 2000b) and spawner escapement is estimated to be low for males and practically nil for females. Exploitation of yellow eel in Lough Neagh is also high and, although not quantified, escapement of silver eel is assumed to be in the region of 20-25 percent of the yield of the.
12 fishery. These two quantified larger scale fisheries (IJsselmeer and Lough Neagh) constitute a notable part of the total yellow/silver eel fisheries. They cannot be considered to be representative of the multitude of smaller fisheries that make up the rest (Dekker, 2000a), due to highly variable levels of exploitation. Consequently, accurate assessment of the continentwide escapement is unachievable (Dekker, 2000b). Along the west coast of Sweden pound net and fyke net fisheries can be relatively efficient, catching more than 96 percent of the stock between 370 and 650 mm (Svedäng, 1999). The above examples illustrate that yellow eel fisheries can impact upon silver eel escapement. The effect of other yellow eel fisheries on spawner escapement is unknown. However, assessment of lake IJsselmeer fisheries (Dekker, 2000c) suggests that even moderate exploitation of yellow eel results in substantial reduction in silver eel production. Dekker (2000c) showed that if a yellow eel fishery was operating at Fmax (in the case of the IJsselmeer the minimum legal size is 280 mm) then the spawning escapement would be reduced to 10 percent of the unexploited biomass. As such, controlling yellow eel fisheries below their local optimum might be crucial for sustained exploitation of the stock. 3.1.3 Impacts of glass eel fisheries on spawner escapement The reduction in egg deposition as a result of glass eel exploitation will be equivalent to the exploitation rate only if there is no density dependent change in sex ratio, growth, survival or emigration rate of the subsequent life stages. This, however, is not assumed to be the case. The major glass eel fisheries are based on estuaries facing the Atlantic coast of France, Spain, Portugal and south-west England (Bristol Channel