FAO Fisheries Report No.709.
FIDI/R709 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
TWENTIETH SESSION OF THE COORDINATING WORKING PARTY ON FISHERY STATISTICS.
Victoria, Seychelles, 21­24 January 2003.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
FAO Fisheries Report No. 709.
Report of the TWENTIETH SESSION OF THE COORDINATING WORKING PARTY ON FISHERY STATISTICS Victoria, Seychelles, 21­24 January 2003.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-104992-0.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2003.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document is the report of the twentieth session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP), held in Victoria, Seychelles, from 21 to 24 January 2003; it includes the report of the Second FIGIS­FIRMS Ad Hoc Meeting which took place at the same venue on 20 January 2003.
FAO. Report of the twentieth session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics. Victoria, Seychelles, 21­24 January 2003. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 709. Rome, FAO. 2003. 65p.
ABSTRACT The report of the twentieth session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP), Victoria, Seychelles, 21­24 January 2003, is presented. Topics discussed were: changes in membership of CWP; review of recommendations from CWP­19; reports of intersessional meetings; reports on intersessional developments in Agency programmes in fishery statistics; elasmobranch and bycatch statistics; national data collection methodologies and data quality; proposals for an advocacy role for CWP; catch and aquaculture terminology; vessel identifiers; proposed FAO strategy on improving information on status and trends of capture fisheries; a report on the Second FIGIS­FIRMS Ad Hoc Meeting, 20 January 2003, Victoria, Seychelles; STATLANT issues (statistical areas; International Standard Statistical Classification of Fishing Vessels (ISSCFV); socio-economic indicators; environmental sustainability indicators; fishery statistics for Southeast Asia); and the CWP Handbook of Fishery Statistical Standards.
Distribution: FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional and Subregional Fishery Officers FAO Member Countries CWP Members Participants.
CONTENTS Page.
OPENING OF THE SESSION AND ADOPTION OF AGENDA (Agenda item 1).
The Twentieth Session of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP) was held at the International Conference Centre, Victoria, Seychelles, from 21 to 24 January 2003. It was hosted by the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC). Sixteen experts representing the following member organizations participated in CWP­20: · Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR); · Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT); · Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); · Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC); · International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT); · International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES); · Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO); · Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC); and · Statistical Office of the European Communities (EU/Eurostat). Two experts from the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC) participated as nominees of FAO and two national experts from Ghana and Seychelles participated as nominees of FAO and IOTC respectively. An expert from Institut de Recherches pour le Développement (IRD), France also participated as an IOTC nominee. A consultant expert also participated at the invitation of FAO. The list of Participants is given in Appendix.
2. The Chairperson of the Nineteenth Session, Mr Tim Lawson of SPC, opened the Twentieth Session and invited Mr David Ardill, Secretary of IOTC, to make an opening statement to the meeting. Mr Ardill welcomed participants to the Seychelles. A particular welcome was extended to SEAFDEC. He outlined the broadening role of the CWP in facilitating and supporting the development of fisheries statistics activities and organizations on a global basis and across the world's oceans. He emphasized its fundamental role in terms of setting and agreeing standards, nomenclature and dataset harmonization. On invitation, Mr Randolph Payet, General Manager of the Seychelles Fisheries Authority welcomed the CWP to Seychelles and noted its particular importance in the development of common standards, especially for assisting in the sustainable management of fisheries and in enhancing the better management of national fisheries agencies.
Eurostat opened discussion of the proposed agenda and noted the importance of CWP in assisting member organizations to develop and maintain socio-economic, environmental and sustainability indicators, and to address the issue of aquaculture terminology. Along with these suggestions, other participants brought additional issues to the attention of the meeting and the agenda was appropriately modified and adopted (Appendix 2), and would include consideration of the results of the workshop addressing FIGIS­FIRMS progress and future which was held at the same venue on 20 January 2003. The documents provided to the session are listed in Appendix 3 and the acronyms used in this report are listed in Appendix 4.
APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON (Agenda item 2).
Mr David Ardill (IOTC) was unanimously elected Chairperson and Mr Hans Lassen (ICES) was unanimously elected Vice-Chairperson for the Twentieth Session of CWP and for the following intersessional period. Mr Ardill thanked Mr Tim Lawson and Mr David Cross for their contributions as Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, respectively, of the Nineteenth Session and intersessional period, and this was endorsed by the participants.
Mr David Evans was appointed as principal rapporteur, with various participants contributing drafts for individual agenda items. CHANGES IN MEMBERSHIP OF THE CWP (Agenda item 3; Document CWP­20/3).
There have been no changes in membership during the INTERSESSIONAL period since CWP­19. In accordance with sentiments expressed at CWP­19, the South-East Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) was invited by FAO to participate in CWP­20, as SEAFDEC had expressed interest at CWP­19 in joining the CWP. REVIEW OF RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CWP­19 (Agenda item 4; Document CWP­20/4, CWP­19 Report Paragraphs identified).
The meeting reviewed progress concerning recommendations from CWP­19 and discussed the following key issues; · Trade Classifications (para 8) and the elimination of data discrepancies (para 9): Efforts have been made to develop a proposal for a more detailed fishery commodity classification for presentation to the World Customs Organization (WCO). Investigations of discrepancies among trade statistics compiled by Eurostat, FAO and OECD have taken place. · High Seas Vessel Authorization Record (paras 18, 150, 152): A database of vessels authorized to fish on the high seas containing 6443 records from 17 countries has been released by FAO under restricted access, including access to regional fishery bodies. Detailed proposals have been prepared to a) improve vessel identification and information exchange, b) provide topic trees for structuring and exchange of vessel records and c) for workflow scenarios. · FIGIS­FIRMS development (para 20): Extensive progress has been made in developing the FIRMS system and the FIRMS partnership framework, including that reported under agenda item 13 of CWP­20. · CWP Newsletter (para 108): Eurostat has continued to edit the Newsletter and it has been made available from the CWP website (www.cwpnet.org). · Intensification of elasmobranch reporting, species of special interest or nontarget (paras 120, 121): There has been some recent improvement in reporting of elasmobranch catch statistics and new identification guides have been produced (see under agenda item 7 of CWP­20). · ISIC, ISSCFV, ISSCAAP and the ASFIS species list (paras 156, 159, 162, 165, 172, 173): The revisions to the ISSCAAP species classification recommended by CWP­19 have been implemented in the FAO databases, the ASFIS species.
list and publications. Further proposals were developed for revision of the ISSCFV fishing vessel classification, which will be considered by FAO. · Statistical methodologies distribution and FIGIS availability (para187): FAO has developed a template for recording methodological meta data for this purpose and it has been successfully tested with nine data sets. It is available on the web and FAO has requested that CWP agencies evaluate it in order that a standard with meta data definitions can be agreed. · Advocacy and quality of fisheries statistics (para 190): A study of possible future advocacy roles for the CWP in relation to statistical development was undertaken and was presented to the CWP in document CWP­20/5.
CWP noted that considerable progress had been made in follow-up to most of its recommendations from CWP­19.
Details of the follow-up to recommendations and other items requiring action from CWP­19 are fully described in Appendix.
REPORTS OF INTERSESSIONAL MEETINGS OF INTEREST TO CWP (Agenda item 5; Documents CWP­20/2(A­B)) Report of the CWP­ISM, 21­22 March 2002, Rome, Italy 10. An intersessional meeting of the secretariats of CWP agencies was held at FAO on 21­22 March 2002 and the report was published (see CWP­20/2(A)). The CWP­ ISM meeting reviewed: · the Partnership Agreements for participation in FIGIS­FIRMS, · the Proposed IPOA on Status and Trends reporting, · the advocacy role of the CWP, · the recommendations of CWP­19, in particular important current and future statistical issues were generally discussed, including o trade discrepancies o Elasmobranch data o integrated catch data files o ISSCFV o ISSCAAP o description of national statistical methodologies o CWP Handbook of Fisheries Statistical Standards o status of catch discrepancy detection exercises o coordination of statistical programmes on socio-economic indicators o aquaculture o CWP newsletter o trade nomenclatures o vessel information and vessel identifiers o data collection standards o catch and trade certification.
Report of the FIGIS­FIRMS Methodological Workshop, 1­5 July 2002, Rome Italy 11. CWP reviewed the Report of the Workshop (Document CWP­20/2(B)) which had agreed on the importance of: · · · · the international context of FIGIS­FIRMS; participation and strategic issues; definitions, conceptual design, and development of standards (including metadata); and the results of valuable working group sessions on standardized inventories and the harmonization of information structures.
12. Participants agreed the value of intersessional meetings to address issues relating to progress on recommendations and in preparing the agenda for principal CWP meetings. 13. In the ensuing discussion, FAO informed the meeting of further development of the metadata issue the results of which are now available on the web site, called the FIMES (Fisheries Metadata Element Set) (http://www.fao.org/fi/figis/devcon/index.html). The meeting also learned that the OECD has been working on the metadata standards issue. 14. SEAFDEC noted the high proportion of world catch attributable to developing country fisheries and, in particular, the importance and significance of small-scale fisheries, inland fisheries and aquaculture and stressed the importance of promoting the adoption of statistical standards in these countries through FIGIS. 15. CWP noted that working definitions of data standards which are utilized must take into account related standards already established (e.g. accepted standards for fishing vessels adopted by IMO). INTERSESSIONAL DEVELOPMENTS IN AGENCY PROGRAMMES IN FISHERY STATISTICS (Agenda item 6; Documents CWP/20 Agency Reports) 16. The meeting reviewed and discussed comprehensive member agency reports and one observer agency report provided in agency papers (Appendix 3) and presented to the meeting. intersessional developments for each agency are summarized in Appendix.
ELASMOBRANCH AND BYCATCH SPECIES STATISTICS (Agenda item 7). 17. CWP noted that a number of its agencies had further developed their data collection for elasmobranchs and, in some cases, other bycatch species. 18. NAFO hosted a symposium on "Elasmobranch Fisheries: Managing for Sustainable Use and Biodiversity Conservation" in September 2002. The Symposium was attended by participants from 22 countries, and presentations highlighted the importance of elasmobranchs and their fisheries worldwide. A summary of the discussions is on the NAFO website and the proceedings will be published in the NAFO Journal of Northwest Atlantic Fishery Science (expected by early­2004). An identification chart was developed for use on board the vessels and is now also available on the web. In addition NAFO's Scientific Council had agreed that.
improved catch statistics were required to monitor the wolffish catches and Contracting Parties were requested to report the catches of wolffish by species. An identification guide was issued for use on board vessels. 19. IOTC noted that the statistics of elasmobranches and other species usually making up the bycatch of tuna fisheries collated by the IOTC Secretariat are highly incomplete and inaccurate, mainly due to underreporting and aggregation. The collection of bycatch data through the IOTC Sampling Programmes continued during the intersessional period. The recent creation of a Working Party on Bycatch, resulting from a Recommendation by the Scientific Committee in 2002, with priority given to shark statistics, can help to assess this issue in the future. Predation of longline-caught fish by sharks and cetaceans was a common occurrence, and a working party is examining ways to improve the collection of such data. 20. FAO reported that recent initiatives and the growing awareness on the needs of better elasmobranch data, stimulated by the International Plan of Action on sharks, have yielded more detailed statistics. A greater number of countries has been reporting elasmobranch capture statistics with a good breakdown by species, some of which only reported aggregated data in the past. 21. FAO had published Volume II of the revised and expanded version of the catalogue "Sharks of the World". Completion of the two other volumes is expected by the end of 2003 or early 2004. Overall, the new catalogue will contain 480 species, about 140 more than the previous version of the catalogue published in 1984. Volume II is available on the Internet (ftp://ftp.fao.org/fi/document/sidp/x9293E_SharksVol2/ X9293E00.pdf). 22. In addition, the "Field Guide of Elasmobranchs of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden" and the "Field Guide of Elasmobranchs of the Mediterranean and Black Sea" are also expected to be released by FAO in 2003. The preparatory work for a "Catalogue of batoids of the world" has started following a meeting with leading taxonomists in March 2002. This catalogue will include over 600 species and comprise five volumes, releases of which are expected between 2004 and 2009. 23. SPC reported that observer data that can be used to estimate elasmobranch catch rates have been compiled by the OFP for longline and purse seine; however, the coverage rates are less than 1 percent for longline and less than 3 percent for purse seine. This level of coverage is considered insufficient to reliably estimate annual catches of elasmobranchs in the WCPO. Further, most tuna fishery catch and effort logsheets that are currently used in the SPC region do not allow the collection of elasmobranch catch data by species due to lack of space. In order to better monitor the catches of major non-target species (such as sharks) and species of special interest (such as turtles, marine mammals and seabirds), the SPC/FFA Data Collection Committee has developed a longline logbook that will contain detailed information on pelagic sharks. The logbook will be tested in the near future. 24. CCAMLR has published a set of species identification sheets to assist scientific observers in making accurate identification of as many species as possible that appear in longline and trawl catches. In addition, a book `Identification of Seabirds of the Southern Ocean' was published jointly by CCAMLR and New Zealand in 1999. In.
both documents, the aim has been to compress as much information into a simple field guide that will allow observers to identify most species as quickly as possible. 25. Data on bycatch taken in fisheries in the Southern Ocean are collected by Flag States and scientific observers. These data are routinely assessed by CCAMLR, and further work is underway to improve the quality of these datasets. 26. ICCAT held a workshop in 2001 to evaluate the availability of data for shark species. On the basis of this workshop, assessments for two species ­ blue shark and shortfin mako shark ­ have been scheduled for 2004. Work on integrating shark data into the ICCAT database is still underway. In addition, ICCAT had recommended further coordination and collaboration with other international organizations, especially ICES and GFCM for the assessment of Atlantic and Mediterranean stocks of porbeagle, blue and shortfin mako sharks. 27. There is no consensus within CCSBT on reporting of bycatches by its Members. However, considerable discussion on bycatch reporting is likely to occur at the next meeting of CCSBT's Ecologically Related Species Working Group. The standards for the new SBT Scientific Observer program will include a listing of data collection priorities for non-SBT catches, but discussion of the actual priorities is still underway. In addition, CCSBT is currently developing education pamphlets for the SBT fleet, in relation to seabirds and seabird catch mitigation, and shark identification. 28. SEAFDEC reported that shark fins were an important commodity within ASEAN countries, and there was a need to develop fin identification techniques based on microscopic examination or DNA analysis. SEAFDEC has been promoting the implementation of national plans of action under the International Plan of Action on Sharks, especially to accommodate major shark species into the species classifications of member countries' national fisheries statistics through various means. 29. An EC funded project (DEASS) on the assessment of elasmobranch species has been coordinated through ICES and is near completion. 30. CWP welcomed the preparation of more field guides for the identification of elasmobranchs and agreed that further practical field guides were required to allow the at-sea identification of sharks based on fins and other body parts, which are often the only parts landed. 31. CCAMLR has approached some CWP Members for information on incidental catches of Southern Ocean seabirds and other species arising from fishing in areas adjacent to CCAMLR's Convention Area. CWP urged Members to provide such information. In addition, CWP Members were encouraged to consider ways of improving and standardising the reporting of bycatch of non-fish species (e.g. seabirds, turtles).
NATIONAL DATA COLLECTION METHODOLOGIES AND DATA QUALITY CRITERIA AND INDICATORS (Agenda item 8; Documents CWP­20/FAO) 32. Eurostat drew attention to methodological reports published by Eurostat on the methodologies used by EU Member States and Candidate Countries in collecting and compiling statistics on catches, landings and aquaculture production. These were submitted by the national authorities under the terms of the relevant EU legislation and are being revised as necessary. Eurostat has also compiled reports on the quality of fishery statistics. These resulted from assessments by Eurostat of the collection and compilation of the fishery data by the national authorities and of the methods of processing and dissemination of the data by Eurostat. They were presented to Eurostat's Working Group "Fishery Statistics" and it is Eurostat's intention that updated reports should be periodically reviewed by the Working Group. 33. FAO briefly illustrated the Agricultural Bulletin Board on Data Collection, Dissemination and Quality of Statistics (ABCDQ) project that is presently under development by the FAO Statistical Division. The web page of the project (http://faostat.fao.org/abcdq/) provides information on the sources and methods of national agriculture data collection and dissemination and on their quality. Quality is defined by the project as Relevance, Accuracy, Timeliness and Punctuality, Accessibility and Clarity, Comparability, Coherence and Completeness, and sound Meta Information. FAO presented a sample of the FIGIS template designed to host the descriptions of the FAO fishery statistics databases. 34. In 2001, ICCAT distributed among contracting parties a questionnaire on data collection systems. Responses to this survey continue to be collected. A summary of the responses received was included in the ICCAT agency report. In the IOTC database, different sources are flagged for their quality although it is often not easy to rank them. The criteria used by IOTC in the assignment of the quality codes are shown in Appendix II of the agency report to CWP­20. 35. CWP recognized that methodological descriptions of national fishery statistics programmes provide very useful indications of statistical quality and recommended that such descriptions be collated and made available by CWP agencies as far as possible. 36. A beta version of the developing new FISHSTAT Plus (version 3.0) was presented by FAO. In this new version, data are imported from a XML format that allows compatibility and easier data exchange with other platform like FIGIS and with common formats such as Excel or CSV text files. The version presented still misses some of the functionalities included in the previous version. CWP recommended that once a more stable version is completed, it will be sent to those CWP members which are presently using FISHSTAT Plus as a medium to disseminate their statistics (i.e. ICCAT, ICES, IOTC, NAFO) to allow them to comment before the final version is released. It was further recommended that following the release of the new version, it be possible for a certain period to continue to support the data format used in the previous version, preferably through a conversion facility or at least retention of the old version of the software, in order to allow a smooth transition between the two versions.
37. CWP recommended that FAO should continue to support and maintain the development of FISHSTAT Plus and provide assistance, including the provision of simple data import procedures which can be used by CWP agencies to implement data updates or revisions. 38. For the collection and compilation of fisheries statistics in the South East Asia region, CWP recommended that FAO and SEAFDEC investigate the feasibility of harmonising their data collection inquiries in order to reduce the burden on countries submitting statistics to both organizations, taking note of the particular requirements of the SEAFDEC region concerning small scale fisheries. 39. IOTC presented the "WinTuna 2000" software which is intended for data entry and processing of fisheries-related information. WinTuna was designed following state-of-the-art modularization principles, making it a flexible tool, which can be easily extended and/or customized to fit the particular needs of different countries and agencies. It is language-independent and provides a robust security level in a distributed computing environment with an enterprise-level database engine. WinTuna is being used in a number of IOTC countries, notably in the context of the IOTC/OFCF statistical development project, as the core fisheries statistical data entry and processing system. It is the intention of IOTC to provide institutions with responsibility in fisheries statistics with the source code of the programme as well as a programmer's guide in an "open source" context as a wide user base is more likely to ensure long-term support for the system. IOTC and FAO are collaborating in providing an Artfish module to cover sample survey situations. 40. Currently, WinTuna provides a set of core modules that allow data-entry, analysis and data-exchange for longline and purse-seine fisheries. Among these, are modules for maintaining a vessel registry and licensing, a trip registry, landing data, and logbooks for those fisheries. Additionally, WinTuna includes a sampling module that can be adapted to many different sampling schemes, as well as several other utility modules to perform other data-related and administration tasks and a report writer for output and analysis of data. 41. CWP congratulated the IOTC for the work carried out during the intersessional period and the quality of the software presented. Some CWP participant agencies expressed great interest in the software, noting that it could be adapted to serve different data entry and processing purposes. 42. CWP noted that several general purpose fishery data systems are used or under development by different RFBs or individual countries. CWP recommended that characteristics of such information systems should be compared and evaluated in a workshop organized by FAO that should be convened before CWP­21 which could consider the outcome. PROPOSAL FOR AN ADVOCACY ROLE OF CWP (Agenda item 9; Documents CWP­20/5) 43. CWP considered the "Review of the Requirements for Progress in Fishery Statistics: approaches to statistical development and a global advocacy role for the CWP for Fisheries Statistics" which was prepared by a consultant, D. Evans, on behalf of the Secretariat. The review focussed on two options as a basis for possible future advocacy by CWP for improving the quality of fishery statistics. This review had been prepared.
following the CWP Intersessional Meeting (February 2002) when an earlier draft was reviewed. 44. There was considerable discussion concerning to what extent CWP should involve itself in advocacy for improved statistics and in support of statistical development. While all participants agreed that CWP should play a more active role in drawing attention to shortcomings in current fishery statistics and the need for improvements, opinions varied as to how far this should be taken. It was finally agreed that the first option presented in the Review paper, which involves taking advantage of opportunities as they arise to draw attention to shortcomings and the need for improvement, should be pursued for the foreseeable future. The second option, which would be much more pro-active, would probably require a change to the CWP Statutes and additional funds for a work programme. Although many CWP agencies have a mandate to pursue such initiatives, it is doubtful that CWP has under its current Statutes. 45. There was also considerable discussion concerning the lack of recognition by many governments of the need for reliable statistics as a basis for fisheries policy making and management. It was agreed that a 1­2 day workshop on this topic should be held prior to CWP­21. If the FAO Strategy for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Capture Fisheries is adopted, the workshop could focus on implementation of the Strategy with a focus on the national level, and on the needs of developing countries in particular. 46. It was agreed that in future CWP should aim to promote its work for the improvement of fishery statistics more widely, as at the national level it was little known. In pursuing such wider recognition in future, it is better to avoid the term "advocacy" when considering CWP's role, but rather to use alternative terms such as "advisory". CATCH AND TRADE CERTIFICATION SCHEMES (Agenda item 10; Document CWP­20/FAO) 47. FAO reported that in response to one recommendation of the IPOA­IUU (adopted by COFI in March 2001), the FAO Secretariat has collaborated with the Chairperson of the Meeting of Regional Fishery Bodies, to convene an Expert Consultation of Regional Fishery Management Bodies on the Harmonization of Catch Certification, which was held in La Jolla, California, 9­11 January 2002. The report of this Expert Consultation has been published as FAO Fisheries Report, No. 697. 48. FAO informed the meeting of the main outcomes of the Expert Consultation which reviewed the current status of catch certification and trade documentation, the types of documentation programmes already adopted by RFMOs and the impact of catch certification and trade documentation in the areas in which they have been introduced. The Consultation evaluated possible methods to harmonize catch certification and trade documentation schemes. Following one of the recommendations, FAO is currently designing the standard documents with inputs from custom officials who have had experience in handling such documents. The results will be presented to the third meeting of RFMOs that will be held in early March 2003.
49. The COFI Sub-Committee on Fish Trade, held in Bremen on 12­16 February 2002, reviewed the Report of the Expert Consultation (FAO Fisheries Report No.697) and many delegations felt that its outcome was a step in the right direction for the harmonization of catch documentation for trade purposes, but there was a need for further work. It was decided that the matter of catch documentation for trade purposes be referred to the 25th Session of COFI on 24­28 February 2003 for further consideration. 50. FAO will soon publish the FAO Fisheries Circular No. 986: Recent developments in catch certification and trade documentation in Regional Fisheries Management Bodies prepared by Peter Miyake for FAO which reviews further developments in adopting similar schemes by any RFMO and examines efforts in harmonizing the systems. The paper also reviews the forms already in use, compares the forms with the recommendations made by the Expert Consultation, examines the difficulties experienced by various RFMOs and Contracting Parties in implementing the programs and suggests possible harmonized form and instructions. 51. CCSBT reported that its Trade Information Scheme (TIS) continues to operate, with a few changes made after the revision of the functionality of the scheme. The main problems experienced in the application of the scheme have been missing documents, uncertainty of the completeness of the data received, and the poor timeframe for data availability. Members are now required to submit an electronic record of their exports in association with the scheme on a six-monthly basis. The data from exporting member will be more up to date than the TIS documents that are returned from importers (which can be more than 9­12 months after export), thereby improving the time frame for data availability. Importantly, in the future, individual TIS documents from exporters will be reconciled with those from importers, which will identify any missing documents and other possible discrepancies. The CCSBT has decided to impose minimum standards on the quality or completeness of TIS documents for accepting SBT imports. However, the CCSBT has also noted that further discussion is required to determine the essential information that would be required as part of the minimum standard as well as potential problems when applying such minimum standards. 52. ICCAT informed the meeting that its bluefin tuna statistical document programme has been operational for several years. At the 2001 meeting, the ICCAT Commission decided to adopt similar progra