Procedural Manual.
Codex Alimentarius Commission.
Introduction.
I NTRODUCTION.
The Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission is intended to help Member governments participate effectively in the work of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The Manual is particularly useful for national delegations attending Codex meetings and for international organizations attending as observers. It will also be useful for Member Governments which wish to participate in Codex work by correspondence. Section I sets out the Commission's basic Rules of Procedure and the other internal procedures necessary to achieve the Commission's objectives. These include the procedures for the elaboration of Codex Standards and related texts, general principles and guidelines for the acceptance of Codex standards by governments, and some basic definitions. Section II is devoted to guidelines for the efficient operation of Codex Committees. These Committees are organized and operated by Member Governments designated by the Commission. It describes how standards are set out in a uniform manner, describes a uniform reference system for Codex documents and working papers, and provides a number of general principles for formulating key sections of Codex standards and outlines the core functions of national Codex Contact Points. Section III lists the Commission's subsidiary bodies with their Terms of Reference. It also gives the Membership of the Commission (169 Member countries in July 2003) together with the addresses of Codex Contact Points. This Thirteenth Edition of the Procedural Manual was prepared by the Secretariat following the Twenty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome, 2003. Further information concerning the Codex Alimentarius Commission and its Subsidiary Bodies can be obtained from the Secretary, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Statutes Rules of Procedure Elaboration Procedures General Principles Definitions.
CONTENTS OF THIS SECTION The Statutes and Rules of Procedure of the Codex Alimentarius Commission were first established by FAO Conference and the World Health Assembly in 1961/62 when the Commission itself was established. The Statutes were revised in 1966. The Rules of Procedure have been amended on several occasions, the last time being in 2003. The Statutes form the legal basis of the Commission's work and provide its mandate or terms of reference. The Rules of Procedure describe the formal working procedures appropriate to an intergovernmental body. The Procedure for the Elaboration of Codex Standards describes the way by which Codex standards are prepared and the various Steps in the process which ensure comprehensive review of draft standards by governments and other interested parties. It was comprehensively revised in 1993 to provide a uniform elaboration procedure for all Codex standards and related texts. The Procedure allows the use of a "fast-track" approach in cases where urgent action is needed. The General Principles of the Codex Alimentarius define the Scope and the purpose of Codex Standards and the way by which governments indicate their formal acceptance of the Standards. The Guidelines on Acceptance provide additional information to Member governments on the procedures regarding acceptance. This Section concludes with Definitions for the Purpose of the Codex Alimentarius which assist in the uniform interpretation of these texts.
STATUTES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission shall, subject to Article 5 below, be responsible for making proposals to, and shall be consulted by, the DirectorsGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) on all matters pertaining to the implementation of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the purpose of which is: (a) protecting the health of the consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade;.
(b) promoting coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non governmental organizations; (c) determining priorities and initiating and guiding the preparation of draft standards through and with the aid of appropriate organizations;.
(d) finalizing standards elaborated under (c) above and, after acceptance by governments, publishing them in a Codex Alimentarius either as regional or world wide standards, together with international standards already finalized by other bodies under (b) above, wherever this is practicable; (e) amending published standards, after appropriate survey in the light of developments.
Membership of the Commission is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO which are interested in international food standards. Membership shall comprise such of these nations as have notified the Director-General of FAO or of WHO of their desire to be considered as Members.
Any Member Nation or Associate Member of FAO or WHO which is not a Member of the Commission but has a special interest in the work of the Commission, may, upon request communicated to the Director-General of FAO or WHO, as appropriate, attend sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies and ad hoc meetings as observers.
Nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of FAO or WHO, are members of the United Nations, may be invited on their request to attend meetings of the Commission as observers in accordance with the provisions of FAO and WHO relating to the grant of observer status to nations.
The Commission shall report and make recommendations to the Conference of FAO and the appropriate body of WHO through their respective DirectorsGeneral. Copies of reports, including any conclusions and recommendations, will be circulated to interested Member Nations and international organizations for their information as soon as they become available.
The Commission shall establish an Executive Committee whose composition should ensure an adequate representation of the various geographical areas of the world to which the Members of the Commission belong. Between sessions, the Executive Committee shall act as the Executive organ of the Commission.
The Commission may establish such other subsidiary bodies as it deems necessary for the accomplishment of its task, subject to the availability of the necessary funds.
The Commission may adopt and amend its own Rules of Procedure which shall come into force upon approval by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, subject to such confirmation as may be prescribed by the procedures of these Organizations.
The operating expenses of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies, other than those for which a Member has accepted the Chair, shall be borne by the budget of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme which shall be administered by FAO on behalf of the two Organizations in accordance with the financial regulations of FAO. The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall jointly determine the respective portion of the costs of the Programme to be borne by each Organization and prepare the corresponding annual expenditure estimates for inclusion in the Regular Budgets of the two Organizations for approval by the appropriate governing bodies.
All expenses (including those relating to meetings, documents and interpretation) involved in preparatory work on draft standards undertaken by Members of the Commission, either independently or upon recommendation of the Commission, shall be defrayed by the government concerned. Within the approved budgetary estimates, the Commission may, however, recommend that a specified part of the costs of the preparatory work undertaken by the government on behalf of the Commission be recognized as operating expenses of the Commission.
Rules of procedure.
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION.
RULE I MEMBERSHIP.
Membership of the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission, hereinafter referred to as "the Commission", is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO.
Membership shall comprise such eligible nations as have notified the Director-General of FAO or of WHO of their desire to be considered Members of the Commission.
Membership shall also comprise regional economic integration organizations members of either FAO or WHO that notify the Director-General of FAO or WHO of their desire to be considered Members of the Commission.
Each Member of the Commission shall communicate to the DirectorGeneral of FAO or of WHO the names of its representative and where possible other members of its delegation before the opening of each session of the Commission.
RULE II - MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS.
A Member Organization shall exercise membership rights on an alternative basis with its Member States that are Members of the Commission in the areas of their respective competence.
A Member Organization shall have the right to participate in matters within its competence in any meetings of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies in which any of its Member States is entitled to participate. This is without prejudice to the possibility for the Member States to develop or support the position of the Member Organization in areas within its competence.
A Member Organization may exercise on matters within its competence, in any meetings of the Commission or any subsidiary body of the Commission in which it is entitled to participate in accordance with paragraph 2, a number of votes equal to the number of its Member States which are entitled to vote in such meetings and present at the time the vote is taken. Whenever a Member Organization exercises its right to vote, its Member States shall not exercise theirs, and conversely.
A Member Organization shall not be eligible for election or designation, nor to hold office in the Commission or any subsidiary body. A Member.
Organization shall not participate in voting for any elective places in the Commission and its subsidiary bodies.
Before any meeting of the Commission or a subsidiary body of the Commission in which a Member Organization is entitled to participate, the Member Organization or its Member States shall indicate in writing which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, has competence in respect of any specific question to be considered in the meeting and which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, shall exercise the right to vote in respect of each particular agenda item. Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a Member Organization or its Member States from making a single declaration in the Commission and each subsidiary body in which a Member Organization is entitled to participate for the purposes of this paragraph, which declaration shall remain in force for questions and agenda items to be considered at all subsequent meetings, subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be indicated before any individual meeting.
Any Member of the Commission may request a Member Organization or its Member States to provide information as to which, as between the Member Organization and its Member States, has competence in respect of any specific question. The Member Organization or the Member States concerned shall provide this information on such request.
In cases where an agenda item covers both matters in respect of which competence has been transferred to the Member Organization and matters which lie within the competence of its Member States, both the Member Organization and its Member States may participate in the discussions. In such cases the meeting, in arriving at its decisions,1 shall take into account only the intervention of the party which has the right to vote.2.
For the purpose of determining a quorum, as specified in paragraph 6 of Rule V, the delegation of a Member Organization shall be counted for a number equal to the number of its Member States which are entitled to.
The word `decisions' should be understood to mean both voting and situations where a decision is taken by consensus. The above is without prejudice to the question of whether or not the views of the party not having the right to vote shall be reflected in the report of the meeting. Where the views of the party not having the right to vote are reflected in the report, the fact that they are the views of the party not having the right to vote shall also be reflected in the report.
participate in the meeting and are present at the time the quorum is sought, to the extent that it is entitled to vote under the relevant agenda item.
RULE III OFFICERS.
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and three Vice-Chairpersons from among the representatives, alternates and advisers (hereinafter referred to as "delegates") of the Members of the Commission; it being understood that no delegate shall be eligible without the concurrence of the head of his delegation. They shall be elected at each session and shall hold office from the end of the session at which they were elected until the end of the following regular session. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons may remain in office only with the continuing endorsement of the respective Member of the Commission of which they were a delegate at the time of election. The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall declare a position vacant when advised by the Member of the Commission that such endorsement has ceased. The Chairperson and ViceChairpersons shall be eligible for re-election but after having served two consecutive terms shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term.
The Chairperson, or in his absence a Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at meetings of the Commission and exercise such other function as may be required to facilitate the work of the Commission. A Vice-Chairperson acting as Chairperson shall have the same powers and duties as the Chairperson.
When neither the Chairperson nor the Vice-Chairperson are able to serve and, on the request of the outgoing Chairperson, during elections for the Chairperson, the Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall appoint a staff member to act as Chairperson, until either a temporary Chairperson or a new Chairperson has been elected. Any temporary Chairperson so elected shall hold office until the Chairperson or one of the Vice-Chairpersons is able to serve again.
(a) The Commission may appoint a Coordinator from among the Members of the Commission for any of the geographic locations enumerated in Rule IV.1 (hereinafter referred to as "regions") or for any group of countries specifically enumerated by the Commission (hereinafter referred to as `groups of countries'), whenever it may find, on the basis of a proposal of a majority of the Members of the Commission which constitute the region or group, that work for the Codex Alimentarius in the countries concerned so requires. (b) Appointment of Coordinators shall be made exclusively on the proposal of a majority of the Members of the Commission which constitute the region or group of countries concerned. Coordinators shall hold office from the end of the session of the Commission at which they were appointed until not.
later than the end of the third succeeding regular session, the precise term being determined by the Commission in each instance. After having served two consecutive terms, the Coordinators shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term. (c) The functions of the Coordinators shall be: (i) to assist and coordinate the work of the Codex Committees set up under Rule X.1(b)(i) in their region or group of countries in the preparation of draft standards, guidelines and other recommendations for submission to the Commission;.
(ii) to assist the Executive Committee and the Commission, as required, by advising them of the views of countries and recognized regional intergovernmental and non-government organizations in their respective regions on matters under discussion or of interest. (d) In order to carry out their functions, Coordinators shall participate in the Executive Committee as Observers.
The Commission may appoint one or more rapporteurs from among the delegates of the Members of the Commission.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall be requested to appoint from the staffs of their organizations a Secretary of the Commission and such other officials, likewise responsible to them, as may be necessary to assist the officers and the Secretary in performing all duties that the work of the Commission may require.
RULE IV EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chairperson and ViceChairpersons of the Commission together with seven further members, elected by the Commission at regular sessions from among the Members of the Commission, one each coming from the following geographic locations: Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Near East, North America, South-West Pacific; it being understood that not more than one delegate from any one country shall be a member of the Executive Committee. Members elected on a geographic basis shall hold office from the end of the session of the Commission at which they were elected until the end of the second succeeding regular session and shall be eligible for re election, but after having served two consecutive terms shall be ineligible to hold such office for the next succeeding term.
The Executive Committee shall, between sessions of the Commission, act on behalf of the Commission as its executive organ. In particular the Executive Committee may make proposals to the Commission regarding the general orientation and programme of work of the Commission, study special problems and help implement the programme as approved by the Commission. The Executive Committee may also exercise, when it shall deem it to be essential and subject to confirmation by the next session of the Commission, the Commission's powers under Rule X.1(b)(i), Rule X.5 insofar as it refers to bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i), and Rule X.10, insofar as it refers to the designation of the Members who shall be responsible for appointing Chairpersons to subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i).
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons of the Commission shall be respectively the Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons of the Executive Committee.
Sessions of the Executive Committee may be convened as often as necessary by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, in consultation with the Chairperson. The Executive Committee shall normally meet immediately prior to each session of the Commission.
The Executive Committee shall report to the Commission.
RULE V SESSIONS.
The Commission shall in principle hold one regular session each year at the Headquarters of either FAO or WHO. Additional sessions shall be held as considered necessary by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO after consultation with the Chairperson of the Executive Committee.
Sessions of the Commission shall be convened and the place of the meeting shall be determined by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO after consultation where appropriate, with the authorities of the host country.
Notice of the date and place of each session of the Commission shall be communicated to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the session.
Each Member of the Commission shall have one representative, who may be accompanied by one or more alternates and advisers.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held in public, unless the Commission decides otherwise.
The majority of the Members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of making recommendations for amendments to the Statutes of the Commission and of adopting amendments of, or additions to, the present.
Rules in accordance with Rule XIV.1. For all other purposes the majority of the Members of the Commission attending the session shall constitute a quorum, provided that such a majority shall be not less than 20 percent of the total membership of the Commission, nor less than 25 Members. In addition, in the case of amendment or adoption of a proposed standard for a given region or group of countries, the quorum of the Commission shall include one third of the Members belonging to the region or group of countries concerned.
RULE VI AGENDA.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO, after consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission or with the Executive Committee, shall prepare a Provisional Agenda for each session of the Commission.
The first item on the Provisional Agenda shall be the adoption of the Agenda.
Any Member of the Commission may request the Directors-General of FAO or WHO to include specific items in the Provisional Agenda.
The Provisional Agenda shall be circulated by the Directors-General of FAO or WHO to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the opening of the session.
Any Member of the Commission, and the Directors-General of FAO and WHO, may, after the dispatch of the Provisional Agenda, propose the inclusion of specific items in the Agenda with respect to matters of an urgent nature. These items shall be placed on a supplementary list, which, if time permits before the opening of the session, shall be dispatched by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO to all Members of the Commission, failing which the supplementary list shall be communicated to the Chairperson for submission to the Commission.
No items included in the Agenda by the governing bodies or the DirectorsGeneral of FAO and WHO shall be deleted therefrom. After the Agenda has been adopted, the Commission may, by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, amend the Agenda by the deletion, addition or modification of any other item.
Documents to be submitted to the Commission at any session shall be furnished by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO to all Members of the Commission, to the other eligible Nations attending the session as observers and to the non-member nations and international organizations invited as observers thereto, in principle at least two months prior to the session at which they are to be discussed.
RULE VII VOTING AND PROCEDURES.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Rule, each Member of the Commission shall have one vote. An alternate or adviser shall not have the right to vote except where substituting for the representative.
Except as otherwise provided in these rules, decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast.
At the request of a majority of the Members of the Commission constituting a given region or a group of countries that a standard be elaborated, the standard concerned shall be elaborated as a standard primarily intended for that region or group of countries. When a vote is taken on the elaboration, amendment or adoption of a draft standard primarily intended for a region or group of countries, only Members belonging to that region or group of countries may take part in the voting. The adoption of the standard may, however, take place only after submission of the draft text to all Members of the Commission for comments. The provisions of this paragraph shall not prejudice the elaboration or adoption of a corresponding standard with a different territorial scope.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Rule and paragraph 2 of Rule XI, any Member of the Commission may request a roll-call vote, in which case the vote of each Member shall be recorded.
Elections shall be decided by secret ballot, except that, where the number of candidates does not exceed the number of vacancies, the Chairperson may submit to the Commission that the election be decided by clear general consent. Any other matter shall be decided by secret ballot if the Commission so determines.
Formal proposals relating to items of the Agenda and amendments thereto shall be introduced in writing and handed to the Chairperson, who shall circulate them to representatives of Members of the Commission.
The provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of FAO shall apply mutatis mutandis to all matters which are not specifically dealt with under Rule VII of the present Rules.
RULE VIII OBSERVERS.
Any Member Nation and any Associate Member of FAO or WHO which is not a Member of the Commission but has a special interest in the work of the Commission, may, upon request communicated to the Director-General of FAO or WHO, attend sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies as an.
observer. It may submit memoranda and participate without vote in the discussion.
Nations which, while not Member Nations or Associate Members of FAO or WHO, are Members of the United Nations, may, upon their request and subject to the provisions relating to the granting of observer status to nations adopted by the Conference of FAO and the World Health Assembly, be invited to attend in an observer capacity sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies. The status of nations invited to such sessions shall be governed by the relevant provisions adopted by the Conference of FAO.
Any Member of the Commission may attend as an observer the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and may submit memoranda and participate without vote in the discussions.
Subject to the provisions of Rule VIII.5 the Directors-General of FAO or WHO may invite intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations to attend as observers sessions of the Commission and of its subsidiary bodies.
Participation of international organizations in the work of the Commission, and the relations between the Commission and such organizations shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Constitutions of FAO or WHO, as well as by the applicable regulations of FAO or WHO on relations with international organizations; such relations shall be handled by the DirectorGeneral of FAO or of WHO as appropriate.
RULE IX RECORDS AND REPORTS.
At each session the Commission shall approve a report embodying its views, recommendations and conclusions, including when requested a statement of minority views. Such other records for its own use as the Commission may on occasion decide shall also be maintained.
The report of the Commission shall be transmitted to the Directors-General of FAO and WHO at the close of each session, who shall circulate it to the Members of the Commission, to other countries and to organizations that were represented at the session, for their information, and upon request to other Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO.
Recommendations of the Commission having policy, programme or financial implications for FAO and/or WHO shall be brought by the DirectorsGeneral to the attention of the governing bodies of FAO and/or WHO for appropriate action.
Subject to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the DirectorsGeneral of FAO and WHO may request Members of the Commission to supply the Commission with information on action taken on the basis of recommendations made by the Commission.
RULE X SUBSIDIARY BODIES.
The Commission may establish the following types of subsidiary bodies: (a) subsidiary bodies which it deems necessary for the accomplishment of its work in the finalization of draft standards; (b) subsidiary bodies in the form of: (i) Codex Committees for the preparation of draft standards for submission to the Commission, whether intended for worldwide use, for a given region or for a group of countries specifically enumerated by the Commission.
(ii) Coordinating Committees for regions or groups of countries which shall exercise general coordination in the preparation of standards relating to such regions or groups of countries and such other functions as may be entrusted to them.
Subject to paragraph 3 below, membership in these subsidiary bodies shall consist, as may be determined by the Commission, either of such Members of the Commission as have notified the Directors-General of FAO or WHO of their desire to be considered as Members thereof, or of selected Members designated by the Commission.
Membership of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) for the preparation of draft standards intended primarily for a region or group of countries, shall be open only to Members of the Commission belonging to such a region or group of countries.
Representatives of members of subsidiary bodies shall, insofar as possible, serve in a continuing capacity and shall be specialists active in the fields of the respective subsidiary bodies.
Subsidiary bodies may only be established by the Commission except where otherwise provided in these Rules. Their terms of reference and reporting procedures shall be determined by the Commission, except where otherwise provided in these Rules.
Sessions of subsidiary bodies shall be convened by the Directors-General of FAO and WHO:.
(a) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(a), in consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission; (b) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) (Codex Committees), in consultation with the chairperson of the respective Codex Committee and also, in the case of Codex Committees for the preparation of draft standards for a given region or group of countries, with the Coordinator, if a Coordinator has been appointed for the region or group of countries concerned; (c) in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(ii) (Coordinating Committees), in consultation with the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall determine the place of meeting of bodies established under Rule X.1(a) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) after consultation, where appropriate, with the host country concerned and, in the case of bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(ii), after consultation with the Coordinator for the region or group of countries concerned, if any.
Notice of the date and place of each session of bodies established under Rule X.1(a) shall be communicated to all Members of the Commission at least two months before the session.
The establishment of subsidiary bodies under Rule X.1(a) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) shall be subject to the availability of the necessary funds, as shall the establishment of subsidiary bodies under Rule X.1(b)(i) when any of their expenses are proposed to be recognized as operating expenses within the budget of the Commission in accordance with Article 10 of the Statutes of the Commission. Before taking any decision involving expenditure in connection with the establishment of such subsidiary bodies, the Commission shall have before it a report from the Director-General of FAO and/or WHO, as appropriate, on the administrative and financial implications thereof. 10. The Members who shall be responsible for appointing Chairpersons of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) and Rule X.1(b)(ii) shall be designated at each session by the Commission, except where otherwise provided in these Rules, and shall be eligible for re-designation. All other officers of subsidiary bodies shall be elected by the body concerned and shall be eligible for re-election. 11. The Rules of Procedure of the Commission shall apply mutatis mutandis to its subsidiary bodies.
RULE XI ELABORATION AND ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.
Subject to the provisions of these Rules of Procedure, the Commission may establish the procedures for the elaboration of world-wide standards and of standards for a given region or group of countries, and, when necessary, amend such procedures.
The Commission shall make every effort to reach agreement on the adoption or amendment of standards by consensus. Decisions to adopt or amend standards may be taken by voting only if such efforts to reach consensus have failed.
RULE XII BUDGET AND EXPENSES.
The Directors-General of FAO and WHO shall prepare for consideration by the Commission at its regular sessions an estimate of expenditure based on the proposed programme of work of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies, together with information concerning expenditures for the previous financial period. This estimate, with such modifications as may be considered appropriate by the Directors-General in the light of recommendations made by the Commission, shall subsequently be incorporated in the Regular Budgets of the two Organizations for approval by the appropriate governing bodies.
The estimate of expenditure shall make provisions for the operating expenses of the Commission and the subsidiary bodies of the Commission established under Rule X.1(a) and X.1(b)(ii) and for the expenses relating to staff assigned to the Programme and other expenditures incurred in connection with the servicing of the latter.
The operating costs of subsidiary bodies established under Rule X.1(b)(i) (Codex Committees) shall 