Cover photograph: Courtesy of Granja Pescis and Ana Bertha Montero Rocha, Mexico.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This document, Health management and biosecurity maintenance in white shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) hatcheries in Latin America, presents technical guidance for the effective and responsible operation of shrimp hatcheries in Latin America. This document was compiled through an extensive consultative process undertaken from 2001 to 2003 that involved inputs from government-designated National Coordinators, regional and international experts, representatives from several intergovernmental organizations, private sector representatives and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. This process was made possible through the FAO Regional Technical Cooperation Programme project - Assistance to health management of shrimp culture in Latin America: TCP/RLA/0071 (A), which involved the participation of 14 countries of the region, several intergovernmental organizations, shrimp hatchery operators and farmers, and individual experts. It is envisaged that this document will provide a firm basis for the improvement of the health and quality of hatchery-produced Penaeus vannamei postlarvae in Latin America.
Distribution.
Shrimp hatchery operators and managers Ministries and Directorates of Fisheries FAO Fishery Regional and Subregional Officers FAO Fisheries Department.
Health management and biosecurity maintenance in white shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) hatcheries in Latin America. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 450. Rome, FAO. 2003. 62p. ABSTRACT Aquaculture is an important food-producing sector, and it provides much needed protein, employment, income and livelihoods support to many people in the world. Shrimp, in particular, is a high value commodity that is mainly produced in Asia and Latin America, especially for export purposes, and brings a wealth of revenue to many developing countries in those regions. Over the past decade, there have been considerable problems in shrimp aquaculture, mainly due to viral diseases. Latin America, in particular, where Penaeus vannamei is the main species produced, has been suffering from severe viral disease problems since the early 1990s. During the efforts to find lasting solutions to the disease problems affecting P. vannamei culture in Latin America, it was perceived that stocking with healthy postlarvae is a key factor for achieving better survival during production. However, to successfully produce healthy postlarvae requires a clear understanding of the basic principles of sound health management and hatchery biosecurity. This document provides technical guidance on how to improve the health and quality of postlarvae produced in hatcheries through improved facility maintenance and husbandry, broodstock maturation, larval rearing, feeding, water quality management, biosecurity and health management, using interventions at different points of the hatchery production process. The document also provides valuable information on how Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) type interventions can be applied during hatchery production of P. vannamei postlarvae. This document is expected to facilitate the efforts of hatchery operators and managers to produce quality, disease-free, healthy P. vannamei postlarvae, thus improving overall production and the sustainability of white shrimp aquaculture.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is pleased to present this document entitled "Health management and biosecurity maintenance in white shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) hatcheries in Latin America" which was developed by representatives from 14 Latin American countries, and scientists and experts on shrimp hatchery production and health management, as well as by representatives from several regional and international agencies and organizations1. This document, a product of the FAO Regional Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project - Assistance to health management of shrimp culture in Latin America, provides valuable guidance for efforts in reducing the risks of disease in hatchery production of P. vannamei and subsequent increase in production. It will also provide opportunities for improving overall biosecurity in the hatchery systems, which is pivotal in ensuring a healthy production process. Improved hatchery practices and processes contributing to increased production of white shrimp in Latin America will address the overall objectives of improving rural livelihoods, generating income, providing employment and increasing food security of countries in Latin America. The countries that participated in the development of this document are: Belize, Brazil, Costa Rica, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Venezuela. This document refers to various disinfection protocols and practices used during the hatchery postlarval production process in Latin America. These procedures and protocols include the use of various chemicals and disinfectants. The chemical concentrations and exposure times given in this document are based on the existing practices in Latin America. FAO promotes the safe and responsible use of chemicals and disinfectants in aquaculture as part of an effort to reduce negative environmental impacts and improved human health safety. Persons who are using this document are encouraged to be considerate and responsible in the use of chemicals and disinfectants and are also encouraged to refer to OIE Guidelines on disinfection in shrimp aquaculture (OIE 2003). FAO extends special thanks to all the governments, agencies and organizations that took part in this endeavour, as well as to all the individuals who generously contributed their time, effort and expertise to the compilation of this document and other information produced during the process. Ichiro Nomura Assistant Director-General Fisheries Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
1See Annex I for the list of persons, agencies and organizations that participated in the development of this document.
Abbreviations and acronyms.
APEC BP CCP CV EDTA FAO HACCP IHHN LAN NACA NC OIE PCR PL PVC SEMERNAP SOPs SPF SPR SPT TSV UV WSSV YHV Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Baculovirus Penaei Critical Control Point Coefficient of variation Ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) Infectious Hypodermal and Haematopoietic Necrosis Local Area Network Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific National Coordinator Office international des épizooties Polymerase Chain Reaction Postlarvae, Postlarval Poly Vinyl Chloride Secretariá de Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales y Pesca (Environment, Natural Resources and Fishery Ministry) Standard Operating Procedures Specific Pathogen Free Specific Pathogen Resistant Specific Pathogen Tolerant Taura Syndrome Virus Ultra Violet White Spot Syndrome Virus Yellow Head Virus.
1 Introduction.
Disease has become a major constraint to shrimp aquaculture in Latin America. Especially since the outbreak of white spot disease (caused by the white spot syndrome virus, WSSV), shrimp production has decreased significantly in many countries and farmers are facing serious difficulties in continuing production. The resulting economic losses and their impacts are now significantly affecting national economies and the livelihoods of poorer sectors. For example, the shrimp exports from Ecuador in December 1999 fell to below 1985 levels. Provision of assistance for combating this situation is considered highly appropriate and timely. Such assistance will help secure shrimp aquaculture development, national income through trade (both local and international), and livelihoods of farmers and other service providers. When the patterns of spread of diseases and pathogens of shrimp are examined, especially those for viral pathogens, there is convincing evidence that most major disease outbreaks are associated with the movement of live shrimp (broodstock, nauplii and postlarvae (PL)). It is important to remain very cautious over the international or regional movement of live shrimp stocks bound for aquaculture. This precaution applies even to domesticated stocks and to a single shrimp species cultivated in different places. However, movements should be permitted when proper quarantine and screening procedures have been applied. Our understanding of the avenues and options for controlling shrimp diseases, especially WSSV, has improved over the past few years, mainly through the experiences gained in Asia and in Latin America. The ultimate solution for combating shrimp disease problems is to culture certified, domesticated stocks that are free of specific pathogens on nutritious, dry feeds in biosecure ponds under conditions that are nonstressful to the shrimp. This should be the ultimate goal for the shrimp industry. With respect to stress, while it is impossible to control weather, we do have the ability to control many important variables, such as pond carrying capacity, feed inputs and water exchange. At present, dry feeds appear to be adequate, although there is obviously still room for improvement in their quality. The biggest potentially controllable problems that farmers currently face are uncertainty regarding the quality of postlarvae used in culture, and the lack of biosecurity of the pond environment from the entry of pathogens and their carriers. The simplest way to solve the postlarval quality problem is to change from the use of postlarvae derived from captured broodstock to those derived from domesticated stocks. However, this practice requires considerable research effort and field-testing, and is still in its infancy. At least we can try to ensure biosecurity in ponds through appropriate screening of postlarvae for important pathogens prior to stocking. The procedures for screening postlarvae for important pathogens (predominantly WSSV) are known; however, additional training, capacity building, and upgrading of hatcheries and diagnostic centres are necessary. Currently, harmonized technical standards for the hatchery production of postlarvae are lacking. It is imperative that such technical standards be developed, standardized, validated, and agreed upon by the hatchery producers, both nationally and internationally. In November 1999, an FAO Expert Workshop was held in Cebu, Philippines, where representatives from 14 shrimp-producing countries, including five Latin American countries, attended. The workshop discussed and agreed upon a number of strategies for controlling shrimp disease problems and made recommendations for future activities. These ideas were further discussed at the recent APEC/NACA/FAO/SEMARNAP Expert Workshop on Transboundary.
aquatic animal pathogen transfer and the development of harmonized standards on aquaculture health management, held in Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco, Mexico, 24­28 July 2000. A consensus was achieved that the strategies should be incorporated into a regional technical cooperation project aimed at assistance, and the member countries of FAO in which the proposed project would be implemented gave their consent for formulation of the project proposal. Developing regional technical guidelines and standards on quarantine and health certification for safe transboundary movement of live aquatic animals (broodstock, nauplii and postlarvae of shrimp), and harmonizing them within the region was considered timely and appropriate. However, this will take some time to realize, and compliance will remain an issue until appropriate national capacities are developed. Nevertheless, FAO's experience in developing technical guidelines on health management for safe transboundary movement of aquatic animals in Asia can be duly utilized for the benefit of Latin America (see FAO/NACA 2000, 2001a). Capacity building among national institutions, involved staff and shrimp farmers is important. Farmers should be made aware of the options and opportunities available for controlling diseases, especially WSSV. Developing good farm and hatchery management practices and documenting them with adequate scientific evidence and field data are also appropriate and timely. Considering the above points, it became clear that the most timely and effective means to assist the Americas to deal with the existing shrimp disease situation would be: i) developing interventions for improving postlarval quality, ii) building capacity among farmers and appropriate state agencies and iii) developing a comprehensive information network within the region. The Government of Ecuador made a formal request to FAO for technical assistance to combat serious shrimp disease problems in Ecuador. FAO, in consultation and agreement with the shrimp-producing countries in the Americas, decided to prepare a Regional Technical Cooperation Programme Project addressing the above issues. The Project, which began in 2001, involved the participation of 14 countries: Belize, Brazil, Costa Rica, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Venezuela. Representatives of each country responded to a questionnaire on shrimp maturation and hatchery practices in their country. The questionnaire covered a number of aspects of production, concentrating on maturation and hatchery types, sizes, species, management, physical and chemical treatments and disinfection procedures used; health management; production and quality assessment methods; transportation methods; and problems encountered. The technical guidance provided in this document was developed by the National Coordinators (NCs) and experts who participated in the project and is based on the information provided by the participating governments.
2 The contribution of marine shrimp to global aquaculture production.
In the year 2000, total global aquaculture production was reported as 45.71 million metric tonnes (mmt) valued at US$56.47 thousand million. Over half of this was in the form of finfish (23.07 mmt or 50.4% of total production), followed by molluscs (10.73 mmt or 23.5%), aquatic plants (10.13 mmt or 22.2%), crustaceans (1.65 mmt or 3.6%), amphibians and reptiles (100 271 metric tonnes (mt) or 0.22%) and miscellaneous aquatic invertebrates (36 965 mt or 0.08%). Although crustaceans (a category comprised mainly of penaeid shrimps) represented only 3.6% of total production by weight, they comprised 16.6% of total global aquaculture by value in 2000. Over half (54.9%) of global aquaculture production originated from marine or brackish coastal waters in 2000, as compared with 45.1% for freshwater aquaculture production. Although brackishwater production represented only 4.6% of total global aquaculture production by weight in 2000, it contributed 15.7% of total production by value. The main species groups reared in brackish water are high-value crustaceans and finfish (50.5% and 42.7%, respectively), while molluscs and aquatic plants dominate in marine waters (46.1% and 44.0%, respectively). As in previous years, marine shrimp continued to dominate crustacean aquaculture, with shrimp production in 2000 reaching 1 087 111 mt (66.0% of global crustacean aquaculture production) and valued at US$6 880 068 900 (73.4% of total value). Aquaculture currently provides just over a quarter (26.1%) of total global shrimp landings. The main cultivated species are the giant tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon), the fleshy prawn (P. chinensis) and the whiteleg shrimp (P. (Litopenaeus) vannamei), these three species accounting for over 86% of total shrimp aquaculture production in 2000. The growth in production of crustaceans has continued to be strong, increasing by 6.8% by weight from 1999, a rate slightly exceeding that for finfish (6.7%), molluscs (5.8%) and aquatic plants (6.1%). The growth of shrimp production, while still significant, has decreased to more modest levels over the last decade (averaging 5%) as compared to the double-digit growth rates observed during the seventies (23%) and eighties (25%).
2.1 Marine shrimp aquaculture production trends in Latin America.
The countries of Latin America, although still relatively minor contributors to total world aquaculture production (1.9% of global production by weight, and 5.3% by value), have raised their output dramatically over the past 30 years, total aquaculture production increasing by over 714-fold by weight, from 1 221 mt in 1970 (0.03% of total global production) to 871 874 mt in 2000. Aquaculture continues to grow strongly in the region, increasing by a healthy 14.2% per year for the period 1990­2000, although this rate is considerably lower than the rapid increases seen in earlier decades (34.4% per year during the period 1970­1980 and 23.3% per year during 1980­1990). Overall growth during the period 1970­2000 averaged 24.5% per year. The top ten cultured species by weight within the region in 2000 included Atlantic salmon (166 897 mt or 19.1%), whiteleg shrimp (139 264 mt or 16.0%), rainbow trout (97 479 mt or 11.2%), coho salmon (93 419 mt or 10.7%), tilapia (85 246 mt or 9.8%), common carp.
(62 241 mt or 7.1%), Gracilaria seaweed (33 642 mt or 3.8%), silver carp (30 000 mt or 3.4%), Chilean mussel (Mytilus chilensis) (23 477 mt or 2.7%) and the Peruvian calico scallop (Argopectin purpuratus) (21 295 mt or 2.4%) (FAO 2003). The top country producers within the region in 2000 included Chile (425 058 mt or 48.7%), Brazil (153 558 mt or 17.6%), Ecuador (62 011 mt or 7.1%), Colombia (61 786 mt or 7.1%), Mexico (53 802 mt or 6.2%), Cuba (52 700 mt or 6.0%), Venezuela (12 830 mt or 1.5%), Costa Rica (9 708 mt or 1.1%), Honduras (8 542 mt or 1.0%) and Peru (6 812 mt or 0.8%). By value, aquaculture production within the region has increased over eight-fold, from US$337 million in 1984 to US$2.98 thousand million in 2000 (representing 5.3% of the total global aquaculture production by value). The main species groups by value in 2000 were finfish (US$1.89 billion or 63.4%), crustaceans (US$0.94 billion or 31.5%) and molluscs (US$128 million or 4.3%), with the top cultured species being the whiteleg shrimp (US$848 million or 28.4%), Atlantic salmon (US$567 million or 19.0%), coho salmon (US$346 million or 11.6%), rainbow trout (US$291 million or 9.7%), tilapia (US$221 million or 7.4%), common carp (US$176 million or 5.9%), Peruvian calico scallop (US$93 million or 3.1%), penaeid shrimp (species not given) (US$77 million or 2.6%), cachama (Colossoma) (US$75 million or 2.5%) and silver carp (US$21 million or 0.7%).
2.2 Shrimp aquaculture in Latin America: the health issues.
The shrimp farming industry in Latin America has developed and emerged as one of the major foreign exchange earners in the region. Initially, shrimp producers relied almost entirely on the capture of wild postlarvae (PL) in the estuaries and coastal areas where these are found naturally. Seasonal and annual variations in the catch of PL, however, led to the development of shrimp hatcheries where postlarval production could be undertaken in a more controlled manner. These hatcheries used wild broodstock caught by fishermen and supplied to the hatcheries. The fluctuations in catches of both wild postlarvae and broodstock as a result of the El Niño phenomenon had a major impact on the development of hatcheries. In years when wild seed was abundant, low postlarval prices and a general perception that wild seed were stronger meant that many hatcheries encountered financial difficulties. In years when wild seed was scarce, on the other hand, hatchery-produced seed could be sold at a premium. Despite this, many hatcheries experienced problems due to the unpredictability of the market situation. In recent years, disease, or more specifically, shrimp health concerns, has led to a revival of interest in hatchery-produced PL. Shrimp from some countries were widely believed to be less sensitive to Taura Syndrome Virus (TSV) than those from other areas, and this led to a lucrative cross-border trade in broodstock, nauplii and postlarvae in the region. Unfortunately, the arrival of the White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) in the region in the late 1990s exposed the local hatchery operators to the possibility that the disease might be spread by such transfers if they were not conducted under appropriate controls and regulation. At the same time, several producers had been experimenting with the breeding of survivors of TSV outbreaks in an attempt to develop lines of shrimp with greater resistance to the virus. The WSSV epidemic and the risk of vertical transmission accelerated this and led to a greater interest in genetics and breeding and a recognition that the dependence on wild sources of shrimp represented a significant disease risk. Hatchery operators reviewed their operations and focused on improving the biosecurity and health management of their production systems.
Now, most countries in Latin America have begun domestication and genetic selection programmes using pond-reared broodstock in maturation systems. This has been done in an attempt to stabilize predictability and improve the disease resistance and growth rates of their shrimp stocks. Initial efforts used broodstock from a variety of countries around the region in order to ensure a wide genetic variability in the stocks, but subsequent closure of most borders to import of live shrimp has curtailed this activity. Most countries in the region are concentrating on the production of Specific Pathogen Resistant (SPR) or Specific Pathogen Tolerant (SPT) shrimp, selecting the best surviving (but not necessarily disease-free) animals from pond on-growing facilities and on-growing them further in various facilities before transfer to maturation systems. Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) shrimp (i.e. those certified free of one or more specific disease agents, and held throughout their lives in closed systems) have also been used, but with less frequency and when used, these animals have generally been brought in from isolated breeding centres in the United States.
3 Requirements for effective hatcher y production.
In order to provide practical and effective technical guidance for shrimp hatchery management, it is first necessary to review the basic requirements for an effective hatchery production system. These include the presence of essential infrastructure, the development of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) (including Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) analysis), the maintenance of biosecurity, the provision of adequate amounts of clean water, the responsible use of chemicals, and the assurance of health status of stocks through laboratory testing. Many of these components are discussed in more detail in later sections of this document.
3.1 Infrastructure.
Hatcheries must be well designed and have adequate infrastructure, as these have an important impact on the quantity and quality of postlarvae produced Hatcheries should be designed (or modified, in the case of existing hatcheries) to ensure good biosecurity, efficiency, cost-effectiveness and the implementation of the hatchery Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). The infrastructure requirements for successful biosecurity in the hatchery operation will be discussed under the relevant headings throughout this section. Shrimp hatcheries should consist of several units, each having appropriate infrastructure A well-designed shrimp hatchery will consist of separate facilities for quarantine, acclimatization, maturation, spawning and hatching, larval and nursery rearing, indoor and outdoor algal culture, and for the hatching (and enrichment, where applicable) of Artemia. Additionally, there will be supporting infrastructure for the handling of water (facilities for abstraction, storage, filtration, aeration, heating and distribution), and feed (laboratories for analysis and preparation and storage facilities), as well as maintenance areas, packing areas for nauplii and PL, offices, storerooms and staff living quarters. Good hatchery design should include the physical separation or isolation of the different production facilities and effective perimeter security The physical separation or isolation of the different production facilities is a feature of good hatchery design and should be incorporated into the construction of new hatcheries. In existing hatcheries with no physical separation, effective isolation may also be achieved through the construction of barriers and implementation of process and product flow controls. The hatchery facility should have a wall or fence around the periphery of the property, with enough height to stop the entrance of animals and unauthorized persons. This will help to reduce the risk of pathogen introduction by this route, as well as increase overall security.
To minimize the possibility of infecting existing broodstock via the introduction of new animals, there should be a quarantine unit for new broodstock The quarantine of all new animals to be introduced into the hatchery is an essential biosecurity measure. Before passing to the production system, the broodstock must be screened for subclinical levels of pathogens (i.e. via dot blot, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunoblot etc.). Broodstock infected with serious untreatable diseases should be destroyed immediately and only animals negative for pathogens introduced to the maturation unit.
3.2 Water quality and treatment.
Water treatment systems should be designed to provide high quality oceanic seawater Water for the hatchery should be filtered and treated to prevent entry of vectors and any pathogens that may be present in the source water. This may be achieved by initial filtering through subsand well points, sand filters (gravity or pressure), or mesh bag filters into the first reservoir or settling tank. Following primary disinfection by chlorination, and after settlement, the water should be filtered again with a finer filter and then disinfected using ultraviolet light (UV) and/or ozone. The use of activated carbon filters, the addition of ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) and temperature and salinity regulation may also be features of the water supply system. The design of the water distribution system should take into account the level of biosecurity required by the individual areas to which the water is distributed Each functional unit of the hatchery system should have the appropriate water treatment and, where necessary, should be isolated from the water supply for other areas (for example, quarantine areas). Separate recirculation systems may be used for part or the entire hatchery to reduce water usage and further enhance biosecurity, especially in high-risk areas. All water discharged from the facility should be free of pathogens All water discharged from the hatchery, particularly that known or suspected to be contaminated (for example, water originating from the quarantine areas) should be held temporarily and treated with hypochlorite solution (>20 ppm active chlorine for not less than 60 min) or another effective disinfectant prior to discharge. This is particularly crucial where the water is to be discharged to the same location as the abstraction point. More specific water treatment procedures to be used for each phase of maturation and larval rearing are detailed in the appropriate sections.
3.3 Biosecurity.
Good biosecurity must be achieved, as it is paramount to the successful production of healthy PL Biosecurity has been defined as "...sets of practices that will reduce the probability of a pathogen introduction and its subsequent spread from one place to another..." (Lotz 1997). The basic elements of a biosecurity programme include the physical, chemical and biological methods necessary to protect the hatchery from the consequences of all diseases that represent a high risk. Effective biosecurity requires attention to a range of factors, some disease specific, some not, ranging from purely technical factors to aspects of management and economics. Various levels and strategies for biosecurity may be employed depending on the hatchery facility, the diseases of concern and the level of perceived risk. The appropriate level of biosecurity to be applied will generally be a function of ease of implementation and cost, relative to the impact of the disease on the production operations (Fegan and Clifford 2001). Responsible hatchery operation must also consider the potential risk of disease introduction into the natural environment, and its effects on neighbouring aquaculture operations and the natural fauna.
3.4 Standard operating procedures (SOPs).
Each hatchery should develop its own set of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) outlining the control protocol for the hatchery should be described in a comprehensive document that covers each stage or process of the production cycle. The document should include details of all of the critical control points (CCP) and describe how to perform each task to control the associated risk. Once the protocol for hatchery operation is documented, the SOPs should be given to all personnel, and a copy should be available for all workers in an accessible place (dining room, meeting room etc.). A meeting should be held to introduce the protocol and explain the need for, and contents of the SOPs. This is a good opportunity to clearly identify and explain any points that generate doubts or that may be misinterpreted and to get practical input from the hatchery staff. As new information becomes available, it will be necessary to update or modify the SOPs, and any changes must be communicated to all personnel. Any updated version of the SOPs should have the date of the modification and a clear statement that the new version supersedes all previous versions. All workers should sign a document indicating that they have read and understood the SOPs, and that they will comply with all requirements All job descriptions of hatchery management and staff should include a clause related to following the SOPs and the disciplinary consequences of failure to comply.
Training in biosecurity maintenance should be an important component of the hatchery process It is advisable to have a group of people with higher technical training or experience who can supervise and train workers in the execution of each step of the SOPs. This point is of fundamental importance, as the workers may not understand either the standards required or the risks of non-compliance to the success of the hatchery. These technical personnel must organize meetings with the workers for each department to explain and discuss the importance of the execution of the SOPs. The biosecurity risk posed by each area of the hatchery should be determined Different areas of the hatchery may be classified according to the level of risk of disease introduction or transfer. Weirich et al. (in press) used this system to describe four classifications: Quarantine areas where a pathogen of concern is potentially present or suspected, High sensitivity areas requiring minimum exposure to avoid potential pathogen introduction or transfer, Medium sensitivity areas with lower risk of pathogen introduction or transfer, and Low sensitivity areas in which risks of pathogen introduction or transfer are unlikely. These classifications can be modified if required and the changes reflected in an updated version of the SOPs. Specific protocols and restrictions may be adopted for each of these biosecurity levels to prevent pathogen entry or transfer.
3.5 Hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) approach.
Development and implementation of biosecurity protocols can be made easier by a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) approach The HACCP approach is a preventive risk management system based upon a hazard analysis and has been widely used to identify and control risks to human health in food-processing systems. Critical limits are set at critical control points (CCPs) in the system where controls must be applied to prevent, eliminate or reduce a hazard. Monitoring and corrective actions are then implemented (Weirich et al. in press). HACCP principles have been applied as a risk management tool to control viral pathogens at shrimp research and production facilities (Jahncke et al. 2001). HACCP analysis should also be applied to shrimp production, with particular emphasis on reducing or preventing disease risks Maximum biosecurity in shrimp production facilities ca