Integrated livestock-fish Integrated farming systems.
Integrated livestock-fish farming systems.
D.C. LITTLE AND P. EDWARDS.
INLAND WATER RESOURCES AND AQUACULTURE SERVICE ANIMAL PRODUCTION SERVICE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS ROME 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-105055-4.
Preparation of this document.
This book was prepared by the authors under the overall coordination of Matthias Halwart, Fishery Resources Officer (Aquaculture) and with the collaboration of colleagues from Animal Production Service, particularly Manuel Sanchez and Simon Mack, who contributed comments. The printing of the publication was supported by the Interdepartmental Working Group on Integrated Production Systems. Graphic design by Joanne Morgante. All photos by D.C. Little.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2 0 0 3.
Small farmers in developing countries are poorer than.
the rest of the population, often not getting enough food to lead normal, healthy and active lives. Dealing with poverty and hunger in much of the world therefore means confronting the problems that small farmers and their families face in their daily struggle for survival. One option for economically and ecologically sustainable development of farming systems is the integration of agriculture and aquaculture. The various types of aquaculture form a critical component within agricultural and farming systems development that can contribute to the alleviation of food insecurity, malnutrition and poverty through the provision of food of high nutritional value, income and employment generation, decreased risk of production, improved access to water, sustainable resource management and increased farm sustainability. Livestock production and processing generate by-products that may be important inputs for aquaculture. The main linkages between livestock and fish production involve the direct use of livestock wastes, as well as the recycling of manure-based nutrients which function as fertilizers to stimulate natural food webs. On a global basis, most cultured freshwater fish are produced in Asia in semi-intensive systems that depend on livestock wastes purposely used in ponds, or draining into them. Much of the vast increase in China's recent inland aquaculture production is linked to organic fertilization, provided by the equally dramatic growth of poultry and pig production. The use of livestock wastes is still needed, even when high-quality supplementary feeds are available and they are still widely used in more intensive aquaculture systems. The objective of the publication is to provide an analysis of the evolution and current status of integrated livestock-fish systems in Asia, particularly East and Southeast Asia, as well as to provide a sound technical basis for considering their relevance for the planning of livestock-fish systems in Africa and Latin America. It is hoped that the conclusions and recommendations presented here will be interesting and thought-provoking for a wide audience generally interested in the subject of integrated agriculture-aquaculture, and particularly policy makers, planners, NGOs and senior research and extension staff. It is hoped that the book will stimulate these people at all levels to ensure that agricultural development provides for reasonable rural livelihoods, a clean environment, and adequate food products. Jiansan Jia - Chief, Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service Irene Hoffmann - Chief, Animal Production Service.
Introduction.
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 Rationale of the Study Definitions of Integrated Farming Potential Linkages Between Livestock and Fish Production Relevance of Integrated Farming Sustainability Issues at Micro- and Macro-Levels.
1.5.1 1.5.2 MICRO-LEVEL MACRO-LEVEL.
Evolutionary Development of Integrated Livestock-Fish Farming Systems in Asia.
2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Systems and Scale Environmental Effects Crop Domination Integrated Crop/Livestock Industrial Monoculture.
Major Types of Integrated Systems in Asia.
3.1 Current Status.
3.1.1 3.1.2 3.1.3 3.1.4 3.2.1 3.2.2 3.2.3 3.2.4 3.3.1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS MONOGASTRICS RUMINANTS NON-CONVENTIONAL LIVESTOCK UPGRADING LIVESTOCK DIETS AND PRODUCTION SYSTEMS COLLECTION OF MONOGASTRIC WASTES IN SMALL-HOLDER SYSTEMS RUMINANT SYSTEMS MIXED INPUT SYSTEMS GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
3.2 Upgrading Traditional Livestock Systems for Aquaculture 31.
3.3 Integration with Agro-Industry.
Environmental Aspects.
4.1 Nutrients.
4.1.1 4.1.2 4.1.3 4.1.4 NUTRIENT NUTRIENT NUTRIENT NUTRIENT RECYCLING IN AGROECOSYSTEMS EFFICIENCY IN LIVESTOCK EFFICIENCY IN AQUACULTURE RELATIONSHIPS IN LIVESTOCK-FISH SYSTEMS.
I N T E G R AT E D LIVESTOCK-FISH FARMING SYSTEMS.
4.2 Significance of Livestock and Fish Production in the Global Environment.
4.2.1 4.2.2 4.2.3 4.2.4 4.2.5 GLOBAL WARMING WATER USE BIODIVERSITY USE OF FISHERIES TO SUPPORT LIVESTOCK AND FISH PRODUCTION IMPACTS OF LIVESTOCK SYSTEMS ON FISH PRODUCTION.
Design Criteria for Livestock Manured Ponds.
5.1 Manured Pond Dynamics.
5.1.1 5.1.2 5.1.3 5.2.1 5.2.2 5.2.3 5.2.4 5.2.5 OVERVIEW PRINCIPLES OF FERTILIZATION PRINCIPLES OF SUPPLEMENTARY FEEDING GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS SPECIES, SIZE AND SEX FEED AND WASTE MANAGEMENT NUTRIENT RELEASE FROM MANURES WASTE COLLECTION AND STORAGE.
5.2 Waste Characteristics.
5.3 Waste Addition.
Public Health and Livestock-Fish.
6.1 General Considerations.
6.1.1 6.1.2 6.1.3 6.1.4 6.1.5 PATHOGENS BACTERIA AND VIRUSES PARASITES INSECT-VECTOR BORNE DISEASES INFLUENZA PANDEMICS.
6.2 Chemical Hazards and Associated Risks 6.3 Biological Hazards 6.4 Summary.
Social and Economic Considerations.
7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 Demand Nutritional Benefits Gender and Age Resource issues.
7.4.1 7.4.2 7.4.3 7.4.4 INTRODUCTION MICRO-LEVEL MACRO-LEVEL BENEFITS.
7.4.5 7.4.6 7.5.1 7.5.2 7.5.3 7.5.4 7.5.5 7.5.6 7.5.7.
RISK LABOUR FRAMEWORK DEVELOPING HUMAN CAPACITY SYSTEMS APPROACH FARMER-FIRST CONVENTIONAL APPROACHES ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES EXTERNAL FACTORS.
7.5 Promotion of Integrated Livestock-Fish.
Transferability of Asian Experiences to Africa and Latin America.
8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 8.9 General Considerations Information Needs Institutional Constraints Seed Supply Theft and Predation Demand Multipurpose Use and Benefits Beneficiaries Comparing the Regions.
Future Directions in Livestock-Fish Integration.
9.1 9.2 9.3 9.4 9.5 9.6 Demand and Globalization Feed Resources Intensification not Concentration Peri-Urban Integration Rural Integration Potential.
Acknowledgements References.
List of Tables.
Table 1.1 Table 1.2 Table 2.1 Table 3.1 Table 3.2 Table 3.3 Table 3.4 Table 3.5 Table 4.1 Table 4.2 Table 4.3 Table 5.1 Table 5.2 Table 5.3 Table 6.1 Table 6.2 Table 7.1 Table 7.2 Table 7.3 Table 7.4 Table 8.1 Table 9.1 Table 9.2 How the integration of fish culture into small-holder crop/livestock systems affects asset accumulation and livelihoods How livestock and fish improve the sustainability of farming systems Comparison of common property management and scope for intensification in water-scarce and flood-prone environments Matrix of livestock waste qualities and suitability for use in aquaculture Change in frequency of pond inputs before and after extension in Kapsia Thana, Gazipur District, Bangladesh Impacts of the use of wastes from ducks fed supplements to scavenging, in addition to inorganic fertilisation, on overall system feed efficiency and yield. Feed and fertilizer inputs in integrated systems for three areas with different levels of production in China Economic comparison of different fertilizers with respect to available nitrogen (N),phosphorous (P) and carbon (C). Efficiency of N recovery in ponds stocked with Nile tilapia and fertilised with livestock waste Water consumption of fish production integrate with livestock or as a stand-alone enterprise Potentials and constraints to integration of livestock with fish by system Factors affecting use of animal wastes in ponds Input and output of poultry waste fed-aquaculture Effect of feeding and management on waste characteristics of livestock Main types of parasites Chemical hazards and associated risks to fish production Adoption of livestock wastes and other inputs in fish culture in NE Thailand Livestock inventories and fertilisers used in an on-farm trial with farmers in Udorn Thani, Northeast Thailand Characteristics of pig production in three areas of Southeast Asia Factors that reduce smallholders' risk through production of livestock, fish or both. Issues and problems from the perspective of aquaculture promoters in Africa, Latin America and Asia Measures to intensify livestock and fish production without spatial concentration Aspects of multipurpose use of a water body involving livestock and fish production.
List of Boxes.
BOX 1.A BOX 1.B BOX 1.C BOX 1.D BOX 1.E BOX 1.F BOX 2.A BOX 2.B BOX 3.A Checklist of key issues affecting linkages between livestock and fish production A widely used definition of sustainability Livelihoods defined Agribusiness view of sustainability Challenges to sustainable farming in the Red River Delta, Viet Nam A decline in integrated farming in China? Disease constrains livestock production Intensification of ruminant and macrophagous fish have similar constraints Case study of integrated farming in Central Thailand.
BOX 3.B BOX 3.C BOX 3.D BOX 3.E BOX 3.F BOX 3.G BOX 3.H BOX 3.I BOX 3.J BOX 4.A BOX 4.B BOX 4.C BOX 4.D BOX 4.E BOX 5.A BOX 5.B BOX 5.C BOX 5.D BOX 5.E BOX 5.F BOX 5.G BOX 5.H BOX 5.I BOX 5.J BOX 5.K BOX 5.L BOX 5.M BOX 5.N BOX 5.O BOX 6.A BOX 6.B BOX 6.C BOX 7.A BOX 7.B BOX 7.C BOX 7.D BOX 7.E BOX 7.F BOX 7.G BOX 7.H BOX 7.I BOX 7.J BOX 7.K BOX 7.L BOX 7.M BOX 7.N BOX 7.O.
Constraints to integration of traditional livestock and fish production Key indicators of the potential for upgrading Upgrading scavenging poultry diets and management in Ethiopia Changing integrated systems in China Summary of factors affecting use of inorganic fertilizer and feeds with livestock wastes By-products from livestock and processing waste Green blowfly larvae used to process pig manure to fish feed Chicken slaughter house waste fed to catfish Feeding maize to catfish Nutrient flows among village subsystems and between village and outside systems in Nguyen Xa village, Viet Nam Approaches to reducing livestock wastes and environmental pollution Summary of nutrients and the environment A need for water encourages integrated fish culture Summary of factors through which livestock and fish interact with the global environment Benefits of animal manures in pond culture Fixed fertilization rates defined by experimentation High loadings of ruminant manure Categories of supplementary feeding Disappointing results with supplementary feeding Summary of key factors affecting manured pond dynamics Goat management level affects nutrients collectable for aquaculture Quantity of supplementary feed affects scavenging poultry wastes and fish production Integration of duck and fish production in ricefields in the Philippines Impacts of supplementary feed quality on waste characteristics Summary of factors affecting livestock waste characteristics Pornsak's duck slaughterhouse in Bang Lane, Central Thailand Surin's use of duck manure in Nakon Pathum, Thailand Factors affecting characteristics of livestock waste and its use for aquaculture Questions to ask during the design of livestock-fish systems Key points to reducing public health risks from pathogens in livestock-fish systems Safety issues as aquaculture stimulates changes in household pig production in Lao PDR Key points to reducing public health risk due to parasites and other biological and chemical agents Summary of key points relating to social and economic issues Building social assets Poor quality control hinders export of value-added fish products Summary of demand related issues Nutritional importance of fish Access and benefits from aquaculture Training women in aquaculture Intra-household relationships affect production and consumption Summary of key points relating to role of gender in integrated aquaculture Overcoming constraints to using livestock waste in Northeast Thailand Contrasting rice land holding, rice yield and pig production Hybrid maize enhances integrated approach Increasing the village pig herd in a village in Northeast Thailand-potential impacts on fish production Summary of key resource issues Development of livestock-fish systems in Asia.
I N T E G R AT E D LIVESTOCK FISH FARMING SYSTEMS.
BOX 7.P BOX 7.Q BOX 7.R BOX 8.A BOX 8.B BOX 8.C BOX 8.D BOX 8.E BOX 8.F BOX 8.G BOX 8.H BOX 8.I BOX 8.J BOX 9.A BOX 9.B BOX 9.C BOX 9.D BOX 9.E BOX 9.F.
Development of integrated livestock-fish production in the provinces around Bangkok, Thailand "Top down" small-scale duck-fish integration fails An approach to understanding constraints to fish production in rain-fed cascade tank systems in the Dry Zone, Sri Lanka. Stages in aquaculture development to serve local demand Poorly targeted research for resource-poor farmers Institutional issues constraining aquaculture development common to Asia, Africa and Latin America Constraints to fish seed production in Africa Promoting self-sufficiency of fish seed What happens to famed fish in rural Africa, Latin America and Asia? Factors affecting the success of integrated livestock aquaculture in community managed water bodies in Northeast Thailand and Lao PDR Promoting community-level aquaculture in Panama A failed attempt at community aquaculture in Nigeria Factors influencing the relatively lower success of rural aquaculture in Africa and Latin America than Asia Possible policies to discourage concentration of intensive livestock and fish production Singapore phases out pig production Separation of solid and liquid fractions improves the efficiency of livestock waste use in farming systems Changing opportunities for smallholders to integrate egg-duck and fish production Assessing efficiency of traditional, upgraded and modern livestock systems Feeding pigs on small fish.
List of Figures.
Figure 1: The development of sustainable aquaculture systems involves consideration of production technology, social and economic aspects, and environmental aspects (Source: AIT, 1994). Figure 2: Potential outcomes of livestock-fish integration Figure 3: Main and secondary linkages in livestock-fish integration Figure 4: Asset pentagons to analyse sustainable rural livelihoods Figure 5: Evolutionary development of integrated farming systems Figure 6: Classification of livestock production and relationship to value of livestock waste for aquaculture Figure 7: Percentage of farms using various fertilizer and supplementary feed inputs for fish culture in Central Thailand (a) manure (b) rice and grain products (c) waste food from human consumption and agro-industry (d) animal by-products and animal feed (e) vegetable matter Figure 8: Livestock present and integrated on fish farms in Central Thailand by type and number of livestock Figure 9: Percentage yield by fish species in three areas of productivity in China Figure 10: Comparison of possible strategies for using livestock production and processing wastes in aquaculture Figure 11: Percentage of farms in Central Thailand using various fertiliser and supplementary feed inputs for fish culture (a) waste food from human consumption and agro-industry (b) animal by-products and animal feed (c) vegetable matter Figure 12: The two-way interaction between aquaculture and the environment involves numerous factors that range from positive to negative in their impact.
Figure 13: Nutrient cycles for an agro-ecosystem involving crops, fish and livestock Figure 14: Nutrient flows among village subsystems and between village and outside systems Figure 15: Mean dissolved oxygen (DO) in mg I-1 at dawn for ponds receiving different levels of manure loading. Error bars show standard deviation Figure 16: Schematic depiction of changes in the natural food organisms and fish yields, in relation to standing crop of the cultured organism and the ensuing protein needs of the supplemental feed (s) Figure 17: Annual production of nitrogen in faeces and urine for various livestock Figure 18: Goat production and total collectable nutrients in different management systems. 1= Stall feeding with fodders and concentrate-wastes collected daily; 2=daytime tethered grazing and ricebran supplement-wastes collected daily; 3=daytime tethered grazing and legume leaf supplementwastes collected daily; 4=daytime tethered only, wastes collected daily; 5=daytime tethered only, wastes collected monthly Figure 19: Egg laying rate of Khaki-Campbell x local strain fed two differents supplementary diets, T1 unhulled paddy rice and T2 village rice bran Figure 20: Dry matter (DM), total nitrogen (N) and total phosphorous (P) in wastes of ducks Figure 21: Loss of total nitrogen in fresh egg-laying chicken manure with time Figure 22: Rates of faecal coliform (grey line) and bacteriophage (blue line) die-off in septage loaded ponds Figure 23: Schema showing main possible resource flows in conventional mixed farming and the alternative use of livestock wastes in fish production Figure 24: Annual distribution by crop of labour input into the dike-pond system, Zhujiang Delta, China Figure 25: Schema of the major interactions between the various subsystems in a crop/ livestock-fish integrated farming system Figure 26: What factors stimulate feed or waste-based aquaculture?.
Aquaculture is the fastest growing food production sector in.
the World with annual growth in excess of 10 percent over the last two decades. Much of this development has occurred in Asia, which also has the greatest variety of cultured species and systems. Asia is also perceived as the `home' of aquaculture, as aquaculture has a long history in several areas of the region and knowledge of traditional systems is most widespread. Furthermore, the integration of livestock and fish production is best established in Asia.
In this initial section we introduce the rationale for the study and provide definitions of integrated livestock-fish farming. We then examine the current status and future importance of livestock and fish production being integrated rather than being developed further as specialized, separate activities. Their sustainability and importance in a broader context are then considered. environment, and if they are socially and economically viable. Macro-level factors may also have a significant influence and there are environmental implications, both on- and off-farm, for the development of sustainable systems (Figure 1). The current status of livestock-fish systems reflects their evolution in response to changing circumstances: the past history of current systems is not generally appreciated; nor is their future potential apparent. The rationale for this study is to interpret Asian, especially East and Southeast Asian experience in integrated systems through analysis of their evolution and current status and to consider their relevance for livestock-fish planning in Africa and Latin America.
Rationale of the study.
Livestock-fish production systems develop to satisfy needs if they fit into the resource base or.
CHAPTER 1 · INTRODUCTION.
The development of sustainable aquaculture systems involves consideration of production technology, social and economic aspects, and environmental aspects.
Production Technology.
Social and Economic Aspects.
Sustainable Aquaculture System.
Socially Relevant and Profitable.
Environmentally Compatible.
Source: AIT (1994).
Definitions of integrated farming.
Integrated farming is commonly and narrowly equated with the direct use of fresh livestock manure in fish culture (Little and Edwards, 1999). However, there are broader definitions that better illustrate potential linkages. Indeed, the term `integrated farming' has been used for integrated resource management which may not include either livestock or fish components. Our focus is the integration of livestock and fish, often within a larger farming or livelihood system. Although housing of livestock over or adjacent to fish ponds facilitates loading of wastes, in practice livestock and fish may be produced at separate locations and by different people yet be integrated. Chen et al. (1994) distinguished between the use of manures produced next to the fishpond and elsewhere on the same farm. A wider definition includes manures obtained from off-farm and transported in bags, e.g. poultry manure, or as a.
slurry in tanks, such as for pig and large ruminant manure. Integrated farming involving aquaculture defined broadly is the concurrent or sequential linkage between two or more activities, of which at least one is aquaculture. These may occur directly on-site, or indirectly through off-site needs and opportunities, or both (Edwards, 1997). Benefits of integration are synergistic rather than additive; and the fish and livestock components may benefit to varying degrees (Figure 2). The term "waste" has not been omitted because of common usage but philosophically and practically it is better to consider wastes as "resources out of place" (Taiganides, 1978).
Potential linkages between livestock and fish production.
The main potential linkages between livestock and fish production concern use of nutrients, particularly reuse of livestock manures for fish.
production. The term nutrients mainly refers to elements such as nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) which function as fertilizers to stimulate natural food webs rather than conventional livestock nutrition usage such as feed ingredients, although solid slaughterhouse wastes fed to carnivorous fish fall into the latter category. There are also implications for use of other resources such as capital, labour, space and water (Figure 3). A variety of factors affect potential linkages between livestock and fish production (Box 1.A). Both production and processing of livestock generate by-products that can be used for aquaculture. Direct use of livestock production wastes is the most widespread and conventionally recognized type of integrated farming. Production wastes include manure, urine and spilled feed; and they may be used as fresh inputs or be processed in some way before use. Use of wastes in static water fishponds imposes limitations in terms of both species and intensity of culture. Stimulation of natural food webs in the pond by organic wastes can support relatively low densities of herbivorous and omnivorous fish but not a large biomass of.
Checklist of key issues affecting linkages between livestock and fish production.
there demand for fish species capable of feeding on natural foods generated by fertilization using livestock wastes?.
the livestock monogastrics or ruminants?.
the wastes be cost effectively collect-.
legislation require processing of wastes before use for fish culture?.
livestock wastes have a high opportunity cost?.
low ambient temperatures (<18°C) restrict waste-fed aquaculture?.
fish culture already established based on conventional feeds and systems?.
carnivorous fish. These biological processes are also temperature dependent. The optimal temperature range is between 25-32°C although.
Potential outcomes of livestock-fish integration.
Separate, stand alone operations.
Integration results in similar levels of benefit to both components, which increases overall benefit.
Integration increases level of benefit of one component and has a neutral effect on the other.
Small declines for one component are compensated for the large increase in the other.
waste-fed aquaculture in sub-tropical and temperate zones where temperatures rise seasonally has also been successful. Processing wastes through organisms such as earthworms and insect larvae that feed on them and concentrate nutrients to produce `live feeds' is an alternative approach to raising fish needing high levels of dietary animal protein. Livestock processing can also provide a wide variety of wastes that vary from dilute washing water to high value meat and bloodmeal that can be used as high value fish feeds or feed ingredients. If enough of these types of feeds are available, high density and intensive production of carnivorous fish species can be supported. Aquaculture may also provide inputs and other benefits to livestock production. A variety of aquatic plants e.g. duckweeds and the aquatic fern Azolla have proven potential as livestock feeds; and invertebrates such as snails and crustaceans can be used for poultry feeds. Our study focuses on the integration of fish and livestock. The use of cultured fish or fish.
products as livestock feeds, although currently uncommon, holds promise and is reviewed. Other, more minor beneficial linkages between fish and livestock production include use of fish culture water for drinking/bathing livestock and cooling livestock housing. Nutrients contained in culture water and sediments may be used to produce arable crops for livestock. The viability of these options depends on a variety of factors, including the types of livestock and fish that can be raised profitably and the production systems used.
Relevance of integrated farming.
The integration of fish and livestock production is probably closer today, and more important than ever before (FAO, 2000). On a global basis most cultured freshwater fish are produced in Asia in semi-intensive systems that depend on fertilizer.
Main and secondary linkages in livestock-fish integration (P = processing).
secondary flows.
Waste feed Drinking Cooling Manure.
abattoir waste Urine.
Irrigation Human.
nutrients. Moreover, with increasing need for multipurpose use of water resources, community water bodies used for watering livestock are increasingly stocked with fish seed and their management intensified. Several studies of small-holder aquaculture in Bangladesh, India, Thailand and Viet Nam indicate that livestock wastes are the most commonly used input. Fish yields may not be optimized for a variety of reasons but livestock wastes purposely used in ponds, or draining into them, support the production of most cultured fish in Asia. An analysis of China, the ancestral home of aquaculture, indicates that whilst intensive practices based on formulated pelleted feed are developing rapidly, much of the vast increase in China's recent inland aquaculture production is linked to organic fertilization, provided by the equally dramatic growth of poultry and pig production. Trends in those parts of Asia which are undergoing rapid industrialization and urbanization suggest that livestock-fish systems can retain a relative advantage over intensive aquaculture for production of low-cost carps and tilapias. A strong link to the use of livestock wastes remains even when high-quality supplementary feeds are available and widely used. A major issue is the potential competition for, and relative efficiency of the use of, limited amounts of feeds between livestock and farmed fish. This has both local and global implications. Supplementary feeds, such as ricebran and oil cakes, which are traditionally fed to livestock, are often in demand for feeding fish. Continued growth in demand for livestock and fish has raised alarm bells over the sustainability of feed supplies and the impacts of such growth on the environment.
very different to that by an economist, but most can support the essence of that in the Brundtland Report (WCED, 1987) which incorporates social and economic as well as environmental concerns. Important questions relate to the role of integration of aquaculture with livestock to improve sustainability of food production in socially and economically advantageous ways while safeguarding or improving the environment. For this to occur, the roles of culture and institutions both have to be considered also since they are major forces for change or conservatism. A major issue of this book is how integration, rather than specialization and separation, of livestock and fish production can enhance sustainability at all levels and perspectives.
A widely used definition of sustainability.
"Sustainable development is that which meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs".
Source: WCED (1987).
1.5.1 MICRO-LEVEL.
The interpretation and measurement of sustainability have become focal points of rural development. In a smallholder farmer's world, key parameters of sustainability have been identified as high levels of species diversity, nutrient cycling, capacity (total production) and economic efficiency (Lightfoot et al., 1993; Bimbao et al., 1995; Dalsgaard et al., 1995). At the micro-level, watershed, community, farm, plot and pond may be used as a basis for assessing sustainability, but the role of people is central to development. Most poor rural people do not rely entirely on their own land to sustain them. Typical livelihoods are complex and depend on a variety of resources, many of which are off-farm (Ellis, 1992). At the heart of the issue of `sustainability' are peoples' livelihoods (Box 1.C). Holistic.
Sustainability issues at micro- and macro-levels.
Sustainability may be considered at global, national, regional, community and household level and from a variety of perspectives. Sustainability as defined by an ecologist, may be.
thinking is required to analyse and describe livelihoods with a focus on peoples' relative strengths rather than `needs'. Building up assets is a core component of empowerment (Figure 4). How the inclusion of intensified management of aquatic resources can support, or detract, from this process is indicated in Table.
People base their livelihoods on a range of assets in addition to financial capital that include natural, human, physical and social capital. A pentagon can represent these five types of asset or capital although in practice.
Livelihoods defined.
"A livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets (including both material and social resources) and activities required for a means of living. A livelihood is sustainable when it can cope with and recover from stresses and shocks and maintain or enhance its capabilities and assets both now and in the future, while not undermining the natural resource base".
Source: Carney (1998).
there is overlap between them (Figure 4). Understanding trends in peoples' assets over time can indicate if positive or negative developments are occurring, and if livelihoods are deteriorating or improving. The approach can be applied on a community, group or household level to inform and guide the development process. Knowing about the assets of different wealth and social groups in the same community can allow better targeting of poorer people and monitoring of changes that occur. The impacts of shocks of various types, and how assets are used to reduce vulnerability, are important aspects of assessing livelihoods. Forging links between ecosystem theory and farming system analysis (Dalsgaard et al., 1995) can be useful, provided that the results are placed within a broader framework of sustainability issues. A range of different system attributes has been identified that provides measures of how livestock and fish can improve sustainability of farming systems (Table 1.2). As sub-systems within the wider farming system (Edwards et al., 1988), fish culture and livestock can improve nutrient recycling and concentration. This feature is important in both nutrient-rich, peri-urban systems and nutrient-poor, rural situations (Little and Edwards, 1999). Diversity, stability and capacity can all be enhanced through inclusion of livestock.
Social capital Human capital.
Asset pentagon to analyse sustainable rural livelihoods.
Physical capital.
Human capital.
Fin