FAO Fisheries Circular No. 993.
FIIT/C993 (En).
ISSN 0429-9329.
ASPECTS OF SEA SAFETY IN THE FISHERIES OF PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
by Robert Gillett Consultant Gillet, Preston and Associates Lami, Fiji.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2003.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This publication is the report of a survey of fisheries-related sea safety in the Pacific Islands region undertaken by FAO in 2003. It is intended to assist in sensitizing fishery managers that sea safety is a legitimate and important objective of fisheries management, focus more attention on small fishing vessel safety and lead to improved systems for recording/analysing sea accident data and making use of the results. It will also serve as a discussion document at a meeting which is to be attended by motivated people from several relevant disciplines, focused on challenging issues, oriented to small fishing vessels, having the objective of producing results with a positive effect on regional and national sea safety programmes.
Author's full address:.
Robert Gillett Gillet, Preston and Associates P.O. Box 3344 Lami, Fiji.
Distribution: FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional and Subregional Fishery Officers Directors of Fisheries FI Mailing list "Fish Technology/Industry".
Gillett, R. Aspects of sea safety in the fisheries of Pacific island countries. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 993. Rome, FAO. 2003. 56p.
ABSTRACT In early 2003 FAO undertook a survey of fisheries-related sea safety in the Pacific Islands region. The objective of the work was to consolidate the experience gained by selected countries in safety at sea with the view of improving ongoing and future activities in the region. The countries directly surveyed in the present study were Tuvalu, Tonga, Samoa, Fiji and Kiribati. Five main topics were covered: the relation of fisheries management to sea safety, safety programmes, data recording, legislation, and boat building and vessel design. The major regional fisheries-oriented sea safety initiatives in the Pacific islands have been the 1991 FAO survey and the more recent work of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). The concept of including sea safety as a specific objective of fisheries management is not common in the countries covered by the survey. In several countries, safety appears to be considered when formulating management interventions, but the idea that saving lives of fishers could be one of the stated objectives of government management intervention does not occur in the five countries. To ensure that sea safety is included in fisheries management, a number of measures are suggested.
9.2 9.3 9.4 9.5 9.6 9.7 10. 10.1 10.2 10.3 10.4 10.5 11. 11.1 11.2 11.3 11.4 12. 13.
Executive summary.
1.1 The main finding.
The survey In early 2003 FAO undertook a survey of fisheries-related sea safety in the Pacific Islands region. The objective of the work was to consolidate the experience gained by selected countries in safety at sea with the view of improving ongoing and future activities in the region. The countries directly surveyed in the present study were Tuvalu, Tonga, Samoa, Fiji and Kiribati. Five main topics were covered: the relation of fisheries management to sea safety, safety programmes, data recording, legislation, and boatbuilding and vessel design. The major regional fisheries-oriented sea safety initiatives in the Pacific islands have been the 1991 FAO survey and the more recent work of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). The concept of including sea safety as a specific objective of fisheries management is not common in the countries covered by the survey. In several countries, safety appears to be considered when formulating management interventions, but the idea that saving lives of fishers could be one of the stated objectives of government management intervention does not occur in the five countries. To ensure that sea safety is included in fisheries management, a number of measures are suggested. Sea safety initiatives which have been common in the past decade in the fisheries sector include: · Radio awareness programmes by various government agencies · Provision of subsidized safety gear, usually sponsored by donors · Revision of national shipping legislation to include fishing vessels · Institutional safety courses as required by revised legislation · Campaigns of enforcement of sea safety legislation · Sponsorship of vessel communication upgrades · The various components of the SPC regional safety awareness programme The survey findings suggest that the following are generally successful at improving safety: · Appropriate small-vessel legislation backed up by "big stick" enforcement for urban-based commercial vessels · Radio programmes and extension visits for remote locations · Video for those communities with access to video facilities · "No survey, no licence" for areas/fleet strictly controlled by licensing · Institutional safety courses for the semi-industrial fleet The results of some initiatives are disappointing: · The promotion of emergency sail rigs and auxiliary sail rigs in areas where there is no continuing tradition of sail use · Providing subsidies for safety gear without a long-term subsidy strategy · The sale of safety gear through government fishery agencies.
Survey coverage.
Previous regional sea safety work Fisheries management and sea safety.
Past and on-going sea safety projects.
Project successes.
Project disappointments.
Accident data recording.
In most countries visited not much importance is attached to producing annual sea accident summaries with sufficient detail so as to be useful for sea safety programme planning. In Samoa where there is a relatively good system in place, the summary information on incidents of sea safety permits identification of accident-prone situations with respect to vessels, areas, and seasons.
One of the major issues in national sea safety legislation is the coverage of small fishing boats. These are the vessels that are associated with most of the sea accidents in the region, but they are excluded from both the fisheries and shipping legislation in most countries. Enforcement of legislation is a critically important issue in sea safety. The results of the survey suggest that for a country to be serious about improving the sea safety situation, that country must be serious about enforcing its legislation. This concept must be balanced with the reality that there are major enforcement problems in each country. There are, however, two schemes concerning enforcement that appear to work well. Rather than attempting to alter the evolution of vessel design in the region to improve safety, it may be more productive to "go with the flow" and promote safety features and construction standards for the types of vessels that are now popular and are likely to grow more common in the future. Safety aspects of fibreglass skiffs should not be ignored. As a prerequisite to attracting more government attention for efforts to improve sea safety, it is recommended that additional attention be focused on keeping records of sea accidents and associated search/rescue expenses. The success of past SPC awareness work together with the on-going requirements suggest that SPC efforts in this subject should continue with some modifications. A meeting which is attended by motivated people from several relevant disciplines, focused on challenging issues, oriented to small fishing vessels, and co-hosted by SPC could produce results having a positive effect on regional and national sea safety programmes. Within the scope of the topics covered in the present survey, the following areas appear to deserve priority: · sensitizing fishery managers that sea safety is a legitimate and important objective of fisheries management; · focusing more attention on small fishing vessel safety; · improving systems for recording/analysing sea accident data and making use of the results; · awareness programmes; · a regional sea safety workshop.
Sea safety legislation.
Enforcement of sea safety legislation.
Boatbuilding and vessel design.
Political will.
SPC sea safety awareness work.
Regional sea safety workshop.
Priorities for future sea safety work.
Summary of the national sea safety issues and lessons-learned.
Issues in improving sea safety Upgrading the recording and analysis of sea accident data; publicizing sea accident data Modifications to the Fisheries Act and Shipping Act to allow for coverage of the type of vessels commonly involved in sea safety incidents Formulation of a strategy which would result in offshore fishers carrying safety gear.
Country Tuvalu.
Sea safety lessons-learned Having offshore safety gear available is no guarantee that it will be used. Radio programmes on sea safety in the vernacular appear to have a major impact. Lack of recording, analysis, and publicity of sea accidents and government costs associated with these accidents, can lead to weak political will for sea safety improvements. Convincing fishers to change their habits may take considerable effort, as judged by a man who went on two long drifts before being convinced of the need for safety gear. What is required to improve the safety of small fishing vessels is very different from that needed for the larger company-owned vessels. The best safety legislation is of limited value if not enforced. For a major improvement in safety on small boats, more is required than just programmes of awareness. Compulsory measures are needed but there does not appear to be the political will necessary to enforce such requirements. Without a good knowledge of the magnitude of sea safety problems in terms of number of incidents, lives lost, and cost to Tonga of search and rescue, it is easy to understand the lack of enthusiasm and political will for new sea safety initiatives. Mandatory requirements accompanied by a "big stick" approach to enforcement has worked best The analysis of past data on sea safety incidents can be very useful for future safety programmes There is a very big difference in attitudes between vessel owners and those that go to sea with respect to sea safety. To be effective, the penalties for noncompliance must cause substantial pain to the offending owners. There is a need to educate skippers and crew to refuse to depart for sea on an ill-equipped vessel A major sea disaster may be required to generate political will to improve sea safety Radio appears to offer the greatest opportunity for sensitizing remote village to sea safety issues, and is certainly better than dependence on non-existent distribution channels of some of the government agencies involved in sea safety.
The frequency and severity of sea safety problems is not widely appreciated in Tonga. Lack of enforcement of fisheries legislation for the smaller vessels Most fisheries officers, other government officials, and representatives of fishing companies support mandatory safety requirements, but there is considerable apathy on the part of small vessel operators.
There is a large difference in safety issues between vessels based in the Apia urban area and those in remote locations The sea safety concerns of owners are very different from those of skippers/crew Balancing the need for safety training of vessel crew with the reality of large crew turnover.
Enforcement at sea of safety regulations Realistic sea safety regulations for small fishing boats Getting the awareness message to isolated villages.
Issues in improving sea safety.
Sea safety lessons-learned As the use of fibreglass skiffs is likely to grow in Fiji and the region, more attention should be focused on appropriate construction standards.
Coverage of fishing vessels under seven metres by sea safety legislation, including provision for safety equipment, design criteria, and vessel inspection. Subsequent enforcement of any such legislation The need for an on-going safety awareness programme on every island.
Most people who go missing are inexperienced with operation of vessels at sea. Full-time commercial fishers in Tarawa are becoming more aware of safety at sea. Emergency sail rigs will often be left at home if they have no other purpose than safety. If the sail can be used for sun and rain cover it will usually be carried, if the rudder and leeboard are a section of floor, they will usually be carried. Oars or spars must be useful in the fishing operation if they are to be carried. A small auxiliary engine will generally end up on another boat. A second engine is expensive, but because dirty fuel and running out of fuel are common, it is no guarantee of safety.
Introduction.
2.1 Background.
Sea safety and related issues are crucially important in Pacific islands fisheries. In some of the countries the accident rate for fishers is among the highest in the world. Over the last four decades various UN agencies, regional organizations, donor agencies and others have made efforts to address the situation. On the regional level, in 1991 FAO implemented one of the largest sea safety initiatives in the region ­ a survey of sea safety issues in 16 countries. This was followed by efforts of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), especially in the area of sea safety awareness. In early 2003 FAO undertook another survey of fisheries-related sea safety in the region. The objective of the work was to consolidate the experience gained by selected Pacific Island countries in safety at sea with the view of improving ongoing and future activities in the region. This report summarizes the finding of the survey. Five major themes were covered in the survey. collected on each topic are: These topics and specific information to be.
Fisheries management · A detailed description of fisheries management in each selected country. · A description of the effects of management developments on fishers' safety and accidents. · Has sea safety been included in fisheries management initiatives? If so, how? If not, why not? · What could be done to ensure that sea safety is included in fisheries management?.
Safety programmes · A description of the programmes that have been implemented since the last FAO study in 1991. · What has been especially effective in these programmes? · Which initiatives have had little or adverse effect on fisher's safety? · What are the important areas for future interventions? Data recording · Which authority is responsible for data recording, analysis and feedback in the different countries? · How is data on accidents gathered, analysed and presented? · What is done with the data generated, are there follow-up activities? · Based on the above, how could data collection and analysis be improved? · What conclusions can be drawn from the existing data? · A presentation of existing data, for the last ten years, on accidents related to fishing operations from the different countries Legislation · A description of the present legislation for safety on fishing boats and for fishing operations in the different countries. · A description of existing regional legislation and agreements regarding safety at sea. · Which authorities are responsible for the legislation related to safety for fishing boats and fishing operations? · Which authorities are responsible for inspection of fishing vessels? · Is the existing legislation enforced? · Based on the above, how could legislation and enforcement of legislation be improved? Boatbuilding and vessel design · A description of past and ongoing initiatives related to fishing vessel design. · How have these initiatives affected the safety of fishing vessels? · Are safety issues being addressed in the vessels constructed in the region? · Are there any successes in the attempts to promote the use of sail? · Is there a need for future vessel design work in regards to safety, and if so, in what areas? · Is there a role for FAO in the interface between naval architecture and safety?.
Survey and report considerations.
Ideally, a study sea safety in the Pacific islands would entail visits to each country. Unfortunately, funding and time constraints dictated that, unlike the 1991 FAO survey, only five countries would be directly surveyed in the present study: Tuvalu, Tonga, Samoa, Fiji, and Kiribati1. It was the intention that by surveying a selection of five countries from Melanesia, Polynesia, and Micronesia, including both atoll and high island countries, many of the important sea safety issues and recent developments in the region would be covered. Not all aspects of sea safety in the region were covered in the survey. The information collected was largely restricted to the five topics detailed in Section 2.1 above. As such, other important topics such as causes of accidents, search/rescue, and survival at sea were not addressed. The scope of vessels covered was restricted to locally-based fishing boats of up to about 20 metres in length. The term "safety" requires clarification. As with the earlier FAO study (McCoy 1991), "safety" is associated with the ability of a vessel to return to port (or more usually the island or village) at the.
As the information collected and thoughts on safety evolved while the survey proceeded, the countries appear in this report in the order which they were visited.
completion of a voyage or trip. Other aspects of safety in fishing such as accidents with gear or in fish handling, dealing with illness on board, collisions at sea, and SCUBA are not addressed in this report. Two consultants were recruited for the survey. One of the consultants, Mike Savins, was responsible for collecting, analysing, and presenting the information related to Kiribati. The other consultant was responsible for the other four countries and writing up the material. The survey commenced on 20 January 2003. Between that date and 23 February five countries were visited and 71 individuals were interviewed from government agencies, regional organizations, fishing companies, boatbuilding operations, and fishing vessels. These people and their institutional affiliations are given in the Appendix.
The Pacific Islands region.
Recognizing that some of the audience for this report may have limited knowledge of the Pacific islands, information on the region and features important for sea safety is provided here. In reference to the fisheries of the Pacific islands, there is often uncertainty over the geographical area in question. In roughly descending size, the western and central Pacific Ocean (WCPO), the US South Pacific Tuna Treaty area, Secretariat of the Pacific Community statistical area (Figure 1), FAO statistical area 71, SPC area, and the EEZs of Pacific Island FFA-member countries are used to describe the "region". Unless otherwise stated, the term "Pacific Islands region" referred to in this report is that of the 200-mile zones of Pacific Island countries. The term "Pacific Island countries" is used here to refer to the 14 independent Pacific Island nations. The political entities of the Pacific islands are characterized by large exclusive economic zones (EEZs) and, in the main, very small land areas. The total area of the region's EEZs is estimated to be 30 569 000 km2, equivalent to about 28 percent of the world's EEZ area. The land area is 552 789 km2, of which 461 690 km2 (84 percent) is in Papua New Guinea. In general, the islands increase in size from east to west. Most islands rise steeply from the deep ocean floor and have very little underwater shelf area. Coral reefs characteristically surround the islands, either close to the shore (fringing reef) or further offshore (barrier reef), in which case a coastal lagoon is enclosed. The area includes many atolls, which are the remnant barrier reefs of islands that have subsided. Some of the more recent islands in the area lack coral reefs. Some distinctive features of the region that are important for sea safety include: · mainly small-scale fishing in inshore/coastal areas and larger scale tuna fishing offshore; · the use of fish aggregation devices (FADs) to facilitate the access by small-scale fishers to tuna resources; · occurrence of destructive cyclones, mainly during the seasons of maximum oceanic wartonnesh; · the presence of communities in most countries that may have only limited contact with urban areas; · Australian-funded patrol boats and maritime surveillance advisors in most countries; · significant amount of inter-island transport on small boats, many of which also serve as fishing vessels; · lingering tradition of the use of sail in the remote areas of about half of the countries; · a large number of foreign tuna fishing vessel operating in the offshore areas; · the existence of maritime or fisheries academies in several countries; · the number of seafarers and mariners familiar with the sea is a high percentage of population relative to larger nations.
Minami Tori Shima Wake Northern Marianas Guam Marshall Islands.
Federated States of Micronesia Howland & Baker Papua New Guinea Nauru Kiribati Phoenix Tuvalu Solomon Is Wallis & Futuna Tokelau.
Jarvis Line Islands.
Cook Islands.
Vanuatu New Caledonia Matthew & Hunter.
Samoa Am Samoa Tonga Niue French Polynesia Pitcairn.
New Zealand.
Map courtesy of SPC.
Also worth mentioning is the close-knit nature of Pacific Island communities. Unlike some of the larger nations addressed by major sea safety programmes, most people in the governments and administrations of Pacific Island countries have friends/relatives working in the fishing industry, or may be part-time commercial fishers themselves. As an example, in one country the Secretary of Foreign Affairs was involved in a sea safety incident which involved drifting for several days. The close-knit nature of Pacific Island countries also has significant implications for enforcement of safety legislation. Fisheries cooperation, fostered by the regional organizations, is another prominent feature of the Pacific islands. The region has two organizations with major involvement in fisheries matters and several others with peripheral involvement: · The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) headquartered in Noumea, New Caledonia has a fisheries programme which is primarily concerned with scientific research on the tuna fisheries and with research, development, and management of the coastal fisheries for the 22 countries and territories in the Pacific islands. · The Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) headquartered in Honiara, Solomon Islands is concerned primarily with economic, policy, and management aspects of the offshore tuna fisheries in the 14 independent Pacific Island countries plus Australia and New Zealand. The table below gives information on vessel numbers in the region.
Estimates of fishing vessel numbers.
Locally-based tuna vessels (Gillett, 2003) Cook Islands 10 L/L Motorized artisanal fishing vessels (McCoy 1991) 200 Non-motorized artisanal fishing vessels (McCoy 1991) 120 Other information on vessel numbers (from Gillett 2002 or this report) 1996 census indicated a total of 1 291 fishing boats, of which 26% were located on Rarotonga See Section 8.1 of this report.
Fiji FSM Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru.
See Section 9.1 of this report.
Palau PNG Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu.
71 L/L 1 P/L 40 L/L 24 P/S 153 L/L 12 P/L 2 P/S 8 L/L 26 L/L 20 skiffs 10 skiffs.
A 1992 survey recorded 218 powered skiffs and 128 paddling canoes In June 2001 Niue had 62 registered boats and about 200 canoes At least 25 percent of households own fishing boats See Section 7.1 of this report.
See Section 6.1 of this report See section 5.1 of this report Fisheries officials indicate that there are between five and ten full-time and five to ten part-time skiff trolling operations.
P/L = Pole and line vessel; P/S = Purse seiner; L/L = Longliner.
The total does not include skiffs - the number of skiffs was only noted in countries where industrial tuna vessels are absent.
Regional fisheries-oriented sea safety initiatives.
The major regional fisheries-oriented sea safety initiatives in the Pacific islands have been the 1991 FAO survey and the more recent work of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). As background for the present study, descriptions of these projects are given in sections 3.1 and 3.2 below.
The 1991 FAO survey of safety at sea in Pacific islands fisheries.
FAO sponsored a consultant, Mike McCoy, to undertake a survey of safety at sea issues in Pacific Island artisanal fisheries in early 1991. The project surveyed 16 countries and island territories with the objectives of determining the types and magnitude of safety problems confronting smallscale artisanal fishers in the Pacific region, to catalogue current programmes or projects which directly address this issue and to draw conclusions based on the information collected. That work represents one of the few attempts to examine fisheries-related sea safety in the Pacific islands on a regional basis. Because the report of the survey (McCoy, 1991) still has considerable relevance to the sea safety situation today, a summary of the findings is given below. The study indicated that most international conventions dealing with safety were found to omit vessels of the size used in artisanal fisheries in the Pacific. After visits to the countries and territories and interviewing 169 fishers and government officials, it was found that most countries do not provide for safety legislation to cover smaller boats or canoes, and officials generally believe that it would be impossible to enforce such regulations if they were introduced. It was estimated that there were about 25 000 non-motorized and 16 000 motorized artisanal fishing vessels in the region, and that an average of one incident of distress per day comes to the attention of officials concerned with search and rescue. Because of problems of communication and the remoteness of many islands and villages, this probably underestimates the total number of actual incidents. Likewise, the known fatalities attributed to these incidents, about 60 per year, are probably far less than the actual total. It is also recognized that many of these vessels are used for a variety of purposes, and that distress is not always encountered solely during fishing activities. Practical problems, including poor engine maintenance, limited availability of spare parts, and high cost of life-saving aids are also taken into consideration. It was found that the total of all budget allocations by the island countries for local search and rescue activities amounts to about US$100 000 yearly. However the actual cost of such activities is probably in the range of US$750 000 to US$1 000 000 per annum for the region as a whole. Many officials in the countries surveyed believe that the public (including artisanal fishers themselves) does not recognize there to be much of a problem with safety on small boats. Many people interviewed, all of whom are associated with fisheries, safety, or search and rescue, offered a variety of suggestions on how to improve safety practices, thereby lowering the number of accidents. Professional mariners were almost unanimous in recommending increased public awareness through educational programmes and publicity as being the one means most likely to produce the desired results. With respect to future initiatives to improve sea safety, the following thoughts were offered: · Financially it does not appear that many countries are in a position to significantly increase their activities relating to safety at sea. However there are areas such as communications where advances or improvements that might take place independent of safety considerations would have a positive effect.
In planning even modest programmes it must be realized that safety at sea is something which must be taught and continually reinforced. It is recognized that heightened awareness of safety in industrial societies is due to constant reinforcement. In the island countries, it is the almost total lack of exposure to safety awareness on a recurring basis that results in it being ignored. Programmes should thus emphasize the necessity for their continued, long-term existence. There should also be an increase in the availability of safety equipment, spare parts and training; but the experience of countries surveyed shows that these three items in themselves will not provide the desired results. Sources of funding can sometimes more easily be arranged for programmes emphasizing education than for acquisition of equipment. In the fisheries sector there are several agencies that have been interested in supporting education, training, and transfer of technology, all of which broadly cover the areas noted. In considering what types of activities are most appropriate, it should be kept in mind that each country possesses a unique set of circumstances surrounding safety at sea and programmes must be specifically tailored to each. For the funding of future activities to become a reality, the impetus must come from the countries themselves.
The major conclusion of the study was that education through publicity campaigns, repeated and reinforced over a long period of time and backed up by a good supply of equipment and spare parts, and training seems to offer the best chance for improving safety at sea for artisanal fishers.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community sea safety work.
Regional fisheries-oriented sea safety initiatives have also been undertaken by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). That work is mostly associated with the Coastal Fisheries Programme (based in Noumea), and to a lesser extent, the Regional Maritime Programme (based in Suva). The Fisheries Training Section of SPC's Coastal Fisheries Programme has been especially active in the areas of sea safety awareness and statutory training relating to sea safety. Some comments on the effectiveness of the awareness work are given in Section 11.2 of this report. Safety resource materials available at the Fisheries Training Section include: · Safety Aboard Fishing Vessels (a practical guide for crew members) · FAD Fishing Skills Workshop, Teaching Modules, Module 2: Safety at Sea and Small Boat FAD · Four safety at sea posters · Logo Stickers "Think Safety at Sea" · A4-size stickers "Small Boat Safety Check-list".
The SPC sea safety logo.
· Laminated cards "Small Boat Safety Check-List: Five Minutes Which Can Save Your Life" · Three videos "Better Safe than Sorry", "Survival at Sea", "Rambo Goes Deep-sea" · Eight TV clips "Boat Safety Tips" · Audio-tape programme on Safety at Sea (radio) · Training materials, including (a) Teaching Resource Package for the Pacific Island Qualified Fishing Deckhand, (b) Basic Sea Safety Certificate course (Learner's Guide, Trainer's Guide, Overhead Transparencies), and (c) Kit of teaching materials for a twoweek Pre-Sea Safety and Fishing course (screening of potential crew of longliners and purse-seiners) 10.
Other safety work of the Coastal Fisheries Programme is the safety advocacy of the masterfishers during country visits (e.g. refusing to go to sea on unsafe fishing vessels), safety recommendations in reports of the Fisheries Development Section, and articles in the SPC Fisheries Newsletter. The SPC Regional Maritime Programme is primarily focused on shipping legislation and provision of maritime training. The p