Cover graphic conceived and designed by: José Luis Castilla Civit and Alessandro Lovatelli.
CAPTURE-BASED A Q U A C U LT U R E.
THE FATTENING OF EELS, GROUPERS, TUNAS AND YELLOWTAILS.
Francesca Ottolenghi, Cecilia Silvestri, Paola Giordano, Alessandro Lovatelli and Michael B. New.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome 2004.
Preparation of this document.
This report was prepared for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) by consultants and staff employed by the FAO Fisheries Department to provide a definition and review of the capture-based aquaculture of four species groups: eels, groupers, tunas and yellowtails. The principal targeted audience includes policy-makers, administrators and trainers in the fields of aquaculture, fisheries and the environment. It is hoped that the document will provide background information and reference sources for those embarking on research in this field. This document was prepared with financial assistance from the Government of Japan under the International Conservation and Management of Fisheries Resources Trust Fund Project (GCP/INT/715/JPN).
CAPTURE-BASED AQUACULTURE defines and reviews certain practices that are shared between aquaculture and capture fisheries. It specifically considers the on-growing or fattening of four species groups ­ eels, groupers, tunas and yellowtails ­ which is based on the use of wild-caught "seed". The report begins with an introduction on the overlap between aquaculture and fisheries and their global trends. Chapters on the four species groups follow and include information on species identification, fishery trends, the supply and transfer of "seed" for stocking purposes, aquaculture trends, culture systems, feeds and feeding regimes, fish health, harvesting and marketing. Further chapters examine the environmental and socio-economic impacts of capturebased aquaculture, together with the relevant fisheries and aquaculture management issues. Finally, the report looks at food safety issues, as well as identifies topics for future consideration.
Ottolenghi, F.; Silvestri, C.; Giordano, P.; Lovatelli, A.; New, M.B. Capture-based aquaculture. The fattening of eels, groupers, tunas and yellowtails. Rome, FAO. 2004. 308p.
In the past, capture fisheries and aquaculture have tended to be treated as distinct and isolated sectors. However, commonalities in processing and marketing, together with shared environmental and socio-economic concerns and, in some cases, common resources make it important to establish a clear link, especially when an overlap between the two activities exists. One of the most obvious cases of overlap occurs in "semi-aquaculture practices" where the life cycle of an on-grown species cannot be managed on a commercial scale and where the "seed" materials (i.e. larvae, juveniles, adults) are collected from the wild. Until now, these "semi-aquaculture practices" have not been precisely defined. Commonly, words such as "farming", "cage farming", "pen farming", "ranching" and "fattening" have been loosely used, depending on the size, species and time-scale of the on-growing culture practice. A new definition needs to be adopted in order to avoid confusion and to enable the issues related to such farming practices to be identified more easily. The aim of this report is to define and review this "semi-aquaculture practice", which has been more accurately named "capture-based aquaculture".
Acknowledgements.
The authors wish to record their gratitude to the many people that assisted in the preparation of this document, who included Roberto Agonigi (Nutreco Holding N.V., Italy), Felipe Aguado Jiminez (Regional Center of San Pedro del Panatur, Spain), Fabio Badalamenti (National Research Council, Laboratory of Marine Biology, Italy), Uwe Barg (Fisheries Department, FAO), Mark Scicluna Bartoli (European Commission, Belgium), Johann Bell (WorldFish Center, Malaysia), Daniel D. Benetti (University of Miami, USA), Antonio Bernal Bas (Tuna Graso, Spain), Francesco Bertolino (Egadi Marine Protected Area, Italy), Arnaud Bertrand (Research Institute for Development, Chile), Isidra Bombeo-Tuburan (Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, Philippines), Alain Bonzon (Fisheries Department, FAO), Christopher R. Bridges (University of Heinrich-Heine, Germany), Richard Brill (National Marine Fisheries Service, USA), Chris Carter (University of Tasmania, Australia), Steven Clarke (South Australia Research and Development Institute, Australia), John Corbin (Hawaii State Aquaculture Development Program, USA), Denis Coves (IFREMER, France), Juana Delgado (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Spain), Wim van Eijk (Dutch Association of Fish Farmers, Netherlands), Andreina Farrugia (University of Malta, Malta), Stefano Fazi (Water Research Institute, Italy), Jean-Marc Fromenin (IFREMER, France), Antonio García Gómez (Oceanographic Institute of Spain, Spain), Maurizio Ginocchi (APCOM, Italy), Cyrille Guernalec (CNPMEM Bluefin Tuna Commission, France), Cathy Hair (WorldFish Center, Malaysia), Brian Jeffriess (Tuna Boat Owners Association of South Australia, Australia) Don Jellyman (National Institute of Water and Atmosphere, New Zealand), Robert E. Johannes (R.E. Johannes Pty. Ltd, Australia), Saadet Karakulak (University of Istanbul, Turkey), Ivan Katavic (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Croatia), Mark Lokman (University of Otago, New Zealand), Hector Lupin (Fisheries Department, FAO), Molly Lutcavage (New England Aquarium, USA), Masashi Maita (Tokyo University of Fisheries, Japan), Jacek Majkowski (Fisheries Department, FAO), Tom Mallows (English Nature, UK), Natalia Martini (Oxford University, UK), Fabio Massa (Fisheries Department, FAO), Naozumi Miyabe (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries, Japan), Peter M. Miyake (International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, Spain), Peter Montague (Aquafin CRC, Australia), Gabriel Mourente Cano (University of Cadiz, Spain), Constantinos Mylonas (Institute of Marine Biology of Crete, Greece), Makoto Nakada (Nisshin Feed Co. Ltd., Japan), Isik Oray (University of Istanbul, Turkey), Ayaka Amaha Ozturk (University of Istanbul, Turkey), Philippe Paquotte (OFIMER, France), Luz Perez Igualada (Polytechnical University of Valencia, Spain), Mike Rimmer (Department of Primary Industry, Australia), Sean Tibbetts (Nova Scotia Agricultural College, Canada), Yvonne Sadovy (University of Hong Kong, China), Robert Sluka (University of Miami, USA), Rohana Subasinghe (Fisheries Department, FAO), Kandula Sujatha (Andhra University, India), Sergi Tudela (WorldWide Fund, Spain), Mark H. Tupper (University of Guam, USA), Filip Volckaert (Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium), Rolf Willmann (Fisheries Department, FAO), K. Yamoaka (Laboratory of Aquatic Biology, Japan) and Peric Zarko (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Malta). The authors are also indebted to José Luis Castilla Civit, who was responsible for its final layout.
Preparation of this document Abstract Preface Acknowledgements Contents List of tables List of figures Executive summary iii v vii ix xi xvi xviii xxiii.
THE AQUACULTURE-FISHERIES OVERLAP: CAPTURE-BASED AQUACULTURE.
Introduction Definitions Background The status of global aquaculture and fisheries.
Trends in global fisheries Trends in global aquaculture.
SPECIES SELECTION.
Introduction.
EELS - Anguilla spp.
Introduction and species identification Fishery trends Seed availability for capture-based aquaculture Capture technology Transfer of "seed" material from fishing to on-growing facilities Trends in aquaculture production Culture systems Feeds and feeding regimes Fish health and disease.
Harvesting systems Marketing Conclusions.
GROUPERS - Epinephelus spp.
Introduction and species identification Fishery trends Availability of "seed" for capture-based aquaculture Catching methods for "seed" material Mortality rates from catching to stocking Trends in aquaculture production Culture systems Feeds and feeding regimes Fish health and disease Harvesting systems Marketing Conclusions.
TUNAS - Thunnus spp.
Introduction and species identification Fishery trends.
Northern bluefin tuna Southern bluefin tuna.
Availability of "seed" for capture-based aquaculture Catching methods for "seed" material Mortality rates from catching to stocking Trends in aquaculture production Capture-based tuna aquaculture in Japan Capture-based tuna aquaculture in the Mediterranean Capture-based tuna aquaculture in Mexico and the USA Capture-based tuna aquaculture in Australia Capture-based tuna aquaculture in Canada Culture systems Feeds and feeding regimes.
Fish health and disease Harvesting systems Marketing Conclusions.
YELLOWTAILS - Seriola spp.
Introduction and species identification Fishery trends Availability of "seed" for capture-based aquaculture Catching methods for capture-based aquaculture Transfer of juveniles from fishing to on-growing facilities Trends in aquaculture production Culture systems Feeds and feeding regimes Fish health and disease Harvesting systems Marketing Conclusions.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS.
Introduction Resource removal - direct effects.
Overfishing Recruitment success Bycatch and discards Direct physical disturbance and habitat destruction.
Resource removal - indirect effects Effects of farming operations (grow-out).
Feeding Organic pollution and eutrophication Effects of chemical use Algal blooms Benthos modification Other interactions.
Conclusions.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS.
Introduction Economic issues Social impacts ­ employment creation and skill development Value-added benefits Impacts and conflicts with other resource users Conclusions.
MANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES AND CULTURE PRACTICES.
Introduction Fisheries management National and regional fishery management.
Bluefin tuna management ­ an example for capture-based aquaculture.
The southern bluefin tuna and the CCSBT The northern bluefin tuna and the ICCAT.
Aquaculture management.
National and Regional aquaculture management Environmental Assessment (EA) ­ a technical instrument for aquaculture management Aquaculture ­ specific legislation Grouper management ­ an example for capture-based aquaculture.
10. FOOD SAFETY ISSUES.
Introduction Food consumption and associated risks.
General hazards associated with wild and farmed seafood Pre-harvest contamination Risks of contamination in harvesting and processing.
Hazards of special relevance to capture-based aquaculture.
Pre-harvest contamination Risks of contamination in harvesting and processing.
Strategies for food safety and quality.
Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP).
The application of the HACCP system to capture-based aquaculture Environmental certification and its application to capture-based aquaculture.
11. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS.
Wild seed supply Seed transfer Farm management Environmental and safety issues Post-production issues Control over the life cycle Statistical issues The future.
12. REFERENCES Web sites Abbreviations and acronyms.
List of tables.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. Value of total capture fisheries production in 1991 and 2000 Global aquaculture production in 2000 compared to 1991 Characteristics of the European eel (Anguilla anguilla) Characteristics of the American eel (Anguilla rostrata) Characteristics of the Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) Characteristics of the Short-fin eel (Anguilla australis) Catch data for European eels (Anguilla anguilla) by country in 2000 The different characteristics of eel stages Catch of American elvers (Anguilla rostrata) in Canada and Maine (USA) Some trade routes of Anguilla spp. elvers and glass eels Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) production by country (2000) Total yield of wild and farmed eels in Japan Indoor eel re-circulating systems in Taiwan Province of China in 1999 Intensive eel production in Europe in 1998 and 2000 Production of artificial eel feeds in the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China Composition of eel feeds produced by Zhongmao Feed Processing Co. Composition of feeds for eels Specific pathogens of cultured eels Production of European eels (Anguilla anguilla) by country in 2000 Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) aquaculture production value by country in 2000 Top ten exporters of eels by volume in 1999 Top ten exporters of eels by value in 1999 Trends in Japanese eel imports (1994-1998) Nature of Japanese eel commodity imports in 1998 Source and value of fresh eel imports by Japan (1998) Source and value of processed eel imports by Japan (1998) Eel exports by Japan Destination of eel exports by Japan Characteristics of the Orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) Characteristics of the Malabar grouper (Epinephelus malabaricus) Characteristics of the Areolate grouper (Epinephelus areolatus) Characteristics of the Nassau grouper (Epinephelus striatus) Characteristics of the Brown-marbled grouper (Epinephelus fuscoguttatus) Characteristics of the Goliath grouper (Epinephelus itajara) Characteristics of the Hong Kong grouper (Epinephelus akaara) Characteristics of the Greasy grouper (Epinephelus tauvina) Local "seed" collection methods for the capture-based aquaculture of groupers Estimates of farmed grouper production in selected countries Summary of the characteristics of grouper culture systems Specific pathogens of cultured groupers in Southeast Asia Production costs of farming groupers in Thailand Characteristics of the northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) Characteristics of the southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) page 11 16 25 27 28 29 33 34 37 38 43 43 44 46 50 50 52 53 59 59 63 63 64 64 64 65 65 65 72 73 75 76 77 79 80 82 88 93 94 97 103 108 109.
Table 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. Catch of bluefin tunas by purse seine compared to total catch in the Mediterranean Production of capture-based tuna aquaculture in Canada Baitfish composition Quality and relative percentage of the fish utilized for feeding the tuna in Ortona (Italy) Percentage increase in weight of farmed tuna in Murcia (Spain) Summary of reported types of feed and FCR reported in capture-based tuna aquaculture Specific pathogens of bluefin tuna Prices for fresh fattened bluefin tunas in the Tsukiji fish market Arbitration prices for fresh North Pacific bluefin tunas in the Tsukiji market Spot prices for fresh bluefin tuna in the Osaka market Prices for fresh southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) in the Tokyo-Chuo market Characteristics of the greater amberjack (Seriola dumerili) Characteristics of the Japanese amberjack or yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata) Characteristics of the yellowtail amberjack or goldstriped amberjack (Seriola lalandi) Number of "mojako" caught in each Japanese Prefecture Trends in the farmed production and number of farms for yellowtails in Japan Trends in cultured Japanese amberjack production Numbers of greater amberjacks reared in September by Prefecture Yellowtail aquaculture facilities in 1998 Recommended stocking density of Japanese amberjacks in floating net pens Characteristics of yellowtail culture areas The behaviour of Japanese amberjacks at various dissolved oxygen (DO2) concentrations Growth and feeding parameters of captive greater amberjacks (Seriola dumerili) Recommended calorie/protein ratio by season and size for Japanese amberjacks Characteristics of feeds used for Japanese amberjack culture Feeding regimes and related production costs for yellowtails Specific pathogens of cultured yellowtails Reports of some cases of "red tide" in yellowtails farms in Japan General trends in the value of farmed yellowtails 1991-2000 Production costs and profit trends for Japanese amberjack culture in Japan Market conditions for the three yellowtail species cultured in Japan Characteristics of the yellowtail import trade in 1999 Yellowtail export trade (quantity and value) in 1999 Comparative analysis of annual costs and returns of wild orange-spotted groupers Examples of regional organizations with remits that include tuna Some ICM programme applications Environmental Impact Assessment Acts Southeast Asia National Regulations Data for the capture-based aquaculture production of eels, groupers, tunas and yellowtails.
page 119 128 132 133 134 135 136 144 144 145 145 152 153 155 162 165 166 167 168 169 170 170 172 173 175 176 179 180 182 183 184 186 187 204 238 241 243 247 271.
List of figures.
Figure.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. Global fish landings per fishing area in 2000 Fish landings from the top ten fishing nations in 2000 Global capture fisheries production (1991-2000) Global capture fisheries production (marine and inland) by region in 2000 Proportion of foodfish produced by aquaculture in Asia Proportion of foodfish produced by aquaculture in other continents Top ten producers of foodfish through aquaculture in 2000 Trends in global aquaculture production Trends in the value of global aquaculture products Marine and brackishwater aquaculture production by region in 2000 Top ten producers of marine and brackishwater foodfish through aquaculture in 2000 European eel (Anguilla anguilla) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Anguilla anguilla American eel (Anguilla rostrata) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Anguilla rostrata Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Anguilla japonica Short-fin eel (Anguilla australis) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Anguilla australis Trends in the global eel catch (1991-2000) Global eel catch by area in 2000 Capture fisheries for eels: the top ten countries in 2000 Trends in the global capture fishery for European eels (Anguilla anguilla) Trends in the global capture fishery for Japanese eels (Anguilla japonica) Example of catching method: fyke-net Example of catching method: fish trap Trends in global eel production by aquaculture Global trends in the production of Japanese eels (Anguilla japonica) through aquaculture Farmed production of European eels (Anguilla anguilla) in Europe Top ten farmed European eels (Anguilla anguilla) producers in Europe in 2000 Total eel feed production in Japan Global value of eel aquaculture (1991-2000) Value of European eels (Anguilla anguilla) cultured in Europe (1991-2000) Trends in the value of Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) aquaculture (1991-2000) Value of global eel imports (1990-1999) Imports of fresh eels by country in 1999 Top ten eel importing countries by value in 1999 Quantity of eel exports (1990-1999) Trends in eels commodity production (1990-1999) Orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) page 10 11 11 12 13 13 14 14 14 15 15 25 26 26 27 28 29 29 30 31 31 32 32 32 39 40 42 42 45 45 51 58 58 59 61 61 62 62 64 72.
Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus coioides Malabar grouper (Epinephelus malabaricus) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus malabaricus Areolate grouper (Epinephelus areolatus) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus areolatus Nassau grouper (Epinephelus striatus) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus striatus Brown-marbled grouper (Epinephelus fuscoguttatus) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus fuscoguttatus Goliath grouper (Epinephelus itajara) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus itajara Hong Kong grouper (Epinephelus akaara) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus akaara Greasy grouper (Epinephelus tauvina) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Epinephelus tauvina Trends in global grouper catch (1991-2000) Global grouper catch by area in 2000 Capture fisheries for groupers: the top ten countries in 2000 Trends in the global capture fishery for Nassau grouper (Epinephelus striatus) Major trade routes for grouper "seed" throughout Southeast Asia Example of catching method: scissor nets Trends in global grouper production by aquaculture Grouper aquaculture production by continent in 2000 Top ten farmed grouper producers in 2000 Harvesting of groupers in a brackishwater pond in Chonburi, Thailand Groupers being sold in a fresh fish market in the Philippines Global value of grouper aquaculture (1991-2000) Top eight countries in grouper aquaculture by value in 2000 Production of frozen groupers Northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Thunnus thynnus Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Thunnus maccoyii Global trends in the total bluefin tuna catch (1991-2000) Total bluefin tuna catch by area in 2000 Capture fisheries for bluefin tuna: the top ten countries in 2000 Global catch of northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) (1991-2000) Global catch of northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) by area in 2000 Global catch of southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) (1991-2000) Global catch of southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) by area in 2000 Catch of southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) by country in 2000 Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) Purse seine system Purse seine operation in the Mediterranean.
Capture fisheries for northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus): the top ten countries in 2000 113.
Operation of the purse seine system Location of tuna capture-based aquaculture Global production of capture-based farmed bluefin tuna (1999-2001) Production of bluefin tuna by capture-based aquaculture by country in 2001 Production of capture-based tuna aquaculture in Japan Location of capture-based tuna aquaculture in the Mediterranean Capture-based aquaculture production of the main Mediterranean producers (2000-2001) Australian capture-based production of southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) Tuna cage in Port Lincoln (South Australia) Offshore cage for the capture-based farming of tuna Frozen blocks of baitfish for capture-based tuna aquaculture Baitfish feeding for capture-based tuna aquaculture Divers capture a tuna during harvesting in Port Lincoln, South Australia Transfer of tuna for harvesting Average prices of fresh bluefin tuna in the Osaka market Average prices of fresh southern bluefin tuna in the Tokyo-Chuo market Greater amberjack (Seriola dumerili) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Seriola dumerili Japanese amberjack or yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Seriola quinqueradiata Yellowtail amberjack or goldstriped amberjack (Seriola lalandi) Zoological sites sampled for geographic distribution of Seriola lalandi Global trends in yellowtail catch (1991-2000) Catch of yellowtails by area in 2000 Global catch of yellowtails: top ten countries in 2000 Trends in the global catch of greater amberjacks (Seriola dumerili) (1991-2000) Global catch of greater amberjacks (Seriola dumerili) by area in 2000 Catch of greater amberjacks (Seriola dumerili) by country in 2000 Catch of Japanese amberjacks (S. quinqueradiata) by Japan (1990-1999) Trends in the global catch of yellowtail amberjacks (Seriola lalandi) (1991-2000) Catch of yellowtail amberjacks (Seriola lalandi) by area in 2000 Catch of yellowtail amberjacks (Seriola lalandi) by country in 2000 Fluctuation in the number of available "mojako" Global production of yellowtails through aquaculture (1991-2000) Japanese production of yellowtails (number of fish) Total amount of artificial feeds used for Japanese amberjack culture in Japan Yellowtail harvesting Trend in the global value of cultured yellowtails (1991-2000) Aquaculture production versus the wild catch for the Japanese amberjack Market price for cultured and wild Japanese amberjack "buri" Trends in the total volume of imports of yellowtail commodities (1990-1999) Trends in the total value of imports of yellowtail commodities (1990-1999) Fishermen repairing their fishing gear in the Philippines Bycatch being delivered for fish feed in Thailand Philippines capture-based aquaculture.
Trash fish used to feed capture-based farmed species in Asia Dissection, showing pellets used for feeding capture-based farmed yellowtails An example of poor water quality due to human impact Nitrogen budget for areolate groupers (Ephinephelus areolatus) in cage culture Bloom of dinoflagellates caused by organic pollution (x 1 000) High nutrient concentration causes algal blooms in coastal areas Tuna being sold in the Tsukiji (Tokyo) fish market Costs and returns of Japanese amberjack culture Feeding a formulated diet to Japanese amberjacks in Japan Divers are indispensable in bluefin tuna capture-based aquaculture activities Specialist employees in a capture-based aquaculture system for Japanese amberjack Artisanal capture-based aquaculture system in Southeast Asia Fishing bluefin tuna for capture-based aquaculture in the Mediterranean Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) Capture-based Japanese amberjack culture in Japan Food safety controls Bacterial seafood analysis One of the major problems in seafood distribution is inappropriate handling Capture-based farmed tuna at harvest Harvesting of Japanese amberjack in Japan.
Executive summary.
Capture-based aquaculture is a global activity but has specific characteristics that depend on geographical location and the species being cultured. The species groups used in capture-based aquaculture include molluscs (e.g. oysters, mussels, scallops), crustaceans (e.g. shrimps, crabs) and finfish (e.g. eels, grey mullets, milkfish, yellowtails, groupers, rabbitfish, tunas). The scale of such practices is difficult to quantify, but it is estimated that about 20 per cent of aquaculture production comes from capture-based aquaculture. The total value of the farmed production of the four species groups considered in this report (the figures reported to FAO are believed to be underestimates) in 2000 alone exceeded US$ 1.7 billion. This report focuses on four species that show high market demand and value and have a short growout time to market size ­ eels, yellowtails, groupers and tunas. A description of the rearing, harvesting and marketing practices for each species is provided, together with a review of environmental, social, economic, food safety and management issues. The following are the major findings:  Seed supply: no suitable commercial supply of "seed" (larvae, juveniles) exists for any of the four species groups. The use of wild-caught seed for their capture-based aquaculture potentially affects their capture fisheries but any damage caused has neither been fully defined or understood nor quantified.  Eels: eel culture benefits from well-developed artificial feed supplies, has low environmental impacts, and requires limited land. The main constraint to the expansion of this sector is seed supply, which can only be solved by hatchery production.  Groupers: the further expansion of grouper rearing will depend primarily on market development. However, better seed catching and culture techniques to reduce wastage, the development of commercially acceptable artificial feeds to replace "trash fish", better control of diseases, and a transfer of culture activities away from polluted areas are also necessary.  Tunas: further expansion of tuna fattening is anticipated in the short-term. However, long-term sustainability depends on increasing the supply of seed, currently constrained by tuna quotas and the lack of economically sound methods of hatchery production; improvements in artificial feed formulation to reduce baitfish consumption, improve FCRs and ensure meat quality; expanding markets beyond the Japanese market; and improvements in offshore technology and harvesting systems. Environmental and ethical concerns affect the public image of tuna rearing but control over the complete life cycle would remove ecological concerns and help to ensure a sustainable future.  Yellowtails: hatchery-reared yellowtail juveniles are of poorer quality than those that are wildcaught, so seed supply remains a constraint. Considerable interest in expanding this form of aquaculture not only exists in Japan, where the traditionally cultured Japanese amberjack is being joined by the rearing of two other species (yellowtail amberjack and greater amberjack), but also elsewhere, notably in Australia and the Mediterranean. Besides solving the problem of seed supply, improved feeds and feeding practices and the introduction of better management to limit losses from "red tide" events are needed. Expanding the range of products available would also be advantageous.  Environmental impact: there is a strong need for better data on the biology and fisheries of the species included in this report, with a view to determining Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) and ensuring sustainability. Seed capture for aquaculture has a potentially negative (but, as yet unquantified) impact that adds to existing high levels of fishing effort, increasing vulnerability to extinction. In addition, other topics causing environmental impact require further study. These include improved site selection; the development of feeds that cause less pollution and are less reliant on limited sources of marine protein and oil; the amelioration of the habitat destruction that is caused by certain types of seed capture; improvements in feeding practices; and better monitoring and control of existing farms.  Social and economic impacts: capture-based aquaculture provides significant positive returns in areas with depressed and marginal economies, and an alternative livelihood for coastal communities. However, the difficulties of marketing fresh fish and supplying markets that demand.
live fish (e.g. groupers), and the need to expand markets limit its potential. The development of new, value-added products would alleviate this problem. Increased competition caused by production expansion (e.g. of yellowtail culture) may lead to falling prices, as has occurred with other farmed species. Unique selling positions (USP) need to be identified for the products from capture-based aquaculture. Skill gaps are evident in the sector, including specific knowledge on economics and management, the suitability of individual (new) species for culture, information on their biology and dietary requirements, and marketing. Capture-based aquaculture is labour intensive in its farming and processing operations, and can contribute to poverty alleviation in developing countries.  Management of resources and culture practices: many difficulties are posed by the interactions between capture-based aquaculture and fisheries. Specific rules that complement existing regulations to improve management practices are required. Innovative technologies and concepts are needed to solve the problems of overfishing, bycatch, and environmental impact (e.g. on seed catching areas for groupers). Considerable efforts are being made to identify adequate responses to the challenges created by capture-based aquaculture, in particular by the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) in the Mediterranean. Capture-based aquaculture not only needs recognition as a distinct sector but integration into resource use and development planning. The principles set out in the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF) would provide useful guidance towards identifying factors that inhibit sound management and development; consultation with all stakeholders, including the private sector, is essential in this process.  Food safety issues: in common with other types of aquaculture, careful choice of aquafeed ingredients and on-growing sites, in addition to good management practices, are necessary to avoid the accumulation of chemical and antibiotic residues, in order to ensure the continued safety of farmed products. Capture-based aquaculture provides other opportunities to reduce the risks associated with food safety. For example, where ciguatera is a problem, capture-based products might be labelled as "ciguatera-free". Certification systems would be advantageous for capturebased aquaculture products.  Statistical issues: specific statistical problems exist where the animals stocked for on-growing are already of significant size. Of the