FAO Fisheries Report No. 731.
FIPL/R731 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: A CALL TO ACTION.
Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003.
Printed on ecological paper.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: A CALL TO ACTION Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-105101-1.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2004.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This is the final report of the FAO Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action, which was held at the Fiji Mocambo Hotel in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003. FAO. Report of the Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action. Nadi, Fiji, 27-31 October 2003. FAO Fisheries Report. No 731. Rome, FAO. 2004. 151p. ABSTRACT This document contains the report of, and the papers presented at, the FAO Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action which was held in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003. The goals of the Workshop were to facilitate a greater understanding of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries among all stakeholders involved in fisheries in the Pacific Islands; to foster steps towards the more effective implementation of the Code in the region; to encourage fishery policy revisions reflecting the objectives and general principles of the Code and to encourage an inclusive approach to management whereby stakeholders are involved in the development and review processes and the implementation of measures rather than an exclusive process where stakeholders are largely excluded from the processes. In the course of its deliberations, the Workshop addressed the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its framework; legal considerations and issues relating to the Code; responsible fisheries management; responsible fishing operations; responsible aquaculture and inland fisheries; responsible post-harvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. In addition, there was a role-playing exercise concerning making responsible decisions about fisheries. To enhance the participatory nature of the Workshop, five Working Groups were formed. They focused on fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture and inland fisheries development, post-harvest practices and trade and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. Each Working Group developed conclusions and recommendations. The Workshop endorsed several national, regional and global follow-up actions. The Workshop was funded by the FAO FishCode Programme through Project GCP/INT/823/JPN (SIDS: Responsible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States) and the FAO Regular Programme.
Distribution: Participants FAO Fisheries Officers, Regional and Subregional Offices.
Page OPENING OF THE WORKSHOP INTRODUCTION TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES FRAMEWORK OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ISSUES RELATING TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBLE FISHING OPERATIONS RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES RESPONSIBLE POST-HARVEST PRACTICES AND TRADE INTEGRATION OF FISHERIES INTO COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ROLE-PLAYING: MAKING RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS ABOUT FISHERIES FORMATION OF THE WORKING GROUPS AND THEIR REPORTS ON CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS GENERAL OBSERVATIONS BY THE WORKSHOP FACILITATOR AND PROPOSED FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS CLOSURE OF THE WORKSHOP 1.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Agenda List of Participants Documentation presented Opening Statement by Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, Fisheries Department, FAO Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: An Analysis of 2002 Responses 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Underpinning Concepts, Goals and Principles 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Background, Content and Role Legal Considerations for the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and Related International Plans of Action The Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Article 8 ­ Fishing Operations Responsible Aquaculture in the Pacific Islands: The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its Application to the Pacific Islands Implementing Responsible Post-Harvest Practices in the Pacific Islands Integrating Fisheries into Coastal Management in Pacific Small Island Developing States Role-Playing: Making Responsible Decisions about Fisheries Composition of the Working Groups Discussion Guides 27 28 33 34 36 46 52 62.
OPENING OF THE WORKSHOP.
The Workshop on the Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: A Call to Action, was held at the Fiji Mocambo Hotel in Nadi, Fiji, from 27 to 31 October 2003.
The Workshop was attended by 32 participants from FAO Members, inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and by five resource persons. A list of participants and resource persons is attached as Appendix B.
The Technical Secretary of the Workshop, Dr David Doulman, Senior Fishery Liaison Officer, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy, called the Workshop to order, welcoming participants, resource persons and FAO colleagues. He outlined technical matters relating to the Workshop and then read a statement on behalf of Mr Ichiro Nomura, Assistant Director-General, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. This statement is attached as Appendix D.
The Workshop Coordinator, Mr Masanami Izumi, Fishery Officer, FAO Sub-Regional Office for the Pacific Islands, Apia, Samoa, also welcomed participants, resource persons and FAO staff to the Workshop on behalf Dr. Vili Fuavao, FAO Sub-Regional Representative for the Pacific, Apia, Samoa. Mr Izumi informed the Workshop that Dr Fuavao, unfortunately, was unable to attend because of urgent matters requiring his attention in Apia. Mr Izumi then outlined administrative arrangements for the Workshop.
Dr Transform Aqorau, Legal Adviser, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, Suva, Fiji, was selected as Workshop Facilitator. He stated that it was an honour to assume this role in the Workshop given its importance for the region. He underscored the need for good governance in fisheries, as envisaged in the Code of Conduct, if the lives of Pacific islanders were to be improved. Dr. Aqorau reminded participants that the Workshop was the beginning in the process towards the promotion of greater responsibility in fisheries, pointing out that economic development in the Pacific Islands required a sustainable resource base if present and future generations were to benefit from the utilization of the region's fish stocks.
The Agenda for the Workshop is attached as Appendix A and the list of documents is attached as Appendix C. INTRODUCTION TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES.
Dr Doulman made a presentation concerning the "Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands: An Analysis of 2002 Responses". The presentation summarized self-assessment responses provided to FAO by Pacific Island countries. The responses enabled FAO to assess the extent to which Members in the region had taken steps to implement the Code, and, as a consequence, to put in place measures that promoted sustainable and responsible practices in the fisheries sector. Based on an analysis of the.
information provided by Pacific Island Members, FAO had assessed that good progress was being achieved in the implementation of the Code. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix E.
The Workshop was encouraged by the high level of responses to the questionnaire from countries in the region in 2002 and the results that were obtained concerning the implementation of the Code of Conduct. Some participants highlighted in-country problems faced with the receipt, circulation and completion of the questionnaire. It was noted that sometimes the FAO questionnaire was not completed by the competent officers but by officers who had limited understanding of the Code or of national fisheries laws. A further complication was that more than one Ministry/Department was sometimes involved in the completion of the questionnaire.
Some participants indicated that difficulty had been encountered in responding to the 2002 FAO questionnaire because of the degree of interpretation involved with some of the questions (e.g. some participants were not familiar with the terminology "limit reference point" and had interpreted this to mean "TACs", etc.). It was pointed out that such interpretation could lead to bias in responses. 10. The role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in responding to the FAO questionnaire and in promoting the implementation of the Code of Conduct was raised. It was pointed out that NGOs played an important role in the dissemination of the Code, awareness building about the Code and implementation of the Code, especially in small-scale fisheries. The Workshop was advised that NGOs were invited to respond to the questionnaire and that the quality of their responses was excellent. 11. The Workshop identified a number of issues and challenges related to the implementation of the Code. These were: how to ensure fishing and fisheries management were undertaken in a responsible manner? the reality that many fishery officers in national administrations did not have a good understanding of national fisheries laws and international fisheries instruments such as the Code of Conduct, and the need to implement fisheries policies that reflected the principles of the Code of Conduct. 12. The Workshop agreed that an important means of addressing some of the national shortcomings with respect to the completion of the FAO questionnaire and the implementation of the Code would be to establish a network of national focal points and to put in place other arrangements for the dissemination of information about the Code. 13. A further presentation was made by Dr Doulman entitled "1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Underpinning Concepts, Goals and Principles". The presentation discussed basic concepts of long-term sustainability and responsibility that underpinned the postUnited Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) international fishery instruments, including the Code of Conduct. Significantly, the Code noted that the right to fish.
carried with it certain obligations to act responsibility; it was no longer morally acceptable to act in a way that denigrated resources in the pursuit of personal gain. The Objectives and General Principles of the Code were also reviewed. This presentation of an introductory nature provided the backdrop for the subsequent presentations concerning the substantive or thematic articles of the Code. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix F. 14. In discussion, the Workshop recognized that the Code of Conduct was a voluntary instrument but that it nonetheless contained useful principles and guidelines that encouraged responsible behaviour in the fisheries sector. It was noted that there was no legal obligation to implement the Code but that there was persuasive moral weight that encouraged implementation. It was stressed that countries were often taking steps towards the implementation of the Code even though this implementation may not be explicitly recognized as such (e.g. when countries developed and implemented fishery management plans for in-shore and off-shore resources). FRAMEWORK OF THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES 15. A presentation was made by Dr Doulman entitled "1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Background, Purpose, Content and Role". The presentation reviewed the background to the development of the Code of Conduct, its purpose, content and intended role in facilitating long-term, sustainable resources use in the fisheries sector. The presentation also discussed the manner in which the Code was elaborated. Its structure was outlined and a number of global, regional and national initiatives aimed at its implementation were addressed. The importance of the Code's Technical Guidelines was highlighted because they not only provided detailed and practical guidance to support the implementation of the Code but they also served as concise reference documents for policy development on a range of fisheries issues. The presentation concluded that there was a need to focus more intensively on implementation and to address past shortcomings if fisheries were to be better utilized in future and if the global contribution of fisheries to food security was at least to be maintained, if not increased. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix G. 16. In discussion, some participants reported on recent changes in national fishery regulations, particularly those changes related to resource management. Most of the changes reflected the directions encouraged in the Code of Conduct although a direct reference to the Code was made in only one case. 17. Participants referred to a number of problems being encountered with the implementation of the Code. Moreover, the need for technical assistance to support the implementation of the Code, as foreseen in article 5, was raised by several participants. Examples of past FAO assistance to countries were indicated and the Secretariat responded that, in principle, FAO technical assistance was possible subject to the nature of the request and the availability of funds. Only through a specific request was it possible to ascertain the availability of such technical assistance which could be delivered through individual consultancies, specific projects or components of wider fisheries projects.
18. The Workshop recognized the value of the Technical Guidelines that had been prepared by FAO to assist countries and stakeholders implement the Code of Conduct. However, it was noted, with disappointment, that there was no Guideline for the management of small-scale fisheries. The Workshop urged FAO to elaborate such a Guideline. 19. The Workshop agreed that to assess progress with the implementation of the Code and to test the effectiveness of measures adopted to promote implementation, participants were of the opinion that the Code could serve as a benchmark to elaborate indicators for evaluating progress. LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ISSUES RELATING TO THE 1995 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES 20. Mr Blaise Kuemlangan, Legal Officer, FAO, Rome, Italy, made a presentation entitled "Legal Considerations for the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and Related International Plans of Action". He stated that the Code of Conduct and the related international plans of actions (IPOAs) were voluntary. This meant that they were not legally binding and were intended to facilitate, inter alia, the implementation of other binding fisheries instruments, namely the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement. It was noted that those sections of the Code that reflect binding international instruments should be seen as binding on Parties to those instruments. It was noted that the measures outlined in voluntary instruments could have significant legislative implications. The fact that the Code of Conduct was now referred to in many multilateral and bilateral agreements has increased this prospect. The most meaningful way to implement the Code of Conduct from a legislative point of view was to use it as a reference document in developing legislative provisions for legal frameworks. However, this should not discourage the implementation of the Code and other voluntary instruments by non legislative means. Much could be achieved through informal arrangements for the implementation of the Code. What was important was to begin the process of adapting the Code of Conduct and the IPOAs to the needs of the State for application within national jurisdiction. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix H. 21. The Workshop took note of the status of the Code of Conduct and the relationship it had with other binding and non-binding international fisheries instruments. The Workshop also recognized the essential role of the Code in facilitating policy development and legislative review and revision. It was pointed out that many practical issues were involved in the process of translating the Code's principles and concepts into policy and legislation. These issues may be unique for each country. In this regard, the importance of a clear policy framework was stressed so as to ensure that legislation reflected and supported that policy; indeed, it was acknowledged that if policy was "right" it would greatly assist the development of legislative frameworks that facilitated the attainment of management objectives. It was further noted that the revision of legislation often required consideration of cross-sectoral issues and some non-fisheries legislation. The Workshop agreed that there was considerable merit in attempting to consolidate all issues relevant to fisheries in the principal fisheries legislation.
22. While noting that Pacific Island countries have basic framework legislation in place for fisheries, the Workshop recognized that a lack of legislative frameworks for coastal fisheries and aquaculture management was notable. 23. With respect to ensuring stakeholders' participation in fisheries management and the implementation of legislation, there was increasing awareness in Pacific Island countries of the importance of legislating the requirement to involve stakeholders in decision-making. Such involvement may occur through membership to advisory committees or through communitybased fisheries management. In this context, it was noted that some countries already involved stakeholders in the development and review of fishery management plans. 24. The Workshop was advised that some Pacific Island countries had taken steps to implement community-based fisheries management through existing legal frameworks, with considerable success. However, it was stressed that there was no blueprint approach for the development of this type of management and that it was paramount that there be careful consideration of existing governance structures including traditional social structures and institutions in order for community-based fisheries management to take firm root. Developing legislative frameworks might be needed to implement community-based fisheries management but this should be guided by clear policies on the conceptual and operational aspects of such management. 25. It was reiterated that four IPOAs have been concluded by FAO Members within the framework of the Code of Conduct. However, discussion in the Workshop focused primarily on the IPOA-IUU. It was pointed out that the four IPOAs contained provisions relating to the development of national plans of action (NPOAs). They were the mechanisms for implementing the IPOAs. It was pointed out that the NPOAs-IUU should be elaborated by June 2004. The purpose of the NPOAs was to focus national action on IUU fishing in a systematic and coherent manner and to provide the policy framework for subsequent legislative review and revision, as might be required. 26. Participants discussed possible conflict in the objectives of the Code. An example cited was the potential conflict between promoting food security (e.g. increasing production) and the need to achieve responsible resource use (e.g. production reduction). The Workshop recognized this potential for conflict but expressed the firm opinion that the main underlying principle of the Code was that fisheries resources should not be excessively exploited. It was explained that in elaborating fishery policy and in revising fishery legislation, care should be exercised to ensure that objectives were compatible. The Workshop noted that article 4 of the Code provided for, inter alia, updating, making it a "living document". Similarly, it was pointed out that national conditions and policies were likely to change through time and that policy and legislation would require review to reflect such changes. In this way, national fishery policies and legislation should also be seen as being dynamic. 27. The Workshop considered the role of NGOs in promoting the implementation of the Code of Conduct. Participants noted that most fishery administrations in the Pacific Islands took a positive stand with respect to NGOs and their involvement in the fisheries sector, encouraging their constructive engagement in review processes and decision-making. Participants expressed.
the view that policy, administrative and legislative frameworks should be reviewed and enhanced to ensure an appropriate level of participation by NGOs. 28. The Workshop agreed that NGOs had an important role to play in the fisheries sector, and especially in: Participating in the review of fishery and aquaculture policy and in the formulation and review of national fishery and aquaculture plans; Promoting awareness among stakeholders about the need to pursue responsible policies in fisheries and aquaculture. In this connection, the powerful role played by a theatre group in the Pacific Islands was mentioned as a model for promoting and sensitizing communities about important social and economic issues such as responsible fisheries; Fulfilling a "watchdog" role with respect to policies and measures being implemented by governments, and Proactively participating in other activities that promoted the health of the fisheries sector (e.g. undertaking checks on water quality, etc.). RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT 29. Ms Barbara Hanchard, Executive Officer, Forum Fisheries Agency, Honiara, Solomon Islands, made a presentation entitled "The Implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in the Pacific Islands". Her presentation noted that the development of the Code of Conduct was fundamentally a global response to the progressive failure of countries to manage fisheries. It was pointed out that the Code provided the international community with a framework of principles, goals and elements for action with which to implement responsible fishery policies and legislation based on conservation, management and development of living marine resources, while taking into account the ecosystem and biodiversity. Ms Hanchard stressed that the Code covered principles and standards not only for the conservation and management of fisheries, per se, but also all aspects of fisheries including capture, processing and trade of fish and fishery products, fishing operations, aquaculture, fisheries research and the integration of fisheries into coastal area management. 30. The presentation commenced by providing a brief overview of the Code of Conduct. It then addressed developments in fisheries management in the Pacific Islands which sought to give effect to the Code of Conduct and other international agreements that provided principles and international standards for the conservation, management and development of living aquatic resources. This part of the presentation focused especially on a review of fishery management initiatives that had been developed and which were consistent with the principles of the Code and other international instruments. A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix I. 31. The Workshop expressed the view that fisheries management in the Pacific Islands had been generally forward looking in approach and that the regional instruments developed and implemented were consistent with the concepts and principle enshrined in the Code of Conduct. However, it was recognized that many of these instruments were directed primarily towards.
highly migratory fish stocks being harvested by foreign fishing fleets. The Workshop noted that the greatest challenge for Pacific Island countries was to maximize benefits from their tuna resources. It was further noted that these resources were the most valuable resource for many countries in the region and that in some cases they generated a substantial proportion of national income. 32. The Workshop noted that there were no regional fishing capacity limits in place and although the only tuna species considered close to being overfished were bigeye and yellowfin the region's fisheries could be described as "open access" in character. The recently negotiated Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, when in force, would be required to establish capacity and/or effort restrictions. This meant that Parties to the Convention would no longer be permitted to allow an "open access" policy and issues of allocation would require closer attention by island countries . The Workshop noted that some Pacific Island countries were fearful of limiting access as they believed that such limitations would lead to a reduction in revenue from their licensing arrangements with foreign fleets. It was further noted that in some instances rights based management was being encouraged in the Pacific Islands for both small-scale and industrial fisheries. 33. The Workshop recognized that the Regional Register of Foreign Fishing Vessels maintained by the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) on behalf of its Members had been an effective tool in regulating the operation of foreign vessels operating in the Pacific Islands. The Register had also been highly beneficial to countries in that it had encouraged compliance by vessels with national laws. 34. Some participants noted the aspirations of their countries to establish viable and responsible domestic fishing industries as a means of replacing existing licensing arrangements with foreign fleets. The Workshop recognized that such action would bring more stable and greater social and economic benefit to island countries. 35. In response to a query on the ARGOS type of satellite monitoring system being trialed in a domestic fishery, the Workshop was advised that this system was based on orbiting satellites and had to "store and send" data that introduced delays of up to seven hours in reporting to a fisheries monitoring centre. Furthermore, it was noted that ARGOS had a disadvantage in that it was a one way system and vessels could not be "polled". Systems based on Inmarsat or other similar communication systems did not have these disadvantages. However, for developing countries and small-sized vessels, the Workshop recognized that cost was an important consideration in selecting a vessel monitoring system (VMS). RESPONSIBLE FISHING OPERATIONS 36. Dr Andrew Smith, Fishery Industries Officer, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome, Italy, made a presentation entitled "The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: Article 8 ­ Fishing Operations". He stated that article 8 of the Code was probably the most important of all the articles, noting that if there were no fishing operations there would be no need for the other articles of the Code. It was explained that article 8 commenced by listing the general duties of all States irrespective of whether fishing was important to their economies or not. It was pointed out.
that even land-locked States could be involved indirectly in fishing and that the occurrence of IUU fishing was sometimes assisted by a lack of responsible behaviour by countries that were indirectly involved in fishing activities (i.e., by registering fishing vessels and then not exercising effective flag State control over them). A copy of the paper on which the presentation was based is attached as Appendix J. 37. The Workshop expressed interest in the development and costs of a new satellite surveillance method, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), and in the opportunities that this new system would provide. This system is currently being trialed by the European Union (EU). Dr Smith responded that while costs for this system were high, research into improvements was ongoing. The EU expected the system to be operational in 2004. He also noted that it was useful to consider the cost of traditional methods of aerial and surface surveillance in comparison to this new development and its additional features. 38. The Workshop took note of the principles in the Code relating to fishing gear selectivity and some participants identified the current concern in the Pacific Islands with respect to the take of small fish in tuna purse seine fisheries. The Workshop was advised that by-catch reduction devices were available for other fisheries such as trawl fisheries. It was also noted that some work had already been done involving the insertion of grids in purse seine nets but that these devices were operationally cumbersome. It was pointed out that the schooling behaviour of pelagic species presented challenges for developing appropriate by-catch devices. The issue of discards and the take of sharks in some fisheries was also raised by participants. In response, Dr Smith stated that many countries had made the capture of shark illegal or had in place regulatory measures to ensure the landing of both fins and carcasses. 39. With respect to IUU fishing in the Pacific Islands, it was noted that this is a matter of ongoing concern. The Workshop welcomed the IPOA-IUU and its associated Technical Guideline as a means of trying to address IUU fishing. Participants agreed that monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) played an important role in combating IUU fishing, but that the financial constraints of MCS in the Pacific Islands was an important consideration. 40. Some participants informed the Workshop that progress was being made towards implementing national anti-pollution legislation based on regional coordinated templates and in line with the MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships as identified in the Code but that in some instances no reference was made to discards by fishing vessels. 41. On a related matter, Dr Smith encouraged Pacific Island countries to implement requirements relating to the marking of fishing gear and to prohibit the dumping of gear at sea, while recognizing that some latitude was required in cases of accidental loss of gear. 42. The Workshop agreed that greater national awareness and coordination was required with respect to cross cutting legislation that was relevant to responsible fisheries.
RESPONSIBLE AQUACULTURE AND INLAND FISHERIES 43. Mr Ben Ponia, Aquaculture Advisor, Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Noumea, New Caledonia, made a presentation entitled "Responsible Aquaculture in the Pacific: The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its Application in the Pacific Islands". It was noted that guidance