FAO Fisheries Report No. 737.
FIIT/R737 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
FAO/SPC REGIONAL EXPERT CONSULTATION ON SEA SAFETY IN SMALL FISHING VESSELS.
Suva, Fiji, 9­13 February 2004.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the FAO/SPC REGIONAL EXPERT CONSULTATION ON SEA SAFETY IN SMALL FISHING VESSELS Suva, Fiji, 9­13 February 2004.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-105111-9.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2004.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
In early 2003, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) undertook a survey on fisheries-related sea safety in the Pacific Islands region. The objective of that work was to consolidate the experience gained by selected countries in safety at sea with a view to improving ongoing and future activities in the region. A major conclusion of the survey was that the majority of loss of life in the Pacific Islands region is associated with small fishing boats which have received the least attention in terms of legislation, construction standards, enforcement strategies, regional discussions, training on proper use, and other schemes to improve safety. The report of the survey indicated that many of these issues have facets that involve law, naval architecture, search, rescue, community awareness, maritime administration, fisheries and other fields. FAO and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) agreed that a meeting attended by motivated people having expertise in these disciplines could have a very positive effect on regional and national sea safety programmes. The FAO/SPC Regional Expert Consultation on Sea Safety in Small Fishing Vessels held in Suva, Fiji, from 9 to 13 February 2004 was intended to produce this outcome.
Distribution: Participants at the meeting Secretariat of the Pacific Community FIGIS Mailing List FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional Fishery Officers.
FAO. Report of the FAO-SPC Regional Expert Consultation on Sea Safety in Small Fishing Vessels. Suva, Fiji, 9­13 February 2004. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 737. Rome, FAO. 2004. 51p. ABSTRACT Work in the Pacific Islands by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) had indicated that to effectively address most problem areas on sea safety requires a multidisciplinary approach. The key disciplines associated with sea safety include law, fisheries, naval architecture, search/rescue, community awareness and maritime administration. Discussions between FAO and SPC led to an agreement to bring together motivated people from several relevant disciplines to discuss sea safety, and specifically focus on challenging issues, related to small fishing vessels. As a result, an FAO/SPC Regional Expert Consultation on Sea Safety in Small Fishing Vessels was convened firstly to address and progress the most important issues in fisheries sea safety from the perspectives of several relevant disciplines and, secondly, to formulate plans for future sea safety programmes. The Consultation was held in Suva from 9 to 13 February 2004. Discussions focused in particular on the significance of good sea accident data, mandatory requirements for vessel registration, vessel inspection and crew certification, enforcement of regulations in remote locations and training requirements for improving safety in small fishing boats. This report lists a number of recommendations together with considerations relating to their implementation.
BACKGROUND OPENING OF THE CONSULTATION ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA PRESENTATION BY THE CHAIRMAN PRESENTATION OF DISCUSSION PAPERS DISCUSSION GROUPS AND PLENARY DISCUSSION FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CONSULTATION IMPLEMENTING THE RECOMMENDATIONS THE WAY FORWARD DETERMINING AND ADDRESSING COUNTRY NEEDS OTHER ISSUES ADOPTION OF THE REPORT CONCLUDING REMARKS.
APPENDIXES A B C D E F Agenda List of participants Discussion papers Important conclusions from each discussion group Notes on implementing the recommendations Acronyms used in this report 11 13 17 37 43 51.
BACKGROUND Work in the Pacific Islands by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) on sea safety has indicated that to effectively address most problem areas requires a multidisciplinary approach. The key disciplines associated with sea safety include law, fisheries, naval architecture, search/rescue, community awareness and maritime administration. Discussions between FAO and SPC led to an agreement to bring together motivated people from several relevant disciplines to discuss sea safety, and specifically focus on challenging issues, related to small fishing vessels. As a result, an FAO/SPC Regional Expert Consultation on Sea Safety in Small Fishing Vessels was convened to: Address and progress four important issues in fisheries sea safety from the perspectives of several relevant disciplines. These issues are: (1) appropriate sea safety regulations for small fishing vessels; (2) improvements in sea safety awareness programmes; (3) improving the safety of fibreglass skiffs through construction standards; and (4) enhancing systems of sea accident data recording. Formulate plans for future sea safety programmes. OPENING OF THE CONSULTATION The Consultation was held in Suva from 9 to 13 February 2004. The meeting was called to order by Mr Malakai Tuiloa, Deputy Director of the Fiji Fisheries Department. He extended a greeting to overseas participants and welcomed the participants to the Consultation. Mr Tuiloa thanked FAO and SPC for taking the initiative to sponsor the meeting and indicated that, due to the large loss of life, it was timely to have such a meeting focused on small fishing boats. The Chairman of the consultation, Mr Ian Cartwright, was introduced. He explained that most individuals attending the meeting were doing so in their personal capacities. This was followed by a self-introduction of the participants. There was special acknowledgement of the representative of the International Maritime Organization. The 32 participants and their contact details are given in Appendix B. Mr Jeremy Turner, Chief, Fishing Technology Service, FAO, addressed the meeting on behalf of the Director General of FAO. He welcomed participants and explained that the Fisheries Department of FAO has been working in the field of fishermen's safety for 50 years. During that period the Organization had acquired considerable global experience on the causes of sea safety accidents and the effectiveness of interventions to prevent such accidents. The current emphasis of the work at FAO related to safety is on raising global awareness of the problem, of its magnitude and of the causes, and is aimed primarily at administrations and policy makers. In the Pacific Islands area, FAO commissioned studies on sea safety in 1991 and in 2003. The more recent study identified four important issues which are crucial to improving sea safety. Mr Turner explained that, due to its breadth of participation, the Consultation has at its disposal the dimensions, experience and expertise to address these four important issues in a holistic manner and subsequently improve safety in the region. The present challenge to develop political will and commitment to deal effectively with sea safety issues was highlighted.
Mr Tim Adams, Director of SPC's Marine Resources Division, spoke to the meeting. He endorsed the sentiments expressed by Mr Turner and indicated that within the Pacific Islands region, the issue of sea safety on small fishing vessels suffered from lack of attention due to gaps in institutional mandates. SPC needed direction from the consultation on priorities in sea safety. Mr Adams indicated that there is potential for SPC to highlight the problem of sea safety at regional meetings, draw the attention of the international community and interest donors in contributing to solutions. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA A draft agenda was discussed. There was a comment that the training aspects of sea safety seemed to be lacking. After some discussion, the meeting agreed that training is a key issue and would be dealt with under each of the four theme areas rather than as a separate agenda item. The agenda as adopted is given in Appendix A. PRESENTATION BY THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman gave a presentation dealing with two components: (1) an overview of sea safety work in the region, and (2) the proposed structure of the consultation. The major regional initiatives in sea safety in the Pacific Islands in recent years were reviewed: the 1991 FAO/McCoy study, the SPC Coastal Fisheries Programme's safety awareness and statutory training, the SPC Regional Maritime Programme's shipping legislation and provision of maritime training, and the 2003 FAO/Gillett study. The FAO/Gillett study recommended several priority items for improving sea safety, including a regional sea safety workshop which evolved into the FAO/SPC Regional Expert Consultation on Sea Safety in Small Fishing Vessels. The Chairman proposed a structure for the meeting. This consisted of Part One in which each of the 27 participants would be assigned to one of four discussion groups corresponding to the major themes of the consultation: (1) Appropriate sea safety regulations for small fishing vessels; (2) Improvements in sea safety awareness programmes; (3) Improving the safety of fibreglass skiffs through construction standards; and (4) Enhancing systems of sea accident data recording. It was suggested that each group carry out detailed discussions on their theme during the first three days and report the main conclusions related to improving sea safety to a plenary session where the conclusions would be further discussed, prioritized and modified into recommendations. The fourth and fifth days of the consultation (Part Two) would consider how best to implement these recommendations, who would do the work and with what resources. The meeting agreed to this format. The Chairman provided some suggested definitions and focus areas for the consultation, which were subsequently adopted. He noted that the definitions were put forward to ensure common understanding between participants. "Sea safety" refers to the preparations and activities associated with safely returning to port at the conclusion of a fishing trip without outside assistance, or more simply "getting home". The focus of the Consultation is the small fishing vessel. Although many of the topics discussed are applicable to larger fishing vessels and to small non-fishing vessels, the competence of the consultation and the thrust of the discussions are to be small fishing vessels.
A "small fishing vessel" is any undecked, unpowered, or outboard-powered fishing vessel. The emphasis of the Consultation should be on prevention of sea accidents rather than a cure for accidents that have occurred. PRESENTATION OF DISCUSSION PAPERS Short discussion papers covering the four themes of the conference were presented by the authors. These papers are given in Appendix C. Each paper ended with a section entitled "Points to be Discussed and Possibly Resolved" which formed a basis for the deliberations in the four discussion groups. Following presentation of the four theme papers to the plenary session, the group offered suggestions for additional items to be discussed by individual groups. DISCUSSION GROUPS AND PLENARY DISCUSSION On Monday afternoon the plenary session divided into the four discussion groups. The groups were instructed to run quickly through the list of discussion points to judge the magnitude of the task and to begin discussing some of the key issues. The groups discussed the various topics and made brief progress reports to the plenary session on Tuesday. Following discussion of these reports in plenary, the Chairman instructed each group to identify about ten important conclusions, principles or "burning issues" for presentation to, and discussion at, the plenary session on Wednesday. The resulting plenary discussions were quite lively and from this emerged several issues that cut across many of the discussion groups. The topic of mandatory requirements for vessel registration, vessel inspection and crew certification received considerable attention. On the one hand, some participants felt that while implementing such mandatory requirements presented considerable challenges, they represented a useful model for countries to strive towards. In this respect it was felt that it would be somewhat negligent if the group did not make such a statement on the issue. On the other hand, some individuals believed that mandatory requirements would be impractical in many locations, could affect the credibility of the outputs of the Consultation and that the target problems could be better addressed through other means. The consultation participants arrived at a compromise in which the group's conclusion was that there should be an investigation of the feasibility and desirability of mandatory sea safety requirements. It was acknowledged that enforcement of regulations in remote locations is extremely difficult and there is a large range of enforcement conditions across the countries of the Pacific Islands. There was general agreement in the consultation that "top down" solutions are rarely effective in the outer islands and that village-level institutions could offer an alternative to enforcement by urban-based agencies. It was also noted that full use should be made of the experiences gained from successes in outer islands enforcement of mandatory requirements in other sectors.
The importance of good sea accident data arose in the discussions of all four of the Consultation themes. The benefits from the availability of this data included: determining the real problems for which regulations should be formulated, the generation of political will, gauging effectiveness of accident reduction programmes, and identifying areas of concern in vessel construction. Training required for improving safety in small fishing boats was discussed in each of the four groups. Some common areas of training needs that came out in the plenary discussions included "light" or informal training considerably below the standard of some of the more formal courses now available, portable courses that could be taken to remote locations and an increased focus on training for community members. Many of the discussions of the four sets of conclusions included reference to automobile analogies: programmes to reduce road fatalities, use of seat belts, good data to target problems areas, increased use of regulations, and the use of visible reminders of accidents. The consultation believed that much is to be learned from successful road accident campaigns, but one participant cautioned that the education level for those targeted in sea safety campaigns is considerably lower than those individuals who drive cars. As a result of the plenary debate and discussion, modifications were made to the conclusions of the four discussion groups to reflect the sentiments of the full group. The important conclusions for each group, as modified by the plenary discussions, are given in Appendix D. FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS The Chairman instructed that the 41 conclusions of the four discussion groups be examined by a plenary subgroup. He requested that a small number of recommendations be formulated from the most important conclusions, bearing in mind the discussions that occurred, the relative importance of the various conclusions and any cross-cutting features. The resulting recommendations were subsequently presented to, and discussed in, a plenary session. THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CONSULTATION Nine recommendations were presented to the plenary session for consideration. Discussions took place that resulted in modifications to some of the recommendations and some additions. Because the importance of having a national sea safety strategy emerged strongly from the deliberations, all recommendations were placed in that context. The resulting general recommendations of the Consultation are: The Expert Consultation recommended that improved small boat safety will best be achieved through the development and implementation of coordinated national strategies, which should include:.
Provision of support to a consultative national stakeholder framework (e.g. national sea safety coordinating group) and motivated people or "drivers". The generation of commitment and political will at national level to address small vessel sea safety. Increasing the effectiveness of ongoing sea safety awareness programmes, with special emphasis on the development of channels for the efficient distribution of appropriate and updated materials, and evaluation of impact.
The development, enactment and implementation of appropriate and sensitive legislation for small fishing vessels, including the carriage of safety equipment, training/certification requirements and construction standards.
The determination of minimum mandatory requirements for each class of small fishing vessel, with due regard to operational circumstances.
The full use of existing institutions and community-based structures for increasing compliance, data collection, training and awareness, taking into account the time and resources required.
The development and phased implementation of appropriate enforcement procedures to ensure compliance.
The development and maintenance of national sea accident databases.
Support for the establishment of an SPC fishing vessel safety at sea special interest group1 and associated newsletter and the development of additional sea safety awareness resource materials. 10. Investigation of the advantages and disadvantages of the establishment of small fishing vessel registration and inspection schemes. 11. Formal and informal training directed at fishers, fishing communities, government staff, NGOs, the private sector and other stakeholders. 12. Consideration of the inclusion of sea safety as an integral part of fisheries management and development initiatives. IMPLEMENTING THE RECOMMENDATIONS The above recommendations to improve sea safety in small fishing vessels were developed during the first three days of the consultation. Part 2 (days 4 and 5) of the consultation focused on implementation of the recommendations. The group commenced Part 2 by going through the list of recommendations and, for each one, listing the considerations relating to implementation. These considerations were subsequently grouped under each recommendation into the categories of: (1) how to do it, (2) who should do it, and (3) what resources would be needed. The result was a non-exhaustive list of important factors for countries to consider when implementing the recommendations of the consultation. These are given in Appendix E. The plenary discussions on implementing the recommendations were wide-ranging. Some of the points made were specific to one recommendation and these have been incorporated into the list given in Appendix E. Other comments were applicable to more than one recommendation and some general consensus became apparent from the discussion. These important points include: Two items were mentioned repeatedly in conjunction with implementing several recommendations: a national sea safety strategy and good information on vessels/accidents. This carries some suggestion that these are fundamental in national sea safety improvement.
SPC has established special interest groups (SIG) in several areas, including fisheries training, traditional marine resource management, trochus, and women in fisheries. Each SIG has an informational bulletin, editor, and members who contribute articles and exchange information.
Ultimately, sea safety is a national responsibility and many efforts to improve safety need to be continuous. Such efforts must be formulated so that local resources, whether government, NGO or private sector, continue to be available after the completion of any initial regional or international assistance. Effective consultation, particularly with fishers and communities, is vitally important for the success of many of the initiatives cited in the recommendations. The effort and resources required for such consultation can, however, be very large. Improving sea safety is a relatively new undertaking for many Pacific Island countries. Progress could probably be accelerated by learning from national initiatives in other sectors, such as road safety and AIDS awareness. The private sector, including boatbuilders, outboard engine distributors, and fuel companies, could have a large role to play in efforts to improve national sea safety. This could include promotion of training, membership on coordinating committees, provision of funding, and assisting in awareness campaigns. It is inevitable that some efforts to improve safety will be more effective than others. To make optimum use of scarce safety resources, the various efforts should be evaluated periodically to determine effectiveness and any need to redirect resources. THE WAY FORWARD After the discussion of implementing the recommendations, the participants considered the steps to be taken in the near future to take advantage of external assistance dealing with sea safety. The group indicated that there should be a national focus to any assistance which may be available. As improving sea safety is a national responsibility, the priority should be to increase national capability and to complement national efforts rather than to act as a substitute for national efforts. It was also acknowledged that there is considerable variability in assistance needs across the very diverse countries of the Pacific Islands region. This suggests that assistance must be tailored to individual countries and to do so may require substantial consultation to "get it right". Finally, development assistance should be formulated in recognition that sea safety conditions are not static. Conditions that affect small fishing boat safety will inevitably change. Some of the changes which are likely to occur are: increasing populations in Pacific Island countries, resulting in decreasing availability of near-shore fishery resources, encouraging fishers in small fishing boats to venture further offshore in pursuit of pelagic fish; fewer alternatives to fishing employment; greater use of fish aggregating devices, which has both positive and negative implications for safety; decreasing use of wood as a small boat construction material, increasing use of fibreglass; an increase in the size of outboard engines; a greater need to take risks in order to repay fishing equipment loans; less traditional fishing craft; erosion of traditional seamanship skills.
DETERMINING AND ADDRESSING COUNTRY NEEDS The Consultation discussed at length the ways in which FAO and SPC could assist in determining and assisting national needs. The FAO representative stated an interest in offering assistance, but to do so required full consultation with countries. The various possibilities for obtaining country views and inputs were distilled into three options:.
FAO could assist through a Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) in which all involved countries (i.e. those countries that request assistance) would be visited and a comprehensive needs analysis could be carried out for those countries. The end product of this process would be a detailed project document which would assist countries develop their national sea safety strategies and that a donor could subsequently use in conjunction with a substantial national or regional sea safety project.
The report of the Consultation could be presented for further input and endorsement at two relevant forthcoming SPC regional meetings. These are the SPC Heads of Fisheries (HoF) meeting, tentatively scheduled in July­August 2004 and the meeting of the Association of Pacific Island Maritime Training Institutions and Maritime Authorities (APIMTIMA) in May 2004. Participants to HoF could start identifying and prioritizing national needs and formulate a request to FAO for a TCP project. The outcomes of the Consultation would also be presented at the CRGA (SPC's governing body) meeting in November 2004.
A smaller number of countries (or countries individually) could formulate a request to FAO for a TCP project that would include identification of needs, assistance with the development of a national strategy and implementation of some activities. SPC could assist with the coordination of this TCP project. There was a discussion of the merits of the above options. Although the importance of national consultation was recognized throughout the Consultation, there was some sentiment that considerable discussions on national needs had already occurred or would occur soon through regional meetings. There was an alternative view that such consultation would be largely limited to government agencies and may not take into consideration the views of other groups, such as fishermen's associations and NGOs. It was noted that the production of a detailed project document is no guarantee that major donor support would follow. A clear consensus for a preferred option did not emerge from the participants, partly because of funding uncertainties associated with the options. There appeared to be general support for Option Two, while there was little enthusiasm for Option One. There was support for the concept of formulating a request to IMO for some of the important foundation activities (e.g. accident database). Discussion also focused on the other steps to be taken in the near future in support of sea safety initiatives. As noted above, it was generally agreed that the report of the Consultation should be presented to forthcoming SPC meetings. These regional meetings could serve several purposes, including raising the profile of sea safety in the region, serving as a mechanism for national consultation, attracting donor attention, and gauging the support/need for a regional small vessel safety programme. Participants to HoF could start identifying and prioritizing national needs and formulate a request to FAO for a TCP project. It may also be possible that the HoF meeting could.
recommend that an SPC-based regional small vessel safety programme be established. It was noted that these discussions would be enhanced if a session of the HoF was set aside to focus on sea safety issues. This possibility is to be explored. At the APIMTIMA meeting, country delegates would be asked to report on small boat safety as part of their country paper. OTHER ISSUES Although the Consultation focused on four key issues, a number of useful suggestions on how to improve sea safety in other areas were raised by participants. In order that these interventions not be lost and to enable them to be considered (where appropriate) during the development of national sea safety strategies, they are listed below. The issue of communications was raised as an issue of significance on a number of occasions. The Consultation recognized the problems in some countries with radio communications, including the situation in remote communities and high cost of maintaining a network. In other places, communications are considered an essential part of reducing casualties, and minimizing search and rescue efforts. Problems with outboard engines are one of the major causes of accidents in small fishing vessels. In view of this, there was general agreement that administrations should strive towards a mandatory requirement that at least one person on every outboard-powered vessel should at least have some form of certification of training on emergency outboard troubleshooting and maintenance. However, the consultation did not underestimate the complexities in ensuring the provision of training, certification and ensuring compliance with such a requirement, particularly in remote islands. The Consultation recognized the importance of including a knowledge of weather as a part of seamanship skills within training or awareness on basic vessel safety. It was also appreciated that there is scope for improvement in weather forecast broadcasting, with particular reference to remote islands, regularity and comprehension of broadcasts, and the possibility of including sea safety messages as part of broadcasts. The Consultation noted that many of the sea safety accidents in small vessels occurred when these boats were being used for transport purposes (passengers, freight). Small vessel safety regulations should therefore be formulated in consideration of these activities. The Australian Pacific Patrol Boat Programme (PPB) is active is most Pacific Island countries. Recognizing that a significant amount of sea time of the PPB vessels is used in search and rescue operations for small fishing vessels (about half of all operating hours in Fiji), the possibility that the PPB programme may be interested in supporting sea safety improvements in the region should be explored. The meeting agreed to this procedure. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT The procedures for the adoption of the report were discussed. It was suggested that a draft report be submitted to the Chairman for modification, after which time it would be submitted to SPC and FAO for further modification. The resultant version would be sent to four of the Consultation participants who would have a week to provide comments to the Chairman. After formal FAO clearance, the report would be circulated by E-mail and subsequently hard copies would be distributed.
CONCLUDING REMARKS Mr Jeremy Turner of FAO thanked the participants for their contribution to the meeting and indicated that the discussions were both focused and comprehensive. He stated that real progress had been made during the five days and he looked forward to assisting countries in the future. Mr Michel Blanc of SPC also thanked the participants and expressed his satisfaction with the FAO-SPC cooperation in hosting the meeting.
APPENDIX A AGENDA.
Monday, 9 February 2004 morning Call to order Fiji welcome Opening prayer Introduction of Chairman Self-introduction from each participant Meeting administration matters: finances, hotel arrangements, hours of meeting, return flight confirmation, office facilities, cocktail party, barbeque Words from FAO Words from SPC Adoption of agenda A few words of self-introduction from each participant Presentation by chairman: (1) Overview of sea safety work in the region, and (2) Overview of consultation Establishment of the four discussion groups Discussion of group recording and reporting afternoon Short presentation of the four discussion papers.
Appropriate Sea Safety Regulations for Small Fishing Vessels.
Improving Small Boat Sea Safety Awareness Programmes.
Construction Standards for Small Fibreglass Fishing Vessels.
Enhancing Systems for Sea Accident Data Recording Break into the four groups for discussion.
Tuesday, 10 February morning Discussions in the four groups Mid-morning progress reports of the discussion groups to the full group afternoon Discussions in the four groups Full group discussion.
Wednesday, 11 February 2004 morning Group discussions Reports of groups to full group General full group discussion afternoon General full group discussion Other matters Summary of first part of the Consultation.
Thursday 12 and Friday 13 February 2004 How to do the follow up work Who does the work Funding for the wor