FAO Fisheries Circular No. 995.
FIPL/C995 (En).
ISSN 0429-9329.
DECISION-MAKING IN REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES OR ARRANGEMENTS: THE EVOLVING ROLE OF RFBS AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT ON DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
by Judith Swan SwanSea Oceans Environment Inc.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2004.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS CIRCULAR This Circular was prepared within the framework of the Regular Programme as part of on-going activities of the FAO International Institutions and Liaison Service (FIPL) aimed at providing information on activities of regional fishery bodies.
Swan, J.* Decision-making in Regional Fishery Bodies or Arrangements: the evolving role of RFBs and international agreement on decision-making processes. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 995. Rome, FAO. 2004. 82p. ABSTRACT This Circular describes the evolving role of Regional Fishery Bodies or Arrangements (RFBs), from the advisory bodies established during the first half of the twentieth century to the current trend of establishing management bodies. It also describes the recognition in recent international instruments of the authority of RFBs as management bodies, a response to the need for strengthened fisheries governance by RFBs. References to the role of RFBs and decision-making are reviewed in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement, the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. Key areas relating to decision-making in RFBs described in the international instruments include the precautionary approach, agreement on decision-making procedures that facilitate the adoption of conservation and management measures in a timely and effective manner, transparency in the decision-making process, decision-making procedures for dispute prevention, and strengthening decision-making to implement relevant policies. Information complied on selected RFBs is summarized to illustrate some activities and procedures that fall within the areas addressed in the international instruments. The information ­ given in detail for each selected RFB in Appendix 2 and in a summary chart in Appendix 3 ­ includes a profile of relevant RFB functions and requirements as follows: area of competence, membership, organization, observers, decision-making by principal body, objection procedures and dispute settlement. This Circular is descriptive only and presents information on selected RFBs in summary form. There is no assessment or analysis of the decisions taken, as the objective of this review is to promote a better understanding of the evolution of the role of RFBs and relevant international agreement on the elements involved in decision-making processes.
_______ * With preliminary work by David Evans.
TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF ACRONYMS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
BACKGROUND ­ THE EVOLVING ROLE OF REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES OR ARRANGEMENTS (RFBs) AND RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS The evolving role of RFBs The role of RFBs under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 UN Convention) The role of RFBs under the Post-UNCED international fisheries instruments 1.3.1 The Post-UNCED international fisheries instruments 1.3.2 The 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement 1.3.3 The IPOA-IUU GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING IN RFBs Strengthening fisheries governance by RFBs Decision-making objectives, features and processes in RFBs Basis for this review of decision-making in selected RFBs REVIEW OF KEY DECISION-MAKING RULES AND PROCESSES IN SELECTED RFBS Precautionary approach Function of RFBs ­ agreement on decision-making procedures 3.2.1 Membership requirements and allocation criteria for new members 3.2.2 Subsidiary bodies: clear and timely procedures for making recommendations/giving advice 3.2.3 Principal bodies: clear and timely procedures 3.2.4 Entry into force in an appropriate time period 3.2.5 An objection procedure consistent with the criteria of timeliness and effectiveness Transparency Dispute prevention IPOA-IUU CONCLUSION vii viii 1.
1.1 1.2 1.3.
2.1 2.2 2.3.
3.1 3.2.
3.3 3.4 3.5 4.
APPENDIX 1: SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS ON RFBs IN POST-UNCED INTERNATIONAL FISHERY INSTRUMENTS 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries 2001 International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU).
vi APPENDIX 2: INFORMATION ON SELECTED REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES Global International Whaling Commission (IWC) Trans-Ocean Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Regional General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) International Baltic Sea Fisheries Commission (IBSFC) Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO) North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC) South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization (SEAFO) Species Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO) APPENDIX 3: SUMMARY INFORMATION RELATING TO DECISION-MAKING BY RFBS IN THIS REVIEW 33.
vii LIST OF ACRONYMS CCAMLR COFI FAO FIGIS FIRMS GFCM IATTC IBSFC ICCAT IOTC IPOA-IUU IWC MCS NAFO NASCO NEAFC REIO RFB RFMO SEAFO SOFIA TAC UNCED VMS WSSD Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources FAO Committee on Fisheries Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fisheries Global Information System Fisheries Resources Monitoring System General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas Indian Ocean Tuna Commission International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing International Whaling Commission Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission Regional Economic Integration Organization Regional Fishery Bodies or Arrangements (where specified, this also applies to regional fishery management organizations or arrangements) Regional Fishery Management Organizations or Arrangements South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture Report Total Allowable Catch United Nations Conference on Environment and Development Vessel Monitoring System World Summit on Sustainable Development.
viii EXECUTIVE SUMMARY A clear shift in the role of RFBs has occurred over the past half-century, a trend which has intensified since the adoption of key international fisheries instruments after the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). In the first half of the twentieth century, the mandates of many RFBs identified their roles as research arm and advisor rather than decision-maker and enforcer. The first watershed event ­ initiation of the process leading to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ("1982 UN Convention") ­ prompted a focus on the emerging role of RFBs. A suite of new activities was envisaged, and this prompted RFBs to review and amend their conventions and opened the door to the establishment of new organizations with more modern mandates. The second watershed event ­ adoption of the post-UNCED international fisheries instruments, brought the role of RFBs into sharper focus. In particular, the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement ("Fish Stocks Agreement") aims for a coherent conservation and management process. Its dependence on RFBs to achieve that process is clear: they are expected to become the management authorities for the establishment of conservation and management measures for the high seas and for their enforcement, through member States, on the high seas. In many respects, however, its application extends beyond the high seas and to States that are not party. Fundamental to the new role it creates for RFBs in general, the Fish Stocks Agreement sets out an extensive list of RFB functions that underline the management role of RFBs. These functions take on particular significance in view of provisions relating to fishing by non-members and new entrants. Among the functions is a requirement for States, in fulfilling their obligation to cooperate through RFBs, to "agree on decision-making procedures which facilitate the adoption of conservation and management measures in a timely and effective manner". This is accompanied by other provisions relating to decision-making that address the precautionary approach, transparency and dispute prevention. Reinforced by other post-UNCED international fisheries instruments, these areas indicate broad international agreement on decision-making in RFBs. They form the framework in this document for the review of decision-making in selected RFBs. The recognition by the international community of the need for strengthened fisheries governance led to a review and reform of the mandates of some RFBs. At the same time, some RFBs have identified a number of constraints, such as a lack of willingness by member States to delegate sufficient decision-making powers to the regional bodies. This review, notes that decision-making is only one of many interrelated elements of governance by RFBs and that developing performance indicators for self-evaluation is within the domain of the RFBs, takes an objective approach in presenting information. While it is recognized that there are three main elements to decision-making ­ political will, legal obligations and institutional mechanisms - there is no attempt to analyse or evaluate the constraints or effectiveness of the decision-making process in any RFB or the reason for the adoption by an RFB of any particular process or decisions. There is a wide range of decision-making objectives, functions and processes among the RFBs, and examples of these are described. Their relevance to the areas in the international instruments is introduced, and the increased level of activity of decision-making activity in some RFBs is noted. A review of key decision-making rules and processes in RFBs is presented, within the framework of the provisions in the international agreements described above. In relation to the Fish Stocks Agreement's call for improved decision-making in implementing the precautionary approach, this review notes that many RFBs are endorsing or implementing precautionary approach, including the establishment of reference points. Some RFBs see scope to improve data collection and management in certain areas, and many endorse the sharing of information and data. Approaches that have been taken towards improvement of decision-making on issues concerning the precautionary approach are described in the text.
ix The functions of RFBs described in Article 10 of the Fish Stocks Agreement include the obligation for States to "agree on decision-making procedures which facilitate the adoption of conservation and management measures in a timely and effective manner." In this context, the following areas are considered, with illustrations drawn from the selected RFBs: subsidiary bodies, principal bodies, entry into force of conservation and management measures in an appropriate time period, and an objection procedure that is consistent with the criteria of timeliness and effectiveness. Membership issues, including allocation criteria for new members, can also affect decision-making, and they are addressed as a backdrop to the above four areas. Reference is made to requirements of real interests, accommodating the interests of new members and the nature and extent of participatory rights. Membership requirements of the RFBs in this review are considered, with most RFBs in the review providing for open membership, subject to various requirements. Adoption of criteria that determines the nature or extent of participatory rights for new members facilitates the adoption of conservation and management measures and may encourage objectivity. Decision-making in the subsidiary bodies is normally not provided in the Convention or Agreement establishing the RFB, but may be found in the rules of procedure. On the whole, subsidiary bodies make recommendations that are not binding and their decisions or reports are reached by consensus. The institutional structure of each RFB, including its subsidiary bodies, is different, and can be very complex with many levels, as illustrated in the text. The value of adopting clear decision-making procedures to ensure that the recommendations or advice will be timely and effective is emphasised. Decision-making procedures for conservation and management measures by the principal bodies (Commissions) are included in the constitutive instrument for an RFB, and vary from a requirement for a unanimous decision, to a specified majority or simple majority, and a stated quorum. Some RFBs allow votes to be taken by secret ballot, roll call or, between sessions as needed, by written communication. The time period between decision on and entry into force of conservation and management measures is normally set out in the constitutive instrument of the RFB. If an objection procedure is not used the earliest time for entry into force in the RFBs in this review ranges from 60 days to six months. The objection procedures differ in each RFB, but if there are objections, the longest period before entryinto-force is between around 100 days and eight months or longer. Various elements of the objection procedures are discussed. To enhance transparency in the decision-making process, RFBs have inter alia adopted procedures for observers. The rules are summarized, including reference to qualifications of observers, application procedures and attendance at meetings. Although most RFBs focus on the related area of dispute settlement, many of the RFBs in this review do not include dispute settlement in their constitutive instrument. Procedures for those that do are described, and procedures for dispute prevention, called for in the Fish Stocks Agreement, are discussed. One recently established RFB has taken some innovative steps in this regard. The IPOA-IUU calls for strengthened decision-making in RFBs for effective implementation of relevant policies, and the implications of this are addressed in the context of the call by the World Summit on Sustainable Development to put the IPOA-IUU into effect by 2004. The evolving role of RFBs to management bodies has placed demands on decision-making in RFBs, as evidenced by post-UNCED international instruments. While RFBs have not, on the whole, actively reviewed this area of governance, the current decade, a period of consolidation in which the postUNCED instruments are being implemented, could provide a platform for further elaboration of decision-making procedures in RFBs in respect of the areas discussed in this document.
BACKGROUND ­ THE EVOLVING ROLE OF REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES OR ARRANGEMENTS (RFBs) AND RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS The evolving role of RFBs.
A clear shift in the role of RFBs has occurred over the past half-century, a trend which has intensified since the adoption of key international fisheries instruments after the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). In the first half of the 20th century, RFBs approached the process of fisheries management in a gradual and evolutionary manner.1 Mandates and functions of RFBs rested comfortably on the centuries-old concept of freedom of the seas, and the resource seemed abundant. The focus for decision-making in most RFBs was how best to serve as a forum for fisheries management rather than as a fisheries management body. At a time when a narrow band of up to twelve miles defined coastal States' authority, the major functions of RFBs were cooperative research2 and database development and analysis. As databases were developed, rudimentary management systems such as mesh size limits3 and closed seasons were adopted.4 The mid-century realization that some fish stocks were being fished to the maximum limit and possibly beyond prompted more intense management measures such as catch quotas5 and joint inspection schemes.6 But these measures only extended as far as the mandate of the relevant RFBs allowed, and the number of RFBs in existence was still growing: their combined areas of competence did not cover all oceans, as they do today. Despite the intensification of management efforts, international conflicts ­ some assuming the proportion of "fish wars" ­ surpassed the ability of RFBs to prevent conflicts or catastrophic overfishing. A major reason for this is that the mandates of many RFBs identified their roles as research arm and advisor rather than decision-maker and enforcer. 1.2 The role of RFBs under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 UN Convention).
The first watershed event ­ initiation of the process leading to the 1982 UN Convention ­ prompted a focus on the emerging role of RFBs. A suite of new activities was envisaged by the Convention, giving RFBs a greater role than their founders may have generally intended. 7 The RFBs would maintain their essential functions as: fora for international cooperation; vehicles for research, analysis, and data repository and exchange; and advisors on fisheries management, in accordance with their mandates. The new activities would include: protecting stocks associated with harvested stocks from depletion;.
See Applebaum B. and Donohue A., "The Role of Regional Fisheries Management Organizations", Developments in International Fisheries Law, Hey, E., ed., Kluwer Law International, the Netherlands, 1999. 2 The International Council for the Exploration of the Sea was established in 1902 with a mandate to promote and encourage research and investigation on the seas, particularly those related to the living resources, to draw up programmes required for this purpose and to publish or otherwise disseminate the result of research and investigation. The first initiative on international cooperative research in marine fisheries in the Northwest Atlantic was the establishment of the North American Council on Fishery Investigations in 1921, by Canada, Newfoundland and the USA. France joined in 1922. It was discontinued in 1938. 3 Such as the 1937 International Convention for the Regulation of the Meshes of Fishing Nets and Size of Fish for the Northwest Atlantic fisheries. 4 Such as the 1950 International Convention for Northwest Atlantic Fisheries (ICNAF), which had the objectives of investigation, protection and conservation of fish. For many years, it recommended open and closed seasons, closed areas, size limits, gear prohibitions and overall catch limits. ICNAF is the precursor to NAFO. For a history of ICNAF, see Anderson, E.D., "The ICNAF History from 1945 to 1997", www.nafo.ca. 5 In 1964 ICNAF established separate catch quotas, noting the necessity of some direct control of the amount of fishing, and in 1969 it adopted a Protocol allowing allocations. 6 In 1970 ICNAF, recognizing the difficulty of enforcing its decisions, adopted a Joint Inspection Scheme. 7 See Applebaum B. and Donohue A., note 1, supra, where articles of the 1982 UN Convention relating to the role of RFBs are analysed.
2 conserving stocks outside 200 miles; giving advice to coastal States on the conservation of stocks inside the 200 mile zone; pursuit of compulsory dispute settlement options; providing coastal States will all relevant information regarding fishing activities in high seas areas adjacent to their exclusive economic zone; transmission to coastal States of appropriate minimum standards; providing a conduit through which coastal States can fulfill their obligation to give due notice of their relevant conservation and management laws and regulations and make information available on the outer limits of their exclusive economic zones; considering stricter regulations for marine mammals than those required for other species. Identification of these activities in the 1982 UN Convention prompted RFBs to review and amend their conventions and opened the door to the establishment of new organizations with more modern mandates. Of over 30 marine RFBs currently in existence, almost half have been established since the Convention was adopted. 8 However, an impediment to exercising the new mandates in the most effective manner has been attributed to the fact that the Convention does not confer management authority on RFBs. One reason for this is that the Convention ushered in an era of newly declared sovereign rights over extended areas of ocean space, which became a paramount consideration for many coastal States. In addition, the general state of the world fishery resources did not appear to be particularly worrisome. In the years to come, the absence of broad international agreement on the management authority of RFBs received increasing attention, fueled by a growing awareness of the scarcity of fishery resources. The need for strengthened fisheries governance through RFBs steadily emerged as a pressing issue. It was acknowledged that to be effective, RFBs would need a clear mandate to manage the fishery resources in full respect of international law. 1.3 1.3.1 The role of RFBs under the Post-UNCED international fisheries instruments The Post-UNCED international fisheries instruments.
The second watershed event filled this gap to some extent ­ adoption of the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement ("Fish Stocks Agreement").9 It brought the role of RFBs into sharper focus and is enhanced by other post-UNCED international fisheries instruments, especially the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement, ("Compliance Agreement") 10 the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries ("Code of Conduct") and its subsequent International Plans of Action (IPOAs).11.
These are: Comité régional des pêches du Golfe de Guinée (COREP) 1984; North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO) l982; South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization (SEAFO) 2001; Commission sous-régionale des pêches (SRCF/CSRP) 1985; Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) 1993; Regional Commission for Fisheries (RECOFI) 1999; Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization (WIOTO) 1991; North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC); 1993; Pacific Salmon Commission (PSC) 1985; Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) 1994; Latin American Organization for the Development of Fisheries (OLDEPESCA) 1984; North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission (NAMMCO) 1992; North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 1992. The Convention establishing a Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (Western Central Pacific Fisheries Organization), in 2000, had not yet entered into force at the time of writing. 9 The Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks entered into force on 11 December 2001. 10 Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High seas. Part of the Code of Conduct, the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement entered into force on 24 April 2003. 11 The IPOAs are: Incidental catch of seabirds in longline fisheries (1999); Conservation and management of sharks (1999); Management of fishing capacity (l999); and Prevention, deterrence and elimination of illegal unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing (2001). In particular, the role of RFBs identified in the IPOA to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA ­ IUU) is extensively defined.
3 A summary of the key provisions relevant to RFBs in each of the three principal instruments and the IPOA to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU) appears in Appendix.
The Compliance Agreement entered into force in April 2003, the date of receipt of the twenty-fifth Instrument of Acceptance.12 It has some provisions similar to those of the Fish Stocks Agreement concerning high seas fishing. However, unlike the Fish Stocks Agreement, the Compliance Agreement assigns the primary role of international coordination to FAO rather than RFBs. The Compliance Agreement does, however, suggest potential roles of RFBs in relation to the scope of its application, international cooperation, exchange of information and cooperation with developing countries. 13 However, there are no provisions directly relating to decision-making in RFBs. The development of the voluntary Code of Conduct occurred over the same general time period as that of the Fish Stocks Agreement, and closely tracks the latter's provisions. The Code extends to all fisheries and to fisheries-related matters beyond those covered by the Fish Stocks Agreement. RFBs are among the agencies tasked to implement the Code.14 All IPOAs concluded pursuant to the Code refer to the role of RFBs in respect of the relevant activity: in particular, the IPOA-IUU has a number of provisions to this effect. The Fish Stocks Agreement entered into force on 11 December 2001 with ratification by the thirtieth State, and is the most comprehensive of the international instruments in defining the role of RFBs, including references to decision-making. It was signed by 59 States and entities, and the number of States that have deposited ratifications is growing.15 There have been successive General Assembly Resolutions calling for the implementation of the Fish Stocks Agreement,16 and the vital role of RFBs in implementing the Fish Stocks Agreement was recognized by all States Parties at the 2002 Informal Meeting of the States Parties to the Fish Stocks Agreement.17 However, a May, 2003 report on the status and implementation of the Fish Stocks Agreement, prepared in response to a request by the General Assembly,18 provides an overview of the main trends in implementation and identifies one constraint as the fact that no RFB was composed exclusively of Parties to the Agreement at the time of writing.19 It was therefore not possible to say that any RFB is bound by the Agreement. In addition, several important fishing States are not parties. The report, which features findings from a survey of States and other stakeholders, also states that "Notwithstanding the constraints, practice since the adoption of the Agreement demonstrates that even before entry into force, provisions of the Agreement have been widely used as a benchmark for State practice." Positive trends identified in the report are the wide application of the Fish Stocks Agreement, even by non-parties, and a high priority given to almost all of the general principles for conservation and management in Article 5.
As at July 2003, twenty-seven States had accepted the Compliance Agreement. For further analysis, see Applebaum B. and Donohue A., note 1, supra, also see provisions in Appendix.
14 Articles 1.2 and 4.1, Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Also see Appendix.
15 As at July 2003, thirty-four States had ratified the Fish Stocks Agreement. Importantly, of these, only ten have accepted the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement. 16 Most recently General Assembly Resolution 57/143. See also the 2002 Report of the Informal Consultative Process, paragraph 41, document 57/80. 17 http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/FishStocksMeetings/UNFSTA_ICSP2002_DraftRep.pdf 18 See http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_fish_stocks.htm. General Report of the Secretary General, distribution 30 May 2003, advance, unedited text. The status and implementation of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention for the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (Fish Stocks Agreement) and its impact on related or proposed instruments throughout the UN system, with special reference to implementation of Part VII of the Fish Stocks Agreement, dealing with the requirements of developing States. 19 At the time of writing this document, the EC is expected to ratify the Fish Stocks Agreement. When this happens, and with current membership, SEAFO will become the first RFB in which all members are parties to the Fish Stocks Agreement.
4 Although the Fish Stocks Agreement applies primarily to the highly migratory and straddling fish stocks on the high seas,20 its broad acceptance and application is evidenced by the reinforcement of other international instruments, implementation at the regional level, and to some extent by State practice within areas of national jurisdiction. The 2001 IPOA-IUU is a voluntary instrument. However, it is prominently visible and the subject of ongoing high-level attention. The 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) called for States to urgently develop and implement national and, where appropriate, regional plans of action, to put into effect the IPOA-IUU by 2004. Subsequently, two supportive General Assembly Resolutions were adopted in 2003: one urged States to take all necessary steps to implement the IPOA-IUU, including through relevant RFBs, 21 and another urged States to develop and implement national and, where appropriate regional plans of action, to put the IPOA-IUU into effect by 2004. 22 In addition, the Twenty-fifth Session of the Committee on Fisheries (COFI) considered the IPOA-IUU in February 2003. References to the IPOA-IUU in the report of that Session23 include the following, indicating activity at both national and regional levels. Many Members from developing countries indicated that a lack of capacity constrained implementation and they appealed to FAO to continue to provide technical assistance to facilitate implementation, especially for the development of national plans of action to implement the IPOA-IUU.24 Many Members proposed a range of initiatives to more effectively address IUU fishing including strengthening the functions of RFBs.25 The IPOA has been the subject of much attention by regional fishery bodies, 26 and contains an extensive part on the role of RFBs, including direct reference to decision-making. Because the Fish Stocks Agreement and the IPOA-IUU contain the most rigorous provisions relating to responsibilities of, and decision-making processes in RFBs, they are considered separately below, mindful of their reinforcement by other international and regional instruments.
Provisions on the precautionary approach and compatibility of conservation and management measures may apply within areas of national jurisdiction: Fish Stocks Agreement, Article.
Also note the Convention of one RFB implements the Fish Stocks Agreement for all stocks on the high seas, and is not limited to straddling and highly migratory fish stocks: see the description of the South-East Atlantic Fisheries Organization, in Appendix.
21 A/Res/57/141. Oceans and Law of the Sea. 22 A/Res/57/142. Large-scale pelagic drift-net