FAO Fisheries Report No. 732.
FIPD/R732 (En).
ISSN 0429-9337.
Report of the.
WORKSHOP AND EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON FISCAL REFORMS FOR FISHERIES ­ TO PROMOTE GROWTH, POVERTY ERADICATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT.
Rome, 13­15 October 2003.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
Report of the WORKSHOP AND EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON FISCAL REFORMS FOR FISHERIES ­ TO PROMOTE GROWTH, POVERTY ERADICATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT Rome, 13­15 October 2003 edited by Stephen Cunningham Institut du développement durable et des ressources aquatiques Montpellier, France and Tim Bostock Support unit for International Fisheries and Aquatic Research FAO Fisheries Department.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 92-5-105203-4.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2004.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT Resource rent is of overriding importance in fisheries exploitation. Depending on the institutional arrangements in a fishery, it may be the driving force leading to overexploitation in its two main forms (overcapacity and overfishing) or it may be the basis for the generation of sustainable wealth and revenue. Fiscal arrangements, and hence their reform, are important in at least two ways. First, fishery management systems are gradually beginning to emerge that allow resource rent to be generated on a sustainable basis. Fiscal conditions will determine the sharing of this wealth between different stakeholders. Second, fiscal arrangements may themselves constitute an important management measure, usually supporting other management instruments and helping to control exploitation levels. In this context, the Support unit for International Fisheries and Aquatic Research (SIFAR) conceived and organized an international workshop on fiscal reform for fisheries, which was hosted by FAO from 13 to 15 October 2003 in Rome, Italy. Financial support for the workshop was provided by DFID (the UK Department for International Development). A key goal of the workshop was to facilitate discussion between participants, drawing on their varied backgrounds, on the central theme of how best to use fiscal methods to achieve both fisheries policy objectives, and broader economic, social and environmental objectives. This report presents a synthesis of the workshop. It draws on presentations made by participants of the situation in each country represented at the meeting. It also uses the summaries prepared by chairpersons and rapporteurs of discussions held in thematic subgroups which concerned: · How to define the mix of fiscal instruments and set the right levels? · What to do with the resource rent? · How to manage fiscal reform and negotiate access agreements? And it uses the summaries prepared by chairpersons and rapporteurs of discussions held in three more regionally-based groupings, the aims of which were to: · Identify thematic priorities on regional basis. · Investigate cooperation possibilities. · Suggest mechanisms to improve fiscal arrangements. · Make recommendations for follow-up. Finally, the document draws on a set of conclusions and recommendations developed and unanimously agreed by the participants in the closing plenary session of the workshop. The workshop participants recognized the importance of fiscal reform and recommended strongly that ways be found to continue dialogue at international, regional and national levels. This document was prepared and edited by Stephen Cunningham and Tim Bostock, respectively Consultant from the Institut du développement durable et des ressources aquatiques (IDDRA) to SIFAR/FAO and Executive Secretary of SIFAR. The papers prepared by participants will be presented in a supplement to this report. Distribution: Workshop participants Directors of Fisheries FAO Fisheries Department FAO Members.
Cunningham, S.; Bostock, T. (eds.) Report of the Workshop and Exchange of Views on Fiscal Reforms for Fisheries ­ to Promote Growth, Poverty Eradication and Sustainable Management. Rome, 13­15 October 2003. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 732. Rome, FAO. 2004. 37p. ABSTRACT The Support unit for International Fisheries and Aquatic Research (SIFAR) conceived and organized an international workshop on fiscal reform for fisheries, which was hosted by FAO from 13 to 15 October 2003 in Rome, Italy. A key goal of the workshop was to discuss the best use of fiscal methods to achieve both fisheries policy objectives, and broader economic, social and environmental objectives. This report presents a synthesis of the workshop. Discussions were organized first on a thematic basis (mix of fiscal instruments, use of resource rent and managing fiscal reform processes) and then on a regional basis (thematic priorities, coordination, and recommendations for improvement and follow-up). The report summarizes these discussions as well as the presentations made by participants of the situation in each country represented at the meeting. It ends with the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the participants.
CONTENTS Page.
2. INTRODUCTION REPORT AND SYNTHESIS OF THE PRESENTATIONS 2.1 Opening of workshop 2.2 Presentations by participants 2.3 Thematic group discussions 2.4 Regional group discussions 2.5 Comments from workshop observers SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL WORKSHOP CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 1 1 1 2 13 16 19 20.
ANNEXES.
Workshop agenda List of participants Workshop background papers Information sheet 1: Resource rent Information sheet 2: Fiscal issues in fisheries exploitation and management.
Resource rent: the source of wealth in fisheries.
Rent, access and incentives.
Resource rent: the three possibilities.
Need for appropriate instruments and institutions.
Who is to do the exploiting?.
What to do with fish resource rents? REFERENCES 22 24 27 29 33 33 34 35 35 35 36 37.
INTRODUCTION.
This international workshop on fiscal reform for fisheries was conceived and organized by the Support unit for International Fisheries and Aquatic Research (SIFAR) and subsequently hosted by FAO from 13 to15 October 2003 in Rome, Italy. Financial support for the workshop was provided by DFID (the UK Department for International Development). The report of the workshop is presented in this document1. The workshop agenda adopted by the participants is presented at Annex.
The workshop brought together 29 participants from ten countries and six organisations. The list of participants is presented at Annex.
Papers prepared for the workshop by participants are to be presented as a supplement to this report. Two background papers prepared for the workshop are included in Annex.
2. 2.1 REPORT AND SYNTHESIS OF PRESENTATIONS Opening of workshop.
Mr Grimur Valdimarsson, Director, Fishery Industries Division, FAO welcomed participants to the workshop. He set the meeting in context, pointing out that where once FAO had helped fishers to catch more fish, now the focus was on helping countries to reduce fishing effort. Overexploitation is now the pervasive problem and landings of the ten most valuable species have declined by 45 percent due to overfishing. Reducing effort is proving a difficult challenge. The most promising approach appears to be some kind of system of limited rights coupled with charging for the rights. It is in this latter aspect that this workshop on fiscal reforms in fishing may be of particular interest. Mr Tim Bostock, SIFAR Coordinator, stressed that an important output expected from the workshop was the discussion between participants on this important but relatively novel topic. The draft agenda was adopted by the meeting. Ms Nancy Gitonga, Director of Fisheries, Kenya was unanimously elected chairperson for the first day of the meeting (the chair passing to Mr Yugraj Yadava, Director, Bay of Bengal Programme for days 2 and 3). She began by asking participants to briefly present themselves, following which she asked the workshop facilitator Mr Steve Cunningham, Institut du développement durable et des ressources aquatiques (IDDRA) to outline the workshop objectives. Mr Cunningham began by making a short presentation on the importance of resource rent, both as the economic driving force leading to overexploitation in unmanaged or poorly managed fisheries and as the potential source of economic benefits in well-managed fisheries. He also stressed the key role played by access arrangements, with free and open access to fish resources being widely recognised as the main problem. He then outlined the objectives of the workshop. The workshop brought together participants with a range of experiences and the primary goal was to use these different experiences as the backdrop to an exchange of ideas on: · How to generate maximum value from fishery resources? · How to ensure efficient revenue collection?.
The views expressed in the report or in the papers prepared for the workshop are those of the respective authors or participants and should not be considered as reflecting the views of FAO or its Members.
How best to use fiscal methods to achieve fisheries policy objectives? And also to achieve broader economic, social and environmental objectives.
In the context of fisheries management, the fiscal system might be expected to have a number of features, including to: · Promote sustainable fisheries management, development and exploitation. · Promote other fisheries objectives ­ e.g. increased private sector participation as stewards of the resource. · Contribute to broader goals: e.g. poverty reduction, good governance (accountable, transparent, reduced corruption), and environmental objectives concerning natural resource utilization and conservation. In order to facilitate the desired exchange of experiences and ideas, the workshop sessions were organized into a series of phases. Presentations were made by participants of the situation in each country represented at the meeting. Discussions were then organized first through thematic subgroups discussing the following three themes:.
How to define the mix of fiscal instruments and set the right levels?.
What to do with the resource rent?.
How to manage fiscal reform and negotiate access agreements? Each thematic subgroup then presented a short report back to the plenary. Discussions were then continued with three more regionally-based groupings, the aims of which were to: · identify thematic priorities on regional basis; · investigate cooperation possibilities; · suggest mechanisms to improve fiscal arrangements; · make recommendations for follow-up. The three groupings were: · Mauritania, Morocco, Guinea, Senegal · Kenya, Mozambique, Uganda · Bay of Bengal/India, Forum Fisheries Agency/Pacific, Papua New Guinea Each subregional grouping reported back to plenary, on the basis of which a series of recommendations were drawn up and adopted by the meeting. 2.2 Presentations by participants.
The papers on which the presentations were based are to be included in a supplement to this report. The intention in this section is not to present a summary of each paper but simply to highlight the main issues that were raised, both in the papers and in the discussion that ensued. Mr Peter Manning2 Mr Manning gave a presentation on the fiscal implications of resource rent, principally associated with Namibia's hake fishery.
In the absence of a Namibian Government Representative, Peter Manning (Coordinator, ACP Fish II feasibility study 2002-2003) was invited to make the presentation on the basis of a study he undertook in 2002 of the hake fishery of Namibia.
He began by stressing that the central issue in fiscal reform is to understand the value of the fish stocks. The key element is to calculate resource rents but for many reasons this is not an easy task. He pointed out that Namibia is somewhat unusual in having no artisanal sector, as historically Namibia did not have a coastal population due to its hyper-arid desert coastal region. The management system is based around Total Allowable Catches (TACs) with quotas being allocated to rights holders. Such quotas are subject to quota levies and other fees. In principle fees are lower for domestic fishers than for foreigners but in practice this is a difficult distinction to enforce since companies are often able to use a combination of accounting and company law to ensure that they end up in the lower cost bracket. Namibia nevertheless collects up sufficient of the resource rent being generated in the fisheries to cover the full costs of management, including monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) and research, and to make a net contribution to the public purse. In the hake fishery, resource rent still accruing to the industry is estimated to be around US$ 53.8 million; that is, net of rent already collected by the Government and potential rent dissipated in other ways. One policy being followed, that uses rent that might otherwise accrue in the fishery, is to try to create employment on land by charging lower quota fees to wetfish vessels than to freezer trawlers. The difficulty is that the latter vessels generally produce more highly valued frozenat-sea products so that rents are sacrificed for the employment. This raises the question of how best to utilise such rents: is it more appropriate to create fishing-related employment, or should a wider view be taken of the issue, perhaps using fishing rents to create employment elsewhere in the economy? Mr Cherif Ould Toueileb3, Mauritania Mauritania has an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of some 234 000 km2. It also has the largest Marine Protected Area in Africa, representing 60 percent of the coastal zone. Fishing is a very important economic activity. The catch potential is estimated to be between 1.5 and 1.7 million tonnes. Current catch is around 600 000 tonnes, 90 percent of which comes from the industrial sector. The fishing sector represents about 10 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP), and generates about 40 percent of hard currency receipts (almost all the catch is exported). Mr Toueileb showed that the extraction of resource rent from fishery resources has long been important for the Mauritanian government. Since the 1980s, some 20 percent to 25 percent of central government revenue has been funded through fish resource rent. He presented a table showing that the structure of this rent has changed through time. In the 1980s and early 1990s, Mauritania had a system of export taxes operated through a state monopsony. This system was radically changed around 1993, being replaced by a licensing system. The new system not proven anything like as efficient from a rent collection viewpoint as the old one with the result that the contribution made by national fishers has declined substantially. Rent is now.
Director of Studies and Management of Fishery Resources, Fisheries Ministry, Mauritania.
obtained principally through fishing agreements, in particular through the agreement with the European Union (EU). Mr Toueileb emphasized that whilst Mauritania wished to continue to apply the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) principle of sharing catch opportunities between local and foreign fishers, the Government now sought to promote joint ventures as a means of keeping as much of the rent as possible within the country. The biggest problem faced in fishery management was that of institutional weakness, with a need in particular for training to develop human capacity. There is also a need to control fishing effort, a need that Mauritania has begun to address through the development and implementation of a series of fishery management plans. Fiscal arrangements are an important part of these plans. Mr Keizire Boaz Blackie and Mr Godfrey Bahiigwa4, Uganda Mssrs Blackie and Bahigwa began by pointing out the difficulty of obtaining unequivocal data concerning the fisheries sector which previously was thought to contribute some 2.4 percent to the GDP but which recent estimates put at 12 percent. The sector employs about one million people (4 percent of population). Fish exports have grown from less than 1 percent of total exports in 1990 (US$ 1.4 million) to 17 percent in 2002 (US$ 80.9 million), second only to coffee. Fish provide a relatively cheap source of animal protein especially for the poor, and the sector is important both for economic growth and poverty reduction. Given the importance of the sector, the Government is gradually developing its fishery policy and a national strategy was published in 2002. Fisheries also figure significantly in the national poverty eradication action plan. The issue of free and open access has been recognized and a co-management approach is being promoted to deal with it. Major institutional innovations are underway in fisheries with the development at the micro-level of a network of about 500-700 Beach Management Units (BMUs) being introduced at the community level. At the meso-level, BMUs can cooperate and form large lake-wide associations, e.g. on Lakes George and Kyoga. At the macro level, the Department of Fisheries Resources is being transformed into a National Fisheries Authority. Both Central and Local Government seek to extract some rent from the fishery sector, the former mainly through export taxes on the processing sector, the latter through fees on fishing vessel licences. At the national level, a levy of 3 percent on fish exports is proposed to support national fisheries management functions. At the local level, the need to plough back rents from fisheries is recognized and BMU legislation will empower communities in revenue collection and utilization. BMUs will be eligible to bid for landing site tenders for revenue collection.
Respectively, Senior Fisheries Economist, Department of Fisheries Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Senior Research Fellow, Economic Policy Research Centre, Makerere University, Uganda.
Mrs Nancy Gitonga5, Kenya The current vision for the Kenyan fishery sector is to increase fish production on sustainable yield basis in order to improve incomes of fishers and fish farmers, alleviate poverty, reduce unemployment and enhance food security at both the household and national levels. Policy development and implementation is the responsibility of the new Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development. Fisheries are important in Kenya both from a social viewpoint - fishing is a way of life for fishing communities - and from an economic viewpoint - fisheries contribute to the economy through employment creation, generation of income and foreign exchange earning. Fisheries resources also provide for recreation through sport fishing and angling activities, which promote fisheries tourism in Kenya. Freshwater fisheries are of great importance in Kenyan fisheries, with Lake Victoria currently contributing around 90 percent of Kenyan landings. The dominant species is Nile Perch but landings are falling. The Government is seeking to manage more effectively the Lake fishery, whilst developing the marine sector. Kenya has a marine EEZ of some 230 000 km2. Most of the marine catch is taken in shallow inshore waters, mainly by artisanal fishermen using simple boats and gears. The offshore waters of the Kenyan zone yield catches of large tunas, billfishes and pelagic sharks to foreign fishers without local participation. Kenya would be willing to negotiate with Distant Water Fishing Nations (DWFNs) for fishing rights in her EEZ in accordance with the UNCLOS provisions, but before such negotiations, the country would wish to have sufficient knowledge of her stocks, and seek advice on the form and contents of a potential access agreement that would tie DWFNs into a formal relationship with the Kenyan Government. The Government aims to improve fishery infrastructure through developments such as establishing ice making plants, modernizing landing sites, providing all weather roads to landing sites, creating fish quality control laboratories, and providing services such as electricity and telecommunication at landing sites. The marketing of fishery products is vulnerable to unfair application of non-tariff trade barriers such as Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) measures by importing countries. There is a need therefore to build capacity to effectively participate in SPS measures and implement international fish quality and safety standards to sustain the market share. The recently-finalized Economic Recovery Strategy is geared towards the realization of wealth and employment creation covering the period 2003-2007. An investment code to consolidate investment incentives, protection and institutional framework in a single legislation is being put in place. The Strategy includes poverty reduction initiatives in the implementation action plan, which emphasize sustainable development of the huge potential of the fisheries sub sector in the country. Policy reform is also being promoted in fisheries subsector with the development of a comprehensive fisheries master plan. Kenya seeks to enter into agreements to promote closer regional cooperation in the management and regulation of the transboundary fishery.
Director of Fisheries, Kenya.
resources. The Government also wishes to encourage the growth of micro-finance institutions to provide credit to the subsector, and intends to introduce fiscal reforms to deal with cost of exploitation of fisheries resources, processing, preservation and export of products. It also intends to ensure the adequacy of financial resources to expedite fisheries growth through research and transfer of technology. Mr Hassan El Filali and Mr Hachim El Ayoubi6, Morocco The fishing industry is an important sector in the Moroccan economy, representing some 2.5 percent of GDP and accounting for a billion dollars' worth of exports (around 15 percent of total exports). Fish landings are around 1 million tonnes per annum, dominated in weight by small pelagics, especially sardine which represents some 70 percent of the total. In value terms the cephalopods, particularly octopus, are the most important species. The catching sector comprises three principal segments: industrial, coastal and artisanal. Together these three segments generate some 113 000 jobs. Onshore there are some 360 processing units, producing frozen, canned and preserved fish, as well as fish meal and oil, and employing around 38 000 people. It is estimated that another 250 000 jobs depend indirectly on fishing. Having gone through what might be called a classical fishery development model (essentially increasing production with the aim of increasing incomes, food security and exports), Morocco has recently adopted a new vision of fisheries development. This new vision centres on sustainable resource management and identifying the appropriate role for the sector in national development. As a consequence, the legal and regulatory framework is being renewed with an objective of managing fisheries taking into account the concept of rent. The fiscal framework involves taxes, fees or levies related to investment, resource exploitation and fishing activity. In each case a wide range of fiscal instruments is used. There are a number of difficulties with the current fiscal situation. First, short-term budgetary considerations tend to dominate rather than a fishery-management-based vision. Second, there are a great many taxes and organizations involved. Third, some levies and fees are very high compared to the level of service offered. Finally, questions are raised as to the equity of the system. Mr Ndiaga Gueye7, Senegal The fishing sector is an important part of the Senegalese economy representing 2.5 percent of GDP, 37 percent of exports by value, and employing some 17 percent of the working population. Fish also play an important role in food security, providing some 75 percent of animal protein. Total production has increased substantially from 50 000 tonnes in 1965 to over 350 000 tonnes in 2002, but many resources, especially the most valuable ones, are now fullyto overexploited.
Ministry of Fisheries, Morocco. Director of Marine Fisheries, Senegal.
A number of key problems can be identified concerning the sector including the need for sustainable management of fish resources, improved sector governance, maximization of resource value, and improving communication between actors in the sector. The current policy agenda can be traced back to a national discussion forum in November 2000, which enabled priorities to be identified. The main priority is to establish a framework for access regulation, following which development actions can be strengthened. In this context, both the institutional, and legal and regulatory frameworks are being revised. A sector strategy has been developed around six key objectives. These are to ensure the sustainability and economic viability of fishing, to meet local demand for fish, to modernize the artisanal segment, to increase value added from fisheries products, to develop an effective funding system for both public and private activities, and to strengthen bilateral, regional and international cooperation. A variety of activities are being undertaken to meet these objectives. At the fishery management level, the priority is given to access regulation through the development of fishery management plans. An important part of this concerns the development of a more appropriate institutional and economic environment, including the establishment of fiscal arrangements in line with the new goals of sectoral policy. Ms Josie Tamate8, Forum Fisheries Agency Ms Tamate presented the situation in the Pacific region covered by the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA). The FFA was established in 1979, following the adoption of the Law of the Sea Convention. It has 17 members ­ 16 independent states and one territory ­ and consists of a Committee and a Secretariat. It is funded by contributions from the members. All decisions are made by consensus or on a two-thirds majority if consensus cannot be reached. There are no provisions for disciplinary actions if a member does not comply with regionally agreed rules and procedures. The Western and Central Pacific (WCP) Tuna Fishery is one of the largest and most productive in the world. Landed catches are around one million tonnes annually, with a monetary value of nearly US$ 2 billion. Major foreign fishing fleets include USA, Japan, Korea, Taiwan (Province of China) and the Philippines. An increasing local (FFA members) fleet has been observed in the last few years. Productive waters in the WCP region are found within the 10°N­10°S band; more than 50 percent of FFA members lie in this band. FFA members located within this productive zone have succeeded in demanding higher fees from distant water fishing nations (DWFNs). These countries have also formed a subgroup within the FFA context called the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA group). These tuna resources are of great importance to Pacific Island Countries/FFA members, representing around a third of all exports by Pacific Island countries. The fisheries make a significant contribution towards economic development, providing employment for an estimated 20­40 000 people and generating access fee revenue to the FFA members of some US$ 60 million per annum.
Project Economist, FFA.
Access fees are typically paid as a lump-sum at the beginning of the licensing period. Such fees are dependent on the level of catch, the tuna price and the rate of return. Purse seine access fees range from US$ 10 000 to over US$ 100 000 per year. Additional fees are charged if and when vessels call into an FFA member port. Fees for longline vessels typically range from US$ 5 000 to over US$ 20 000. Vessels based in FFA members pay lower licensing fees but are liable for export taxes, and the like. A new method of charging access/licensing fees is being considered which would involve a minimum lump-sum payment plus an additional payment at the end of the licensing period. The current approach by FFA members is not directly linked to resource rent but this may change in the near future with various projects/studies underway to measure the rent and options to increase revenue from fisheries. There is a need to promote transparency mechanisms for licensing fishing vessels in the region. A number of mechanisms have been applied to implement and monitor access agreements. These include the Palau Arrangement for the Management of the WCP Purse Seine Fishery, Harmonized Minimum Terms and Conditions (MTCs), FFA Vessel Monitoring System (FFA VMS) and the Niue Treaty on Co-operation in Fisheries Surveillance. The WCP Tuna Convention was adopted in September 2000 after six years of negotiation between major DWFNs and coastal states in the WCP region. This Convention introduces a new element into the tuna fishery with the prospects of enhanced programs for tuna conservation. It appears to offer new opportunities for FFA members to generate greater benefits from their resources. The biggest challenge for FFA members will be to maintain their regional cooperation and unity. Mr Jonathan Manieva9, Papua New Guinea It is estimated that Papua New Guinea (PNG) marine resources could produce annual sustainable landings of some 500 000 tonnes worth around US$ 600 million. Current recorded market value of PNG catch is only US$ 100 million to US$ 200 million, partly due to the difficulty of obtaining the true value of artisanal fisheries and partly due to fish price variations from year to year. There is significant potential to increase the economic value and returns to PNG of these fisheries through better management and development programs. Fisheries policy is determined by the Minister of Fisheries and implemented by the National Fisheries Authority (NFA). The main objective has been to ensure that PNG fisheries and other living aquatic resources are exploited within sustainable limits, with the 2000 Fisheries Act placing an obligation on Government to ensure the conservation and optimum utilization of marine resources within the EEZ. The approach taken to meet policy objectives has been to develop, implement and monitor fishery management plans for each specific fishery. Such plans establish rules for access to fish resources. A key element has been the move towards annual licences. The NFA is a financially-autonomous semi-government corporate body, governed by a 10-person Board which includes representatives from government, the fishing industry, resource owners and non-government organizations. It derives the bulk of its operational revenue from access fees related to Distant Water Fishing Nation activities. Other sources.
Industry Liaison Co-ordinator, National Fisheries Authority, Papua New Guinea.
include mandatory licence fees, assistance from donor agencies and penalties arising from successful prosecutions under the Fisheries Management Act 1998. The revenue obtained is used to fund NFA operational costs with any surplus being declared as a dividend and paid to the government. This autonomy has ensured that the NFA has the financial resources to carry out its functions, unlike under the former structure where operational budget and financial plans were subject to Ministry of Finance approval during the annual national government budget allocation process. Since its establishment in 2000, it is felt that the NFA has achieved its objectives in terms of revenue generation and the implementation of established management policies and plans. By far the most important commercial fis