GFCM REPORT 27.
GENERAL FISHERIES COMMISSION FOR THE MEDITERRANEAN.
REPORT OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SESSION.
Rome, 19-22 November 2002.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2002.
iii PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document is the final version of the report adopted in Rome, by the twentyseventh session of the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) on 22 November 2002.
FAO General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean. Report of the twenty-seventh session. Rome, 19-22 November 2002. GFCM Report. No. 27. Rome, FAO. 2002. 36p. ABSTRACT The twenty-seventh session of GFCM was attended by delegates from nineteen of the twenty-three members of the Commission. The Commission reviewed the intersessional activities, particularly the conclusions and advices of the fifth session of the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) and of the third session of the Committee on Aquaculture (CAQ). The Commission noted that the regional project proposal entitled "Mediterranean Fishery Statistics and Information Systems" (MEDFISIS) was to be initiated. The Commission also reviewed the status of action taken by Members towards ratifying the amendments to the GFCM Agreement relative to the autonomous budget. The Commission adopted Recommendation 2002/1 on the management of selected demersal and small pelagic species and further endorsed three Recommendations by ICCAT concerning the management of large pelagic species. The Commission established a Joint SAC/CAQ/ICCAT Ad Hoc Working Group on Sustainable Tuna Farming Practices in the Mediterranean. While adopting the programme of work for SAC and CAQ, the Commission also established a reference framework for the mandate of SAC for the intersessional periods 2003-2004.
Distribution: Participants in the Session GFCM Mailing List FAO Regional and Sub-Regional Fisheries Officers.
v TABLE OF CONTENTS.
OPENING OF THE SESSION.
The General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) held its Twentyseventh Session at FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy, from 19 to 22 November 2002.
The Session was attended by delegates from 19 Members of the Commission. Observers from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Russian Federation, the International Centre for Advanced Mediterranean Agronomic Studies (CIHEAM), the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) also attended. The list of delegates and observers is given in Appendix B to this report. The meeting was called to order by Mr A. Berraho, Chairperson of the Commission,.
who welcomed the delegates, wishing them a successful session.
At the invitation of the Chairperson, Mr J-F. Pulvenis de Séligny, Director of the Fishery Policy and Planning Division addressed the Commission on behalf of the Director-General of FAO, Dr Jacques Diouf.
Mr Pulvenis de Séligny expressed the satisfaction of the Organization for the good attendance at the Session, which was of particular importance since it took place in the year of the Commission's 50th anniversary. He stressed the adaptive capacity of the Commission which took positive action to face the challenge of responsible fisheries and aquaculture, taking into account the variegated interests of its Members and the diversity of their situations. He noted three areas where action by the Members was urgently called for: firstly, the provision of timely and reliable data and information to the Secretariat; secondly, ensuring the availability of adequate financial resources; thirdly, the entry into force of the amendments to the Agreement of GFCM which were adopted in 1997, through the deposit of the respective instruments of ratification by those Members that had still to complete their internal procedures for ratifying these amendments. After recalling the utmost importance attached by FAO to GFCM, Mr Pulvenis de.
Séligny highlighted the generosity and hospitality of some Members which had allowed the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) and the Committee on Aquaculture (CAQ) to satisfactorily perform their duties. In this respect, he thanked the Government of Spain for its contribution to COPEMED, the Government of Italy for its contribution to ADRIAMED and MEDSUDMED, the Government of Tunisia for hosting SIPAM and the European Community for its contribution to the good progress being achieved in the area of statistics with the MEDFISIS project. Finally, he stressed the need for more progress in some areas, particularly in relation to the implementation of the Action Plan for the Promotion of Responsible Aquaculture in the region and the increase of scientific activities within the framework of SAC and CAQ in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea sub-regions.
2 ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE SESSION.
The Heads of Delegations introduced themselves and their respective advisors.
The Delegate of France, Mr X. Vant, informed the Commission that Mr J. Turenne, first Vice-Chairperson had taken over new functions and needed to be substituted within the bureau of GFCM. The Commission appointed Mr T. Cheriaa, former second Vice-Chairperson, as First Vice-chairperson, and Mr X. Vant as Second Vice-Chairperson.
The Commission agreed to discuss under Agenda item 7, "Any other matters": the communication from the European Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the draft Action Plan for the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources in the Mediterranean Sea under the Common Fisheries Policy, as well as the information related to the organization of a Multilateral Conference of Ministers on Mediterranean Fisheries, and the formalization of a logo for GFCM. 10. 11. The Agenda attached as Appendix A to this report was adopted. The documents which were before the Commission are listed in Appendix C.
INTERSESSIONAL ACTIVITIES 2001-2002 Implementation of the recommendations of the Twenty-sixth Session of GFCM Mr A. Bonzon, Secretary of GFCM, introduced this agenda item on the basis of 12. documents GFCM/XXVI/Inf.3, Inf.4 and Inf.5. The Secretary reviewed the recommendations laid down in the Report of the Twenty-sixth Session and informed the Commission on follow-up actions taken for their implementation. The Commission noted with satisfaction the actions taken by the Secretariat, SAC and 13. CAQ on its recommendations. It further noted, however, that several Members did not provide SAC with all the necessary data to enable the Committee to optimally perform its tasks during the intersessional period, as defined in the terms of reference given in Appendix G to the Report of the Twenty-sixth Session. 14. The Commission was informed that the newly launched regional project entitled "Control of eutrophication, hazardous substances and related measures for rehabilitating the Black Sea ecosystem (Phase I)", funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF), included support to resuming negotiations among concerned countries for the establishment of a Black Sea Fisheries Committee under the aegis of the Black Sea Economic Commission. Report on the activities of the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) 15. Mr J.A. Camiñas, Chairperson of SAC, reported on the activities of the Committee on the basis of documents GFCM/XXVII/2002/2 and GFCM/XXVII/2002/Inf.4. He acknowledged the intense work of SAC, its Sub-Committees and Working Groups. Fifteen meetings were held during the intersessional period, including a meeting of the Coordinators of the Sub-Committees.
3 16. The Chairperson of SAC informed the Commission that an increasing number of issues and scientific activities were cross-sectional, and fell under the mandate of more than one subsidiary body of the Committee. In this regard, SAC felt that the holding of meetings of Coordinators of its Sub-Committees was essential for the proper functioning of the Committee, and sought guidance from the Commission on this issue, as well as on the participation of the Coordinators of the Sub-Committees in GFCM sessions at the expense of the Commission. 17. The Chairperson of SAC expressed concern that the involvement of scientists at its meetings was often uncertain and unbalanced in terms of representation of Members and at variance with the Rules of Procedure of the Commission, mentioning, in particular, the scarce participation of experts from the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea sub-regions. 18. The Chairperson of SAC stressed that substantial efforts were made to enhance the format of resource management advice for demersal and small-pelagics species. He also observed that, after reviewing stock assessment methodologies in the Mediterranean, SAC was of the view that more accurate scientific evidence could be obtained by applying more than one method. Moreover, the list of priority shared stocks was updated. 19. The Chairperson of SAC invited the Commission to encourage national institutions to provide in a timely manner data and information on environmental parameters following the agreed format, and also to provide SAC, timely, with National Reports. 20. While stressing the importance of developing a GFCM/SAC Home Page, Mr Camiñas noted that the GFCM Glossary had been updated and posted on COPEMED Home Page and the SCSA FTP site (ftp://cucafera.icm.csic.es/pub/scsa). The Chairperson of SAC alluded to the development of collaboration between SAC and FIGIS and pointed out that there was still a need to refine the objectives, formats and data ownership schemes to strengthen cooperation. The Commission was informed that the Draft Project proposal entitled "Mediterranean 21. Fishery Statistics and Information Systems" (MEDFISIS) was updated. The project would call upon resources and efforts from the EC, FAO Regular Programme, ADRIAMED, COPEMED and MEDSUDMED, as well as from beneficiary GFCM Members. The project document was to be finalized, targeting for its signature before the end of 2002. 22. The Commission commended the excellent progress made by SAC and its subsidiaries despite the lack of an autonomous budget for GFCM, and congratulated Mr Caminãs and all the scientists involved for their dedication and hard work. The Commission expressed its gratitude to those Members and national institutes who facilitated the organization of SAC meetings. 23. The Commission noted that the most salient cross-sectional activities included: the sustainability of the Bluefin tuna resource vis-à-vis the developments in farming, the adoption/promotion of an ecosystem approach to fisheries, studies on the management of sturgeon including restocking and reintroduction programmes to be undertaken by the Ad Hoc EIFAC/GFCM Working Party on the subject, and the structure of Operational Units (OUs) and related socio-economic indicators, as well as their relationship to the concept of Local Operational Units (LOUs).
4 24. The Commission further noted that SAC had made substantial progress in the collection of information on the OUs in the Western Mediterranean (Alboran Sea and Gulf of Lions), Adriatic and the Gulf of Gabès, but that national data on OUs from the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea were generally not available, preventing SAC from building a full consensus on the OU composition. 25. The Commission acknowledged the suggestion that a step-by-step approach, starting with assessing the nature of cooperative and co-management arrangements in all GFCM countries and monitoring current activities of ADRIAMED and COPEMED was essential to promote greater participation of the private sector in research activities. 26. The Commission expressed concern on the unbalanced participation, both in connection with scientific discipline and geographical distribution, in the work of SAC. In this respect, the need to formulate a regional project for the Eastern Mediterranean was reiterated. The Commission urged all Members to ensure the participation of National scientists in SAC activities and to provide the Committee with the data it needed to perform its mandate. The Commission noted the need to clarify and implement properly the procedures 27. governing the work of the Sub-committees and Working Groups, including the terms of reference of Coordinators and the designation and role of national focal points, in order to enhance participation and make data collection and analysis more effective. 28. The Commission further endorsed the suggestion by SAC that a multidisciplinary Ad Hoc Working Group of SAC, CAQ and the ICCAT Standing Committee on Research and Statistics (SCRS) should be established to develop Technical Guidelines on Sustainable Tuna Farming Practices in the Mediterranean and welcomed the definition on tuna farming provided by SAC. The representative of the World Wide Fund for Nature brought to the attention of the 29. Commission the "Cartagena Call for Action for Sustainable Tuna Farming in the Mediterranean". This document referred, inter alia, to GFCM to address the sustainability of tuna farming practices. The delegate of Morocco confirmed the availability of his country to host the next 30. meeting of the Working Group on Small Pelagic Species, as well as the meeting of the Working Group on Demersal Species, if the latter was organized back-to-back with the former. 31. The Representative of the EC confirmed the intention of his Organization to co-finance the MEDFISIS project, and was provided with clarification on the scheme for incorporating contributions from the beneficiary GFCM Members. At the request of the delegates of Morocco and Monaco, the Secretariat recalled the 32. process which led to the convening of the FAO Expert Consultation on Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management, referred to in paragraph 23, highlighted the main provisions of the draft guidelines and indicated that the draft guidelines would be made available at the Twenty-fifth Session of COFI, in February 2003. The Secretariat emphasized that the adoption of an.
5 ecosystem approach to fisheries should be incremental and both conventional and ecosystem approaches were required for responsible fisheries management. 33. The Coordinator of MEDSUDMED informed the Commission on progress and activities of the project related to ecosystem and fishery aspects. 34. Following a suggestion by the delegate from Monaco, the difficulties encountered by the SCMEE in establishing its activities were noted but it was felt, however, that establishing a Working group on ecosystem approach was premature. 35. Concerning the participation of the industry in the work of the Commission, the delegate of the EC reiterated the importance of that issue for the European Union and its Members. He informed the Commission that a meeting to support and encourage the establishment of a Mediterranean fishery association would be organized by the EC, early in 2004. The Coordinator of ADRIAMED provided complementary information on the Second 36. Meeting of the Adriatic Fisheries Associations held in September 2002, which had agreed to establish the Regional Committee of Adriatic Fisheries Associations for Responsible Fisheries. This Committee will promote a consultative approach with fishery scientists and management authorities and with Fishery Associations on discussion of fishery management options. A brief document highlighting the ADRIAMED activities implemented so far was provided to GFCM delegates. The Director of COPEMED provided information on the first forum to be organized in 37. 2003 by the project, involving the private sector, research institutions and administration representatives, with the view to enhancing governance and co-management. He also informed the Commission on work initiated on fisheries management regulations and related legal systems. Complementary explanations were provided on the process and criteria used to arrive at 38. the adoption of the fleet segmentation by SAC. It was noted, however, that the relationship between the fleet segmentation, vessel capacity and resource stocks needed to be further clarified. The Commission invited GFCM Members to supply data on Operational Units (OU). The Secretariat presented and distributed a preliminary version of a CD Rom of the FAO 39. Fish Species Identification Sheets for the Mediterranean and the Black Sea, which was prepared by the Marine Resources Service (FIRM), with the support of COPEMED. Report on the activities of the Committee on Aquaculture (CAQ) 40. At the invitation of the Chairperson of GFCM, Mr J.P. Blancheton, Chairperson of CAQ reported on the basis of document GFCM/XXVII/2002/2 and GFCM/XXVI/Inf.5, on the activities carried out during the intersessional period by the three main networks of CAQ: SIPAM (Information Systems for the Promotion of Aquaculture in the Mediterranean); TECAM (Technology and Aquaculture in the Mediterranean); and SELAM (Socio-Economic and Legal Aspects of Aquaculture in the Mediterranean). The activities of the networks were implemented with limited financial resources. Some priority activities, therefore, such as the development of.
6 producers' associations or linkage and promotion to existing associations operating in the Mediterranean and Black Sea region, were not implemented. 41. The Commission was informed that the SIPAM network has been in full operation in the Regional Centre in Tunis and in the sixteen participating countries. The sixth annual meeting of SIPAM National Coordinators was held in January 2002 and a Steering Committee meeting was held in June 2002. 42. During the intersessional period, Albania, Romania and Lebanon were linked to SIPAM. These countries benefited from training to install and operate the SIPAM software. Efforts were made for future participation of Israel, Slovenia and Syria. The visibility of SIPAM databases was improved through the creation of a portal (www.faosipam.org). The Chairperson of CAQ emphasized that the portal still required financial support for future development and maintenance, as the Regional Centre currently lacked necessary technical skills. 43. The Commission was informed that the SIPAM portal was expanded to include a dynamic communication flow for data and information supply through FIGIS (FAO - Fisheries Global Information System) and four other partners. In addition, the SIPAM portal had established the "SIPAM National Coordinators Forum" as a platform for communication among the National Coordinators. Other technical fora were being established, including one on marketing and trade, to discuss among other current issues affecting the regional seabass and sea bream industry. In this regard, the EC Representative informed the Commission that a meeting at Community level was planned to further investigate the nature of the problem, and that findings would be shared with the Commission. 44. The Commission noted that the TECAM network organized, during the intersessionnal period, a seminar on mollusc production and finalized a survey on Mediterranean aquaculture diagnostic laboratories. A workshop on Mediterranean Fish Nutrition was held in Rhodes, Greece, organized under the aegis of the Tenth International Symposium on Nutrition and Feeding of Fish. Other TECAM and SELAM activities forecasted could not be implemented due to lack of funding. It was further noted that numerous activities of the two networks had been organized in Zaragoza, Spain, due to the available facilities at CIHEAM. Member Countries were invited to enable national institutions to host future activities through co-funding arrangements. 45. The Commission further noted that the Plan of Action, endorsed by GFCM, following the Consultation on Article 9 of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, held in 1999, provided the framework for the activities which were reviewed at the Twenty-sixth Session of the Commission. Outputs were discussed at the Third Session of CAQ held in Zaragoza, Spain, from 25 to 27 September 2002. 46. The Commission agreed that the Secretariat should prepare a revised and focused regional aquaculture project proposal for submission to potential donors, as recommended by the Third Session of CAQ. The CAQ Technical Secretary informed the Commission that an FAO study on finfish 47. fattening activities, using wild-caught juveniles including bluefin tuna, would be available in early 2003. It was suggested that the study could be used to finalize the terms of reference of the.
7 proposed Joint SAC/CAQ/ICCAT Ad Hoc Working Group on Sustainable Tuna Farming Practices in the Mediterranean. AUTONOMOUS BUDGET ­ STATUS OF RATIFICATION OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE GFCM AGREEMENT 48. The Secretary of GFCM introduced this Agenda item, referring to document GFCM/XXVII/2002/3. He briefly retraced the process which led the Commission to amend the GFCM Agreement, particularly with regard to the establishment of an autonomous budget and revision of internal rules and regulations of the Commission. He recalled the modalities for determining the budget ceiling, particularly the scale of contributions, as adopted at the Twentyfifth Session of the Commission (Sliema, Malta, September 2000). 49. The Commission was informed that nine Members (Cyprus, European Community, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Monaco, Spain and Turkey) out of twenty-three had deposited their instruments of acceptance of the amendments. The Commission noted that, because the quorum of two-thirds of acceptance by 50. Members required for the amended Agreement to enter into force was not attained, GFCM would continue to operate in a transitional manner in the year 2003. The delegate from Tunisia informed the Commission that his government had ratified 51. the amendments and that the instrument of acceptance would be deposited soon. 52. Upon request of a delegation, Members were requested, through a "tour de table", to qualify their position with regard to the autonomous budget and to provide the Commission with the status of action taken towards ratifying the amendments. Among some of the Members who had not yet ratified, the following status was noted: · The delegate from Algeria expressed concern with the catch component of the scale of contributions retained for his country. He reiterated the favourable position of his Government regarding the autonomous budget and stated that every effort would be made to initiate the procedure for ratification of the amendments. The delegate from Albania informed the Commission that the amendments were presently being reviewed by the Parliament and, most probably, would be ratified before the end of 2002. The delegate from Croatia explained that the Fisheries Authorities had initiated the procedure again and was confident that the amendments would be ratified and the instruments of acceptance deposited in early 2003. The delegate from Japan reiterated his position in favour of the autonomous budget and informed the Commission that the matter was under consideration by the Government to be submitted to the Diet (Parliament) for approval. The delegate from Morocco reported that internal procedures for the ratification of the amendments had been initiated and that the instruments of acceptance would be deposited with FAO as soon as the matter was approved by the Parliament.
8 53. Some delegations acknowledged progress in the status of ratification and also noted that the procedure necessary for ratifying the amendment were often long. Several delegations expressed disappointment as there was no guarantee that the amendment to the Agreement on the autonomous budget would enter into force prior to the next session of GFCM. 54. The Commission urged Members which had not ratified to make every effort to accelerate their internal procedures. The Commission further invited the Director-General of FAO to urge the Members which had not yet deposited their letters of acceptance to do so at their earliest convenience. The Commission requested the Secretariat of GFCM to directly approach the relevant authorities of concerned countries, including through travelling to and meeting with, these respective Authorities, to further explain the important contribution that GFCM could make to responsible fisheries management and sound aquaculture development in the Mediterranean, if GFCM had an autonomous budget. The Commission requested the Secretariat to prepare a study with a view to facilitating 55. the modus operandi of the Commission, when endowed with an autonomous budget. The study should include, inter alia, technical, procedural and legal issues related to the effective implementation of an autonomous budget. The Commission also stressed the need to update the catch component of the scale of contribution and the terms of reference of the bureau and subsidiaries of GFCM. MANAGEMENT OF MEDITERRANEAN FISHERIES Review of the recommendations of the Fifth Session of the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) 56. The Chairperson of SAC presented, for each of the Sub-Committees, and on the basis of document GFCM/XXVII/2002/4, the recommendations adopted at the Fifth Session of the Committee. He indicated that these recommendations were further detailed and synthesized in table format in Appendix H of the report of SAC. Sub-Committee for Stock Assessment (SCSA) 57. The Commission noted that advices on resource management for demersal and small pelagic species were the result of eight assessments of demersal stocks and eleven assessments of small pelagics mainly carried out in the GFCM geographical sub-areas of the Western Mediterranean, the Sicily channel and the Adriatic Sea. Large Pelagic Species 58. The Commission endorsed the establishment of a joint SAC/CAQ/ICCAT Ad Hoc Working Group to Develop Technical Guidelines on Sustainable Tuna Farming Practices in the Mediterranean. Concerning the priority themes for the Working Group, the delegations of Tunisia, Croatia, EC and Malta proposed that emphasis should be given to the environmental and socio-economic issues listed in the Terms of Reference for the Working Group (Appendix G of the SAC Report), while the delegations of Cyprus and Morocco stressed the need to initially.
9 focus on the statistical component of the work. The Commission agreed that the issue should be addressed by the group of experts concerned, under the responsibility of the Chairperson of SAC. 59. The Commission was informed that experts from Malta, Italy, Tunisia and Spain had participated in the COPEMED dolphinfish sub-project but that assessment methodology for that species was yet to be perfected. 60. With reference to the recommendation on historical and recent swordfish data, the representative of ICCAT informed the Commission that his Organization had planned an assessment of swordfish stocks in 2003 and called for the collaboration of all GFCM Members for the provision of related scientific information and data. 61. The Commission acknowledged the advice of SAC on large pelagic species and invited Members to take action accordingly. At the invitation of the Chairperson of the Commission, the representative of ICCAT 62. informed the participants that out of the many recommendations formulated at the last ICCAT Plenary Session, four of them, which were reproduced in document GFCM/XXVII/2002/Inf.6, were of particular relevance to GFCM. They respectively covered: a multi-year conservation and management plan for bluefin tuna in the Mediterranean [02-08], the reduction of catches of juveniles in the Mediterranean [02-09], tuna farming[02-10], and the establishment of a working group to develop integrated and coordinated management strategies [02-11]. The Commission reviewed these recommendations and endorsed recommendations [0263. 08], [02-09] and [02-10] as reproduced in Appendix E, F and G, respectively, of this report. 64. The delegate from Japan suggested that other relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted by ICCAT also needed to be duly considered by GFCM Members. 65. The delegation of Malta made reference to Recommendation [02-08] of ICCAT and stressed that its country intended to maintain its historical bluefin tuna catching capacity and effort to guarantee Malta's share of the total allowable catch for bluefin tuna as in past years, and until further development on the matter within ICCAT. Demersal and Small Pelagic Species 66. The Chairperson of SAC presented a synthesis of the assessments undertaken. It was noted that advice on assessments of demersal and small pelagics only involved three priority species - hake, anchovy and sardine, and only three shared stocks, one of hake and two of anchovies. It was also noted that the evaluations made with MEDITS data by the SAMED Project were also included in the report of the Fifth Session of SAC. 67. The Commission called for an increased participation of experts in the Working Groups of SCSA, in particular to ensure that assessments and related data and information on priority shared stocks cover, if possible, all GFCM geographical sub-areas.
10 68. The delegate from Morocco and the representative of the EC requested clarification on the legal nature of the GFCM Recommendations. The Secretariat confirmed that only those Recommendations, taken by virtue of Article III, I, (b) of the GFCM Agreement and which explicitly refers to Article V of the Agreement, were compulsory for Members, taking into account the related procedure laid down in Article V concerning delay for entry into force and the possibility to formulate objection to the Recommendations. 69. A comprehensive debate arose on SAC advice on demersal and small pelagic stocks. On the initiative of the EC delegation, a draft proposal for a GFCM Recommendation on these stocks was submitted for consideration of the Commission. The Commission welcomed this proposal and, with the cooperative contribution from several delegations, the text of the first GFCM Recommendation on fishery management, based on the advices of SAC, was drafted. 70. The Commission acknowledged the advice of SAC concerning demersal and pelagic stocks and invited Members to take them into consideration. The Commission further adopted the Recommendation GFCM/2002/1, as attached in Appendix D. Sub-Committee on Economic and Social Sciences (SCESS) 71. Following the presentation of advice related to the work of the SCESS, the delegate from Italy emphasised that the manual on sampling methodology would serve as an important tool for facilitating development of socio-economic parameters for fleet segmentation and related operational units, and that it would serve training purposes as well. The Commission acknowledged the advice of SAC, with regard to the activities of 72. SCESS, and invited Members to take action accordingly. Sub-Committee on Fishery Statistics and Information (SCSI) 73. The Chairperson of SAC emphasized the weak participation at this subsidiary body and the lack of work being carried out at working group level. He further pointed out the need to hold a meeting between COPEMED, ADRIAMED and SCSI in order to harmonize criteria on relevant existing data bases. Moreover, he reiterated that few Members had so far provided SCSI with data on Operational Units and pointed out that this information was needed to proceed with formatting the data which should be forwarded to FIGIS. 74. The Secretariat provided additional information on data coverage and on the schedule of main activities foreseen in the MEDFISIS project. In this respect, the delegate from Italy emphasized the importance of considering socio-economic data and information. 75. The Commission acknowledged the advice of SAC with regard to the activities of SCSI.
Sub-Committee on Marine Environment and Ecosystems (SCMEE) 76. The Commission noted with disappointment the low participation of scientists in this Sub-Committee and the limited progress made in returning completed forms on environmental parameters to the Coordinator of the Sub-Committee.
77. The delegate from Monaco informed the Commission on the Action Plan for cartilaginous species and about activities related to the Strategic Action Programme for Biodiversity (PASBIO) being implemented under the aegis of the institutions of the Barcelona Convention. She stressed the need to further increase cooperation with the institutions and arrangements established within the framework of the Barcelona Convention and the other relevant IGOs and NGOs, including UNEP/RAC/SPA, IUCN, ACCOBAMS, WWF, particularly through developing joint activities within the relevant SCMEE Working Group. 78. On the basis of an EC proposal, the Commission agreed on an indicative Reference Framework for the work of SAC during the next two years, a