FAO Fisheries Circular No. 987.
FIP/C987 (En).
ISSN 0429-9329.
PORT STATE CONTROL OF FOREIGN FISHING VESSELS.
Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360.
FIP/C987(En).
by Terje Lobach International Legal Consultant.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2003.
The desi gn ations employed and the pres ent atio n of the material in this information product do not imply the expr ession of any opinion whats oev er on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the U nite d Nati ons c onc er nin g the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities , or concerni ng the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educ atio nal or other non-commercial pur poses are authorized without any prior written permission from the c opyr igh t holders provided the sourc e is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright hol der s. Applicati ons for such permission should be address ed to the Chi ef, Publishi ng Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Vial e delle Terme di Carac alla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2003.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT.
This document is a revised version of a report presented and deliberated at the Expert Consultation to Review Port State Measures to Combat Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing that was held at FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy, from 4 to 6 November 2002. The Expert Consultation was convened by the Director-General of FAO with a view to facilitating the implementation of the 2001 FAO International Plan of Action to Deter, Prevent and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU). The Expert Consultation was arranged in conjunction with the Fishery Policy and Planning Division, the Fishery Industries Division, and the Development Law Service under the auspices of FishCode, the FAO Interregional Programme of Assistance to Developing Countries for Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Funds were provided through the FAO Regular Programme and FishCode project GCP/INT /84 9 /USA (" Sup p o rt for Implementation of the International Plan of Action on Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) Fishing"). The document incorporates suggestions made by participants at the Expert Consultation, and is produced and published as a further contribution of the FishCode IUU Fishing Project. J. Eric Reynolds Programme Coordinator, FishCode Fishery Policy and Planning Division FAO Fisheries Department, Rome www.fao.org/fi/fishcode.
Lobach, T., Port S tate control of foreign fishing vessels. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 987. Rome, FAO. 2003. 19p. ABS TRACT The FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) agreed in M arch 2001 on an international plan of action (IPOA) to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. The plan may be considered as a toolbox from which States may choose relevant measures to implement into domestic legislation. A joint FAO/IM O Working Group on IUU fishing met in October 2000 and agreed that FAO in cooperation with relevant organizations should consider the need to develop measures for port State control related to the management of fisheries resources. In order to facilitate possible future developments in this field, FAO convened in November 2002 an Expert Consultation to Review Port State M easures to Combat IUU Fishing. The present document draws on the experiences of IM O in developing port State control regimes with respect to vessel safety and pollution prevention standards and equipment. It looks into the reasons for the adoption of port State measures under the auspices of an agreement or a memorandum of understanding at regional level and into the means for achieving a transparent and efficient system. The paper further discusses elements of a possible M emorandum including possible actions by port States.
CONTENTS Page.
4. INTRODUCTION JUSTIFICATION FOR A HARMONIZED SYSTEM HOW TO ACHIEVE A COM PREHENSIVE AND TRANSPARENT SYSTEM ELEM ENT S OF A POSSIBLE M EMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8.
6. "Flag of Convenience" in the context of port State control Listing of vessels Prior notice of port access Denial of access to port Port State obligations Port inspections Possible actions Information and reporting 1 2 4 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 17 18 18.
IMPLEM ENT AT ION OF PORT STATE CONTROL OF FOREIGN FISHING VESSELS INTO DOM EST IC LEGISLATION CONCLUSIONS.
ABBREVIATIONS CCAM LR COFI EEZ FOC FONC GATT/WTO GT ICCAT IMO IOTC ISM IUU fishing MOU NAFO NEAFC Paris MOU RA RFM Os SEAFO VM S Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic M arine Living Recources Committee on Fisheries Exclusive Economic Zones Flag of Convenience Flag of Non-Compliance General A gree ment on Tariffs and Trade/World Trade Organization Gross Ton International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas International M arit ime Organization Indian Ocean Tuna Commission International Safety M anagement Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing M emorandum of Understanding Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization North East Atlantic Fisheries Commision Paris M emorandum of Understanding on Port State Control The Regulatory Area Regional Fisheries M anage ment Organizations South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization Vessel M onit oring System.
INTRODUCTION.
The FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) agreed in M arch 2001 on an international plan of action (IPOA) to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing (hereinafter referred to as "IPOA on IUU fishing"). The FAO Council endorsed the IPOA on 23 June 2001. The IPOA is a voluntary instrument that applies to all States and to all fishers. The objective of the plan is to guide flag States, coastal States, port States and regional fisheries management organizations (RFM Os) to take appropriate measures in order to address the issue of IUU fishing. The plan may be considered as a toolbox from which States may choose relevant measures to implement into domestic legislation. However, there is a need to have a harmonized approach among States in some areas to give full effect to the IPOA. For example such an approach is important when dealing with port State measures. There is also a clear guidance in the IPOA on IUU fishing itself calling for cooperation in this field. 1 A joint FAO/IM O2 Working Group on IUU fishing met in October 2000. 3 The main issues examined by the group were related to flag State and port State control. Concerning port State control in brief it was noted that the majority of fishing vessels were not covered by IM O instruments either because fishing vessels were specifically excluded, were outside the size limitations or the flag States are not parties to the relevant instruments. Further it was noted that it might be difficult to introduce port State inspection procedures for fisheries management purposes and fishing vessel safety within existing regional M emorandum of Understanding (M OUs) on port State control4 . It was also recognized that the mechanism of international or regional M OUs relating to port State control could be used as an important and effective tool for enhancing fisheries management, and addressing IUU fishing. Finally the group agreed that FAO in cooperation with relevant organizations should consider the need to develop measures for port State control dealing with all matters related to the management of fisheries resources. The Working Group developed a list of criteria for port State control of fishing vessels, which should be examined by FAO when considering the need to develop relevant measures. It should also be mentioned that IMO, in its submission of 27 June 20015 , to the General Assembly of the United Nations fifty-sixth session of Oceans and the Law of the Sea stated that "cooperation should be extended to FAO towards developing a port State control regime of its own through a sharing of IM O's experience and expertise in the matter".
Paragraph 62 of the IPOA reads: " States should cooperate, as appropriate, bilaterally, multilaterally and within the relevant regional fisheries management organizations, to develop compatible measur es for port State control of fishing vessels. Such measures should deal with the information to be collected by port States, procedures for information collection, and measures for dealing with suspected infringements by the vess el of measures adopted under these national, regional and international systems." 2 International Maritime Organization. 3 See Report of the joint Ad Hoc Working Group on illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and related matters, Rome 9-11 October 2000. 4 The concern about IUU fishing is first and foremost related to conservation and management measures and less to the safety of fishing vessels and pollution prevention standards. Thereby the IUU fishing is not the prime concern of IMO or of shipping administrators, and thus the existing regional MOUs on port State control targeting substandard vessels are not the vehicles for s eeking to compensate for the lack of effective flag State enforcement of fisheries conservation and managem ent measures. 5 On the implementation of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement.
Following the adoption of the IPOA on IUU fishing and in the light of the recommendations by the joint FAO/IM O Working Group, States should consider adopting legislation, and RFM Os should consider adopting binding measures to implement more effective port State controls, including through the development of new regional agreements or M OUs on port State measures.6 In order to facilitate possible future developments in this field, FAO convened in November 2002 an Expert Consultation to Review Port State M easures to Combat IUU Fishing.7.
JUS TIFICAT IO N FOR A HARMONIZED S YS TEM.
8 The 1982 UN Convention establishes rules to guide port States by setting reasonable standards for interventions, inspections and violations. Basically it says very little about port States jurisdiction. References to port States are primarily found in the articles dealing with marine pollution, see Articles 218­220 where it is assumed that ports are subject to sovereignty of the coastal State as they are parts of internal waters.
When provisions for port State control were included in different treaties, it was foreseen that their application would be of national concern. The port State control regime introduced by 9 the Paris M emorandum of Understanding on Port State Control , adopted in 1982, changed this situation and constituted the first regional system in the world on port State control. The 1982 Paris MOU is an international agreement among 18 countries to establish a coordinated port State control system with respect to vessel safety and pollution prevention standards and equipment. One goal of the Paris MOU is for member States to inspect at least 25 percent of 10 foreign merchant ships entering their respective ports each year. If deficiencies that are clearly hazardous to safety, health or environment are discovered the ship will be detained and 11 repairs will need to be completed before the ship can leave the port. IMO has developed a global strategy for port State control and has incorporated in the procedures for such control the professional profile, training and qualification requirements and general operating guidelines for control officers. This is to ensure that, while the systems may be regional, the standards applied will be universal. The procedures instituted by the Paris MOU initiative inspired the development of port State regimes around the world. Port State control regimes are now operated in Australia, the AsiaPacific Region, the Black Sea, the Caribbean Region, the Indian Ocean, in the M edit erranean Region, Latin America and in West and Central Africa. M ore than 90 countries are involved in these different systems and there are initiatives underway to take the process further by formalising the transfer of information between the different systems.
In the Report of the Expert Consultation on Illegal, Unreported And Unregulated Fishing organized by the Government of Australia in cooperation with FAO, Sydney 15-19 May 2000 it is suggested that FAO, in concert with States and other agenci es of relevant competence such as IMO, convenes a conference addressing the establishment of bilateral and multilateral instruments (such as Memoranda of Understanding on port State controls) to deter IUU fishing and related activities. The report also indicates items to be addressed by such a conference, see paragraph 52 of the Report. This idea is not, however, reflected in the final version of the IPOA on IUU fishing. 7 See Report of the Expert Consultation to Review Port State Measures to Combat Illegal, Unreport ed and Unregulated Fishing, Rome, Italy, 4-6 November 2002. 8 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. 9 Further referred to as Paris MOU. 10 Section 1.3 of the Paris MOU. 11 See Section 3.7.1 of the Paris MOU.
The development of port State control for the merchant fleet has increased the number of inspections on international shipping and consequently standards have undoubtedly improved. Regimes on port State control are most effective if such regimes have common goals with the flag State and are initiatives that supplement and do not substitute flag State control. The principle of flag State responsibility over vessels continues to be the fundamental principle in international shipping. 12 A limited role for port State intervention has been envisaged under the M ARPOL 73/78 Convention regarding inspection of certificates and reporting and prosecution of certain violations.1 3 Article 218 of the 1982 UN Convention allows for actions related to violations which took place on the high seas and other areas and was quite innovative at the time with respect to combating marine pollution. It provides indeed that a port State may also take legal proceedings against a vessel in one of its ports that is alleged to have discharged a polluting matter outside that State's territorial waters or Exclusive Economic Zone "in violation of applicable international rules and standards established through the competent international organization or general diplomatic conference". It should also be noted that when the 1993 Torremolinos Protocol1 4 and the 1995 STCW-F Convention1 5 will enter into force, these instruments might eventually contribute more effectively towards harmonizing the port State control regimes addressing safety of navigation and prevention of pollution with regimes addressing IUU fishing. The approaches to fisheries-related port State control contemplated in Article 8.3 of the Code of Conduct 1 6 , Article 23 of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement 1 7 , Article V (2) of the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement 1 8 , paragraphs 52­64 of the IPOA on IUU fishing and several regional management agreements, suggest that the concept of port State control is highly relevant for fishery conservation and management. 1 9 There may therefore be an idea to take the now widely applicable regional M OUs on merchant shipping as a model and see if some regional approaches to fisheries can be developed. 20 A coastal State has, with minor exceptions not relevant in this context, full jurisdiction within its internal waters. These waters, which include ports, are regarded as part of the land over.
Critics have claimed that the port State control imposes a burden on port States that should be borne by the fl ag State. But the key question is how the international society can deal with vessels flying the flag of States not taking that responsibility. 13 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 1973, as modified by the protocol of 1978 related thereto, Articles 5(2)-(3) and 6(2)-(5). 14 The Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, superseded by the 1993 Protocol. 15 International Convention on Standards of Training and Watch Keeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995. 16 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. 17 Agreem ent for the Implement ation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks adopted in 1995. 18 Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Managem ent Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas. adopted in 1993. 19 The Santiago de Compostela International Conference on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (25 and 26 November 2002) established that IUU fishing t akes advant age of a number of factors including the lack o f agreed, effective, compatible and stringent port State measures. The Conference further urged the international community to give further consideration to, among other things, use port State and market State measures to prevent IUU caught fish from entering markets, including bans on importation, landing and transhipment. 20 The Expert Consultation to Review Port State Measures to Combat IUU Fishing (4-6 November 2002) recognized that a possible MOU constitutes one of numerous tools to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing and considered a range of elements that might be included in a regional MOU.
which the coastal State has sovereignty. A number of port States already exercise individual port State control over foreign fishing vessels voluntarily in their ports, but the IUU fishing experience strongly suggests the need for a network of mandatory port State controls. The underlying principle formulated in Article 23(1) of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks A gree ment is "the right and the duty" of a port State to take non-discriminatory measures2 1 in accordance with international law, in order to "promote the effectiveness of sub-regional, regional and global conservation and management measures". Paragraph 2 specifies, inter alia, inspections of documents, fishing gear and catch on board which the port State may take on vessels voluntarily in port. The use of the wording " inter alia" indicates that other measures may well be taken. It should be noted that the port State may take action in its own right and it does not need a request from another State to do so. Thus, emphasis needs to be put not only on the "right" in Article 23 of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement, but also on the "duty". Some States have already enacted into their domestic legislation provisions to give effect to the obligations set out in Article 23 of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. It is, however, questionable if all the relevant port States will take relevant actions within a reasonable time frame. It is recognized that port State measures may constitute an effective tool to curb IUU fishing, especially if that is undertaken in the context of an international arrangement. Such an arrangement might be a binding agreement 2 2 , a M OU which may be binding or not or other voluntary instruments such as the newly adopted IPOA on IUU.2 3 The parties should determine the legal nature of the instrument.
HOW TO ACHIEVE A COMPREHENS IVE AND TRANS PARENT S YS TEM.
In order to establish a workable system, port States should adopt harmonized mandatory obligations for control of foreign fishing vessels. It may be appropriate to link such a system to the RFMOs. Some conventions that establish RFMOs include provisions on port State control over foreign fishing vessels. Some other RFM Os have adopted such controls as part of their suite of fishery conservation and management measures. However, most of these bodies have not worked out an adequate policy to put such provisions into effect. M OUs could have a wider application since not all port States are members of a RFMO, because there are regions were RFM Os are unlikely to be established and finally because appropriate port measures might involve more than one RFM O. Nevertheless, a regional approach to port State control of fishing vessel's compliance with conservation and management measures may be founded on these organizations.
SEAFO (South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization) has incorporated these elements in Article 15 of the Convention, except the last sentence of paragraph 1 of Articl e 23 of the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement where it refers to that "when taking such measures a port State shall not discriminate in form or in fact against the vessels of any State." This was deliberately left out as parties felt that such discrimination could take place against Flag of Convenience (FOC) vessels. 22 In paragraph 53 of the Report of the Expert Consultation on IUU fishing, Sydney 15-19 May 2000 it is proposed that States elaborate a binding international agreement on port State controls to deter IUU fishing. This is not, however, included in the final version of the IPOA on IUU fishing. 23 In this paper the concept of a MOU is considered. Whether such a MOU should be binding or voluntary is of course for the States involved to decide. However, in order to counteract IUU fishing, a binding instrument would probably be more effective than a voluntary instrument. When elaborating on a MOU, other possible instruments such as a binding convention or a voluntary International Plan Of Action is not disregarded and the ideas and suggestions in this paper may easily be transformed into such instruments if so decided.
There are at least three reasons for that. Firstly, RFMOs were strengthened by the entry into force of the 1995 UN Fish Stock A gre ement and their important role is underlined throughout the agreement. The 1995 UN Fish Stock A gree ment has also inspired coastal States and distant water fishing nations to cooperate in order to establish such organizations in regions previously not covered by such bodies. Secondly, these organizations are responsible for establishing relevant conservation and management measures in areas under respective purviews. Thus, an inspection in port should therefore examine if the fishing vessel in question has violated any conservation and management measures established by any RFM O. In addition, compliance with global conservation measures such as the UN-resolution on the global moratorium on all large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing on the high seas2 4 should of course be examined. Thirdly, most of these bodies have secretariats, which are up and running and a lot of expertise and experience on fisheries matters are gathered within those organizations. For some RFM Os the Convention area also includes areas under national jurisdiction, but the competence to establish conservation and management measures is restricted to areas beyond the limits of such jurisdiction 2 5 and there are RFM Os where no distinction between areas of jurisdiction is made for management purposes2 6 . There are also regional bodies in which the convention areas apply only to the high seas2 7 . IUU fishing may take place by foreign vessels in waters under the jurisdiction of a port State, on the high seas by vessels flying the flag of parties or non-parties to a relevant RFMO. Port States should thus carry out control related to at least these three situations. In addition a port State should inspect vessels flying the flag of another State where fishing activities took place within the waters of that particular flag State. This last point is in particular important when conservation and management measures concerning shared stocks have been agreed upon between two or more States. Sometimes fishing is conducted within the EEZ of a party to such arrangements, but landed in the port of another State (due to port facilities, price factors, distance from fishing grounds etc.). In these cases it is most likely that the fishing vessels leave the waters of a coastal State without being inspected to determine whether the fishing has been conducted in accordance with applicable legislation. This is also, however, a general issue as a coastal State may seek assistance from a port State to verify that fishing in the waters of that coastal State has been in accordance with relevant legislation. This may be the only way of obtaining the information required for assessing the situation. It should be mentioned that for example Norway has entered into agreements about cooperation in the field of monitoring, control and surveillance with a number of States.2 8 This includes the exchange of information of mutual inspections in ports by parties to the agreements. In principle port State control should relate to all areas where marine capture fishing operations take place. Port States should thus examine that fishing undertaken in these areas have been in conformity with established conservation and management measures. In summary a port State should examine whether IUU fishing has taken place in: 1) the.
UNGA Resolution 46/215. However, a RFMO may regulate also within waters under national jurisdiction with the consent of the coastal State, see for example Articl e 6 of the NEAFC Convention. 26 This is the case for bodies managing highly migratory species. 27 See the SEAFO Convention (signed in April 2001, but not entered into force) and the draft for a new RFMO in the South Indian Ocean (Madagas car, September 2001). 28 Such agreem ents have been concluded with Denmark, Faroe Isl ands, France, Germany, Icel and, Irel and, Netherlands, Sweden, Russian Federation and United Kingdom.
Regulatory Area2 9 (RA) by a Contracting Party of a RFMO, 2) the RA by a non-Contracting Party of a RFM O, 3) waters under national jurisdiction of a Contracting Party by a Contracting Party of a RFMO and 4) waters under national jurisdiction of a Contracting Party by a non-Contracting Party of a RFM O. Parties to a RFMO are most likely both fishing nations and States having responsibilities as port States. This may facilitate mandatory port State control for both Contracting and nonCont ract ing Party vessels as a part of the organization's conservation measures that could have a great impact on IUU fishing. However, vessels conducting IUU fishing move from one region to another and are therefore not the concern of one RFM O alone. In order to establish a comprehensive system, developing a M OU on port State control between such bodies could be a way forward. In that context port States should have the duty to take action against vessels having participated in IUU fishing in areas managed also by other regional bodies. Therefore RFM Os should be encouraged to enter into multilateral agreements on port State control. Such cooperation would be essential in areas where IUU fishing is the concern of two or more regional bodies. Such a possible M OU on port State control between RFM Os is envisaged to be binding on all parties of those bodies. It seems not to be contrary to any legal instrument to enter into agreements of this kind. From a practical point of view negotiations could be carried out by representatives empowered by each of the regional bodies, followed by a process within the RFM Os adopting the result of such negotiations. M embers will then have an obligation to implement these international agreed standards into their respective domestic legislation. A specific problem occurs where a State is not directly involved in fishing, but acts as a port State only. The question is whether a State with no fishing activity in the area of a RFM O may qualify to become a member solely by operating as a port State that receives landings of fish or facilitates service for the fleet. It is doubtful if such activities meet the concept of «real interests» in Article 8.3 the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. If not, such a State may not be entitled to become a member of a RFM O.3 0 However, concerning the duty to cooperate, the Article refers to relevant coastal States in general, which includes port States. This may indicate that a State acting solely as a port State also may become a member of a RFM O if it so wishes. If that is not the case, such a State should be approached and encouraged by relevant organizations to become party either to a relevant RFMO or to a possible M OU on port State control.
ELEMENTS OF A POSS IBLE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERS TANDING3 1.
Some general standards and harmonized procedures should be worked out. A system may also include measures dealing in particular with the problem of "Flag of Convenience" (FOC)vessels, as there is a close link between port State control and activities undertaken by such vessels. The call for port State measures is in many cases based on the lack of implementation of flag State responsibility. If all flag States complied with their obligations concerning their fishing fleets, port State control would more or less be superfluous. As mentioned above, the.
"The Regulatory Area" is the area of competence to establish conservation and managem ent measures within a RFMO. 30 Attempts to define the concept «real interests» have been carried out without success both in NAFO (Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organi zation) and in the process of establishing SEAFO (South East Atlantic Fisheries Organization). 31 The Expert Consultation to Review Port State Measures to Combat IUU Fishing (4-6 November 2002) developed a draft MOU that could be used as a template for regional approaches in this regard.
joint FAO/IM O Working Group developed a list of criteria for port State control, which should be examined when considering developing such measures. The IPOA on IUU fishing also includes a number of possible measures that should be looked at in this context. It is further of importance to agree internationally on consequences for vessels found to be in noncomp liance with international conservation and management measures. A M OU should apply to all vessels engaged in, or supporting, fishing activities including thus fishing vessels and vessels transporting fish and fishery products. 4.1 "Flag of Convenience" in the context of port S tate control.
Under international law the flag State is primarily responsible for ensuring compliance with international minimum standards. Article 94 of the 1982 UN Convention reaffirms this fundamental principle, but also makes clear that flag states have certain obligations especially with regard to ensuring compliance with international minimum safety, pollution prevention and social standards. Similarly, Article 217 of the 1982 UN Convention sets out an obligation on flag States to effectively enforce such international rules, standards and regulations, irrespective of where the violation occurs. These requirements were incorporated in IM O Resolution Guidelines to Assist Flag States in the Implementation of IMO Instruments (A. 847 [20]). Article 91 of the 1982 UN Convention requires there to be a "genuine link" between the vessel and the flag State. Although the "genuine link" is not expressly defined in the 1982 UN Convention, other Articles, especially Article 217, implicitly point to the requirement for at least an "economic link". This indicates that there should exist within the flag State a substantial entity which can be made responsible for actions of the vessel and on which penalties of adequate severity can be levied so as to discourage violations of applicable international minimum rules and standards, wherever they occur. The FAO Compliance Agreement introduced the concept of flag State responsibility in the fisheries context to the global level. 3 2 In many respects the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement 3 3 reiterates the concept of flag State responsibility as elaborated in the FAO Compliance Agreement. It should also be noted that Section 7.8 of the Code of Conduct in a way addresses the problems caused by re-flagging of fishing vessels to FOC-registers in order to escape controls. The IPOA on IUU fishing sets out a number of measures aiming at strengthening the flag State obligations in the context of fisheries. 3 4 It is commonly acknowledged that one major factor related to the problem of IUU fishing are the activities undertaken by FOC-vessels which often are defined as vessels flying the flag of States with open shipping registers. In 1998 the First Joint M inist erial Conference of the Paris and Tokyo M emorandums of Un