FORESTRY OUTLOOK STUDY FOR AFRICA.
SUBREGIONAL REPORT SOUTHERN AFRICA.
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK EUROPEAN COMMISSION FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Forestry outlook study for Africa: Subregional report - Southern Africa.
This report, which examines the long term prospects of forests and forestry in Southern Africa, is one of the five subregional reports prepared as part of the Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA). Southern Africa has a number of unique features stemming from its specific ecological, economic, socio-cultural and historical setting. It has demonstrated what could be done to develop a vibrant forest industry even in a situation of limited natural resources. As the subregion adapts to the emerging changes, the forestry situation is bound to be influenced directly and indirectly by the global, regional and country level developments. This report provides an account of the current situation, the driving forces and what is likely to happen upto the year 2020 if the present tendencies persist. Further, the report also outlines what may be done to improve the situation, especially in the context of the pervasive problems of poverty and environmental degradation facing the countries in the subregion. Considering the enormous diversity within Southern Africa, there will be obvious differences in the development of the forest sector between countries. FOSA has attempted to capture this diversity and to provide an indication of the changing opportunities and challenges. The subregional and regional overview provided by FOSA would help to strengthen the knowledge base of the national forest programmes. While the FOSA provides an insight into the potentials and challenges and indicates the different options, it also has a broader purpose of stimulating discussion on the future of forests and forestry, providing an indication of the long term changes and how the countries and the different stakeholders could take advantage of their strengths and overcome the weaknesses. What is important is to look at FOSA as a process, enabling to raise the appropriate questions and to seek the answers based on a critical analysis of the situation, current and emerging, in the larger context. FAO in partnership with the countries and other organizations will continue to strive to support this process taking advantage of the insights provided by FOSA.
M. Hosny El-Lakany Assistant Director-General Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
FOREWORD ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ABBREVIATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii vii ix xi.
INTRODUCTION Background Objectives FOSA process Structure of the report 1 1 1 1 2.
FORESTS AND WILDLIFE IN SOUTHERN AFRICA: TRENDS AND CURRENT SITUATION State of forest resources and their management Forest cover and changes therein Management of natural forests Forest plantations Cer tification Trees outside forests Supply of wood and non-wood products Woodfuel and its significance in energy consumption Industrial roundwood and its processing Trade in wood products Non-wood forest products Wildlife and tourism Service functions of forest: water and forests Summary of the current situation 3 3 3 4 5 6 7 7 7 8 10 11 11 13 13.
SOME CRITICAL CHANGE DRIVERS Political, social and institutional factors Decentralization and community participation Land reforms Privatization Resolving civil strife and conflicts Demographic changes Population growth Urbanization Impact of HIV/AIDS Change in age structure Migration and other population movements Consequences of demographic changes Economic changes Gross domestic product and its change Income distribution and poverty Sectoral shifts in income and employment Agricultural development Growth of the informal sector Economic liberalization and the impact of globalization Enviromental changes Growing awareness of environmental issues Technological changes General situation with regard to technological changes Changes in forestry science and technology An overview of change drivers 15 15 15 16 16 17 18 18 18 19 19 20 20 21 21 21 22 22 23 24 25 26 26 26 26 27.
ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS Approach to defining scenarios Public sector dominance Market forces Narrowly focused growth of the private sector Private sector support for social and economic development Informal sector Fortress scenario The Great Transition Scenarios - The immediate future 29 29 29 31 32 33 33 34 34 36.
THE FOREST SECTOR IN THE NEXT TWO DECADES Some key questions The outlook for forest resources Forest cover changes Management of natural forests Forest plantations Trees outside forests The outlook for products and services Woodfuel Industrial wood and wood products Non-wood forest products Wildlife: long-term potential Forests and water Forestry and poverty alleviation Summary of implications 37 37 37 37 38 39 39 40 41 42 42 43 45 46 47.
PRIORITIES AND STRATEGIES Priorities for the forest sector Pover ty alleviation Environmental protection Strategies Strengthening the framework for the transparent operation of market forces A revitalized public sector Strengthening civil society organizations Regional and subregional cooperation 49 50 50 51 52 52 52 52 52.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Key findings Priorities FOSA follow-up REFERENCES 55 55 55 56 57.
Acknowledgements.
This subregional report on Southern Africa is the outcome of the collective effort of the countries in the subregion and several institutions and individuals. But for their commitment and interest, it would not have been possible to prepare this report. FAO is indebted to all of them and wishes to acknowledge its gratitude to the following for their guidance, support and collaboration in undertaking the study. All the governments in the Southern Africa subregion have actively participated and shaped the FOSA process through their nominated national focal points. The country outlook papers prepared by the national focal points formed the foundation of the FOSA process. FAO wishes to acknowledge the contribution made by S. Baker, A. Chilesha, E. Cruz, S. Gamedze, P.C. Gondo, S. Kainja, H.O. Kojwang, D.Kwesha, A.R. Madula, N. Maile J.A. Mhungu, K. Nyasulu, T.Simelane, S. Moyo, C. Phiri, M. Sekgopo, E.M. Shumba and A. Zola, for participating and supporting the FOSA process, especially through preparation of country outlook papers and providing a wealth of information on key developments in the countries. FAO also wish to acknowledge the help provided by the Department of Forestry, Zambia in facilitating the FOSA process through organizing the subregional planning meeting held at Lusaka in March/ April 2000. Support provided by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Government of South Africa for organizing the technical review meeting in Pretoria in January 2001 is gratefully acknowledged. The FOSA Expert Advisory Group has been instrumental in guiding the study in all its stages. In particular H. Coetzee provided substantial support in guiding the preparation of the Southern Africa subregional report, including through his involvement in the various meetings and reviewing the draft reports. M. Chihambakwe, FOSA subregional consultant for Southern Africa played a key role in compiling and collating information and preparing the draft subregional report. Support provided by the SADC- Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit, in particular M. Ngulube and K. Nyasulu, is gratefully acknowledged. Insights to forestry issues provided by G. Kowero, F. Kruger and L. Bethlehem were particularly helpful in preparing the subregional report. The African Development Bank has been the key partner of FAO in undertaking the study. The subregional thematic studies on driving forces and key issues in forestry in Southern Africa commissioned by the African Development Bank with financial support from the Swedish Trust Funds formed an important input in preparing this report. The other important partner in implementing FOSA has been the European Commission, whose support to the regional projects on data collection and analysis and sustainable forest management provided a strong information base for FOSA. During the various stages of preparation of the study a number of consultants provided substantial technical support. These include S. Ryder, R. Khan and J. Lyke.
M. Laverdiere provided substantial technical support especially in coordinating and guiding the study and providing technical support to the national focal points and the FOSA subregional consultant. The FAO representations in the Southern Africa subregion played an important role in facilitating the preparation of the country outlook papers. FAO also wishes to express its gratitude to the FOSA team based in Rome, Accra and Harare, the members of the Internal Advisory Committee who guided the FOSA process, the FAO staff members of who assisted in the preparation and revision of the subregional report and the editors and translators who did an excellent job adhering to the tight deadlines.
Abbreviations.
ADB CAMPFIRE CBD CCD CDM CIFOR COMESA ECA FAO FOSA GDP HIV/AIDS ILO NEPAD NGO NWFP SADC SACU UNAIDS UNEP UNDP WTTC.
African Development Bank Communal Area Management Program for Indigenous Resources Convention on Biological Diversity Convention to Combat Desertification Clean Development Mechanism Center for International Forestry Research Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Economic Commission for Africa Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN Forestry Outlook Study for Africa Gross Domestic Product Human Immuno Deficiency Virus / Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome International Labour Organization New Partnership for Africa's Development Non-Governmental Organization Non-Wood Forest Product Southern African Development Community Southern African Customs Union Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Development Programme World Travel and Tourism Council.
Executive summary.
The Southern Africa subregion comprises of Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe. A key feature of the subregion is the high inter- and intracountry variation in economic, social and institutional conditions, and this is reflected in the forest sector, with a highly-developed forest-based industry coexisting with a predominantly subsistencefocused informal sector. This report offers an overview of the long-term trends in forests and wildlife in Southern Africa and outlines the strategies and options for increasing their contribution to sustainable development in view of emerging economic, social, institutional and technological changes.
CURRENT SITUATION.
network of national parks and game reserves, which is an integral component of the fast-growing tourism industry. Conflicts will intensify in the future, however, and considerable efforts will be needed to resolve them. Local participation in the management of national parks and game reserves will remain an important option and should be systematically pursued; · increasing water scarcity will draw attention to the role of forests and trees. In several countries, there will be an urgent need to improve watershed management and this will require a re examination of the role of forests and trees in regulation of water yield.
DRIVING FORCES.
Southern African forestry is characterized by a number of contrasting features, which means that it is hard to make generalizations for the subregion. The situation in South Africa is unique and should be treated separately for the purposes of analysis. The forest and forestry situation in each country reflect the overall state of social and economic development in that country. Some of the features that need to be taken into account are as follows: · while there is a very well-developed wood industry based on high-quality plantations in South Africa, Swaziland and to some extent Zimbabwe, in most other countries forests and forest industries are poorly developed. Indigenous forests are poorly managed, and although no reliable statistics are available they are certainly being overexploited; · in most countries, except South Africa and Swaziland, deforestation is continuing, because of the expansion of agriculture and other related land uses. Several countries, particularly Zambia, have a very high rate of deforestation; · plantation forestry is well developed in South Africa and to some extent in Zimbabwe and Swaziland. In most other countries weak institutional arrangements, low investment and the absence of links with the processing sector have undermined the performance of plantations; · Southern Africa has a unique advantage in its.
The last two decades have seen major social and political changes and upheavals in Southern Africa. Although a number of problems will persist, there are also opportunities as the countries consolidate their progress and face new challenges. The main driving forces that need to be taken into account include the following: · although Southern Africa as a whole is economically better off than other subregions, there are wide differences in income between the different countries, with South Africa, the largest economy, accounting for most of the GDP. In view of the strong links between South Africa and other countries in the subregion, the performance of the latter is to some extent dependent on South Africa's economic performance; · income distribution is highly unequal and there is widespread poverty. In most countries the poorest 10 percent of the population receive under 2 percent of the income, while the richest 10 percent receive over 40 percent. Low income levels and wide disparity have led to a high incidence of poverty;. · in view of the low income and poor growth of the formal sector, there is increasing dependence on the informal sector. Although no quantitative data are available, dependence of people on the informal sector is high and is expected to rise; · the population is expected to grow from 113 million to over 150 million between 2000 and 2020;.
· a key concern for all the countries in the subregion is the very high incidence of HIV/AIDS. In some of the countries almost a third of the adult population between the age of 15 and 50 has been infected; Social and economic fallout from the high infection rates and the deaths of a large number of people will have a significant impact on forests and forestry; · landownership and reform is a politically and socially very sensitive issue and is a cause of conflict, with the potential to derail the development process. Changes in one country could have significant ripple effects in adjoining countries; · in comparison with other subregions, Southern Africa is more open and well integrated with the regional and global economies, largely through South Africa. A number of regional and subregional organizations are supporting the process of regional integration. While several of the problems may persist, opportunities are also emerging to promote all-round social and economic development. There has been significant progress in the democratization of government, especially through decentralization. Policies and legislation have facilitated community participation. Southern Africa is rich in resources and technical capacity. There are also considerable opportunities to mobilize investment from within the subregion, and the increasing economic integration could strengthen these. Southern Africa probably has prospects of faster development than the other subregions of Africa, although this will depend on a number of factors, particularly the deepening and broadening of democratization and wider empowerment of the people.
IMPLICATIONS.
Taking the above driving forces and the various possible scenarios into account, the general trends evident from the study are as follows: · forest cover is expected to decline more or less at the same rate as in the previous decade on account of continued dependence on land and limited opportunities for diversification. Ongoing land reforms in some countries, although necessary, could exacerbate the situation; · forests and woodlands constituted as national parks and game reserves will be afforded some incidental protection, but most woodlands outside protected areas will continue to be exploited unsustainably.
Despite some ongoing efforts, sustainable management is unlikely to find wider application, especially in view of a growing demand for woodfuel as well as timber for construction and other uses; the forest plantation sector is well developed in Southern Africa, especially South Africa, Swaziland and Zimbabwe, and most of this is under private ownership. With the private sector taking the lead, there is likely to be a further expansion of plantations, especially to countries such as Mozambique and Zambia where water is not a limiting factor and there are ongoing efforts to improve transport infrastructure. Much of the plantation expansion will be industry-driven, largely to enhance the global competitiveness of existing industries; while the stock of trees on communal land is expected to decline, this will be partly compensated by planting on farms undertaken through outgrower schemes under industry-farmer partnership arrangements. With increasing local demand, there are opportunities for broadening such arrangements to link a range of wood processing industries with farm forestry; wood will continue to be the most important source of energy for most households, at least in the near future, although there are prospects of some switching, depending on the progress of ongoing efforts to tap alternative energy resources; Southern Africa will maintain its lead position in the wood industries and is expected to enhance its competitiveness through improved technology and especially through strategic alliances with other global players. This will be largely driven by South African companies; there is unlikely to be any problem in the supply of forest products, especially in view of the existing processing capacity of the subregion and liberalization policies enabling free movement of goods across the countries. Effective demand will be limited by the low purchasing power of the majority of the population. Ongoing efforts to resolve the conflicts in Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo is expected to have a positive impact on enhancing supplies of wood and wood products; demand for non-wood forest products, in particular medicinal plants, is expected to increase, especially as a result of urbanization and continued reliance on.
traditional medical systems. This, coupled with increasing global demand, could result in depletion of the stocks available from easily accessible areas. Although this may result in domestication and commercial cultivation of some important items, availability to subsistence consumers is unlikely to improve; · wildlife is one of the unique assets of Southern Africa and will continue to be an important element in the growing tourism industry. With a growing population and a rising demand for land, the scope for expanding the area of national parks and game reserves is limited. The resolution of conflicts in wildlife management requires increased participation by local communities, ensuring that they are able to reap economic benefits; · water scarcity is expected to worsen on account of the increasing domestic, agricultural and industrial demand. This will be particularly critical for Botswana, Namibia and South Africa, while countries such as Mozambique will continue to experience floods of increasing frequency and severity. These will necessitate closer cooperation between countries in watershed management, and the role of forests and trees in regulating water yields will require closer scrutiny.
Future development strategies need to address the extreme dualism characteristic of the subregion, where highly developed modern segments of the economy coexist with poorly developed, low-income segments.
Poverty and deprivation are further exacerbated by problems such as the high incidence of HIV/AIDS. Considering the high dependence of the poor on natural resources, especially forests, forestry priorities in the next two decades will be: · poverty alleviation; and · reversing the environmental degradation to improve the livelihoods, especially those of the more vulnerable sections of society. The priority areas of action will include: · strengthening the informal sector by improving access to information, especially on emerging market opportunities, trade channels and technology; · improving the legal and institutional framework for community management of resources; specifically this will require support to improve transparency, access to information and the capacity to manage community enterprises; and · supporting small farmers in the adoption of integrated land use, to reduce economic and ecological vulnerability; · strengthening the framework for the transparent operation of market forces; · revitalizing the public sector to play a facilitating role and to provide a level playing field for all actors; and · improving regional and subregional collaboration in areas of research, education, training and management of critical ecosystems, especially to address problems like desertification, watershed degradation and poaching of wildlife.
Introduction.
BACKGROUND BOX 1 SOUTHERN AFRICA SUBREGION.
For the purposes of FOSA, the following countries constitute the Southern Africa subregion: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
The Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA) has been undertaken as part of the ongoing effort of the FAO to provide a regional perspective of the future developments in the forestry sector. Endorsed by the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and the Near East Forestry Commission, FOSA aims to identify emerging opportunities and constraints in enhancing the contribution of forestry to sustainable development. As globalization accelerates economic integration, it is essential to develop appropriate responses to the rapidly changing environment. It is in this context that the Forestry Outlook Study for Africa was undertaken in partnership with the African countries and international, regional and sub-regional organizations. This report on Southern Africa is one of six reports produced as part of FOSA.
Southern Africa.
Angola Namibia Botswana South Africa.
Zambia Malawi Mozambique.
The primary objective of FOSA is to provide a longterm outlook (with 2020 as the horizon) for development of the forest sector in Africa in the context of wider economic, social, institutional and technological changes. FOSA will analyse the trends and driving forces shaping the sector during the next two decades. Based on this analysis, it will then identify the broad strategies and options available to increase forestry's contribution to sustainable development. FOSA is designed to complement African countries' other forest-related strategic planning initiatives, including their national forest programmes. In addition to helping to discern the long-term potential of the sector, FOSA also lays considerable stress on the study process, especially ensuring the involvement of all the key African stakeholders. Involvement in the process will help to improve African capacity for forest-related strategic planning, while wide-ranging consultations aim at developing a shared vision of what could be done to realize the full potential of the forest sector. The main products of FOSA consist of five subregional reports outlining the long-term potential and challenges of the forest sector in each of the.
Swaziland Lesotho.
subregions, and a regional report providing an overview of the regional situation, which places African forests and forestry in the global context and indicates strategies to increase forestry's contribution to sustainable development. The present report deals with the Southern Africa subregion (see Box 1 for a list of countries in the subregion).
FOSA PROCESS.
FOSA was undertaken as a highly participatory initiative involving all the countries and key organizations in the subregion. To facilitate the provision of country inputs, each country nominated a national focal point, who produced a FOSA country paper with the help of a working group. Subregional meetings were held at the beginning to plan the FOSA process and later to review the main findings of the.
country reports1. A baseline study on population, income and forest resources prepared by the African Development Bank (African Development Bank, 2000) provided background information on critical demographic, economic and social parameters. A forestry expert from the subregion, functioned as a focal point for refining the country reports as well as for developing an initial draft subregional report2. (see Chihambakwe, 2001) Based on the Global Forest Supply Model, FAO developed estimates of production and consumption of wood and wood products (see Rytkönen, 2001). FAO also undertook a review of the available data on woodfuel consumption and developed estimates of future woodfuel consumption (Broadhead et al., 2001). The African Development Bank, through the Swedish Trust Fund, contracted ORGUT Consulting AB of Sweden to prepare two thematic papers, one on the main factors affecting forestry and the other on key issues in forestry (African Development Bank, 2001a and 2001b). The draft of these reports was presented and discussed during a regional technical review meeting held in Addis Ababa in September 2001. A revised version of the subregional report that amalgamated the various inputs were presented to the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission during its thirteenth session held at Libreville, Gabon in March 2002. This final version of the report incorporates the comments and suggestions from the members of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and others who reviewed the draft report. The FOSA regional and subregional reports have been drawn up with input and support from several organizations. The European Commission-supported project on data-collection and analysis provided critical background information. Links were established with the United Nations Environment.
Programme in order to establish synergy with the ongoing Global and Africa Environment Outlook studies, focusing particularly on scenario development. The World Bank commissioned a study on institutional issues, covering aspects such as decentralization, community participation, privatization, corruption and illegal activities. The Center for International Forestry Research contributed a paper on science and technology issues, focusing on research priorities and the capacity for undertaking research. FAO undertook a questionnaire-based survey to elicit the views of civil society in the region regarding forests and forestry. An advisory group consisting of African experts provided the necessary guidance for the study3. Further, FAO established an internal advisory committee to oversee progress and provide technical guidance.
STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT.
The key features of forests and wildlife in Southern Africa are described in chapter.
Chapter 3 outlines the driving forces influencing the forest sector, with the emphasis being laid on how forestry is affected by what happens outside the sector and the implications for the future. Considering the impact of factors outside the sector, chapter 4 indicates the possible scenarios or chains of events that may emerge in Africa in the next two decades. Some of these could be mere extensions of present trajectories, while others represent significant shifts in the pattern of development. The implications of these scenarios for forests and forestry during the next two decades, are discussed in chapter.
Chapter 6 focuses on what options and strategies are available to improve the unfavourable situation and steer the sector towards a more desirable future. An overview of the conclusions and recommendations is given in chapter 7.
An initial planning meeting of the FOSA focal points and key partners was held in Lusaka from 31 March to 1 April 2000 in conjunction with the twelfth session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission. A second subregional review meeting was held in Pretoria from 17 to 19 January 2001 to discuss the draft country outlook papers and work out the approach for developing the subregional report. 2 Effor ts in the Southern Africa subregion were coordinated by Mike Chihambakwe, whose report forms the basis of this subregional report.
The FOSA Expert Advisory Group included Agnes Odijide (Chairperson), Hennie Coetzee (Vice Chairperson), Madeline Cisse, Fousaba Banahane, John Kaboggoza and Hassan Osman Abdel Nour.
Forests and wildlife in Southern Africa: Trends and current situation.
The importance of forests and wildlife to the Southern African economies, and more particularly to the livelihood of rural communities in the subregion, is well documented. A wide range of products and services is provided by forests, with the relative importance of this varying depending on country and location. An assessment of the overall state of resources and the availability of goods and services is an important starting point for analysing the long-term prospects of change. This chapter attempts to provide an overview of the general trends and current resource situation, including the availability of goods and services.
STATE OF FOREST RESOURCES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT Forest cover and changes therein.
Forest cover in the subregion is estimated at approximately 183 million ha or about 31 percent of the land area. Table 1 gives the distribution of forest cover in the various countries of the subregion. As can be seen, the situation varies enormously from country to country: Angola has a forest cover of 56 percent of its land area, while Lesotho, South Africa and Namibia are the least forested countries. Much of the forest is distributed in the northern belt of the subregion, extending from Angola to Mozambique and including Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Inaccessibility and the insecurity caused by civil wars have been important factors contributing to the high proportion of forest in.
TABLE 1 Forest cover in Southern Africa in 2000.
Country Total land area (000 ha) Angola Botswana Lesotho Malawi Mozambique Namibia South Africa Swaziland Zambia Zimbabwe Total Southern Africa 124 670 56 673 3 035 9 408 79 409 82 329 121 758 1 720 74 339 38 685 591 336 Total forest (000 ha) 69 756 12 427 14 2 562 30 601 8 040 8 917 522 31 246 19 040 183 125 % of land area (%) 56.0 21.9 0.5 27.2 39.0 9.8 7.3 30.3 42.0 49.2 31.0 Total forest plantation (000 ha) 141 1 14 112 50 0 1 554 161 75 141 2 173.
countries such as Angola and Mozambique. With increasing population and other pressures, the area under forests is on the decline. Forests in Southern Africa shrank from 199.4 million ha in 1990 to 183.1 million ha in 2000 (see Table 2). This corresponds to an annual deforestation rate of 1.62 million ha, accounting for 31 percent of the continent's forest cover loss. Zambia, for example, has one of the highest rates of deforestation, losing about 851 000 ha per year, accounting for half the deforestation in the entire subregion. Other countries with high rates of deforestation include Zimbabwe, Angola and Botswana. South Africa has a very low rate of forest cover loss - just 8 000 ha per year - while Swaziland has a net increase of 6 000 ha per year. The main reasons for deforestation remain the same throughout Africa: the expansion of agriculture and an increased demand for forest products, particularly close to rapidly expanding urban areas and fires4. In Malawi, the reasons for deforestation are uncontrolled felling for woodfuel to cure tobacco in the smallholder and estate sectors, the opening up of new gardens and farming areas, the extraction of woodfuel for commercial purposes, infrastructure development and shifting cultivation5. These trends are likely to persist.
TABLE 2 Forest cover loss in Southern Africa ­ 1990 - 2000.
Country 1990 (000 ha) Angola Botswana Lesotho Malawi Mozambique Namibia South Africa Swaziland Zambia Zimbabwe Total Souther