<title>The conservation and rehabilitation of African lands</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Edouard Saouma - Director-General - Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
African nations face many problems. In the long term, perhaps the most serious is that of land degradation. The African economy depends on the continent's forests, pastures and croplands; all are now threatened with degradation. The importance of this issue was highlighted in the 1986 FAO study African Agriculture: the next 25 years. One of the major recommendations of this study was that a conservation strategy should be developed for the continent.
With the assistance of African experts, FAO has followed up this recommendation. The result is the International Scheme outlined in this publication.
Land can not be reclaimed or conserved through sporadic efforts or short-term projects; what are needed are long-term programmes, backed by sound land-use policies, and strategies to catalyse their development. To succeed, these programmes must be founded on the concept of participation; ultimately, African land can be conserved and rehabilitated only by those who make their living from it.
The purpose of the International Scheme for the Conservation and Rehabilitation of African Lands is to provide a means by which African countries can develop their own programmes to fight land degradation. The Scheme is specifically designed to enable countries to tailor these programmes to meet their individual needs.
Currently, African nations face severe financial constraints and lack enough trained workers and inputs to undertake programmes of the scale required. Fortunately, technical assistance and financing agencies are keen to help - providing they can do so within programmes likely to enjoy long-term success. This Scheme therefore includes a mechanism which enables African governments and these organizations to work in partnership.
I commend this Scheme to governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations. For its part, FAO intends to support and coordinate the Scheme with the vigour and enthusiasm that it merits.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Africa's lands - its croplands, savannah, bush and forests - are under attack. They are suffering from poor land management resulting in rapid land degradation: massive soil loss, falling yields, deforestation, the disruption of water resources, and the destruction of natural pasture. Land mismanagement - whether of arable land, rangeland or forested areas - consists, usually, of removing too much, returning too little and cultivating, grazing or cutting too frequently.
Land degradation is proceeding so fast that few African countries can hope to achieve a sustainable agriculture in the foreseeable future. Droughts combine with falling productivity to threaten food shortages and famines over wide areas. The livelihoods of millions are being put at risk as a result of lower agricultural yields, water shortages, frequent flooding, and a shortage of natural resources such as fuelwood and fodder.
Yet land degradation can be prevented and even reversed. Soil conditions can be improved, and productivity restored. Africa's lands could be made to support many more people, and to guarantee a secure future for the rural population.
This proposal outlines a plan - the International Scheme for the Conservation and Rehabilitation of African Lands - to mobilize local, national and international resources to fight the problem of land degradation. It suggests a new approach designed to capture the interest and imaginations of rural people throughout the African continent.
Part I of the publication outlines the magnitude of the threat. It explains that while most traditional African land-use systems did little harm to the environment, few of them have stood up to the pressures of expanding populations and more intensive land use. Past approaches to this problem were based on physical measures, such as creating mechanical barriers to soil movement. They were expensive and provided few benefits to the land users themselves. They attacked the symptoms of the problem, not the causes. As a result, most were poorly maintained, and fell into disrepair.
The international scheme advocated here is based on promoting sound land-use management principles which, because they produce increased yields and profits within one or two seasons, encourage widespread participation. Physical conservation measures will still be needed, but much greater emphasis will be placed on increasing and maintaining the land's vegetative cover through appropriate agronomic and forestry techniques, and introducing sound management practices. This approach protects the land surface from wind and water erosion, and improves soil conditions by increasing fertility and organic matter content. As soils improve, productivity rises, profits increase and the risk of crop failure recedes.
Part II of this publication describes a framework for national, regional and international action for dealing with land degradation.
In Africa, few farmers have had the time or the means to adapt their methods to today's conditions of land scarcity. Land mismanagement has become widespread. National action is needed to identify its causes and to suggest solutions based on techniques designed both to raise yields and to prevent degradation. National resources must then be used to encourage the widest possible level of participation in these schemes and to develop conservation institutions, at both government and non-governmental level, to expedite national conservation plans.
Increased research and advanced training are among the many requirements to tackle land degradation. These schemes are often best advanced regionally and there are a number of successful precedents for this.
Finally, a mechanism is described to enable nations, NGOs, donors and financing agencies to cooperate in formulating policies and devising programmes that will work efficiently and effectively. Experience has shown that schemes which are controlled by governments but which invite outside participation at a very early stage are the most likely to succeed.
Land degradation, seen here at its worst in the Ethiopian highlands, lends directly to human suffering and misery. Not only is valuable land last to cultivation but topsoil ends up as silt in rivers and reservoirs, causing flooding, damaging hydro-electric schemes and blocking navigable waterways
<section>3</section>
Part I: Facing facts: The threat of land degradation
Lessons from the past
The way forward
LAND USE PATTERNS ARE LEADING TO DEGRADATION, DESERTIFICATION, DEFORESTATION, FLOODING, THE SILTING UP OF RESERVOIRS AND WATERWAYS, AND FALLING LEVELS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION
The FAO study, African Agriculture: The Next 25 Years, stressed that Africa has considerable agricultural potential but that several constraints are preventing this potential from being exploited. If these constraints could be overcome, the continent could produce enough food, fuel and fibre to support a population very much larger than the 500 million people now living there. About 840 million hectares, 30 percent of Africa's land area, is potentially cultivable; less than one-third of this was actually being cultivated in 1980.
Sustainable agriculture at risk
Much of Africa's land base is environmentally delicate and easily damaged. Large areas of cropland, grassland, woodland and forest are already seriously degraded. A major finding of the FAO study was that the basis of Africa's agricultural production - its land - must be protected. Sustainable production, whether of crops, livestock or fuelwood, depends on systems of land use that maintain soil fertility and reduce erosion and other kinds of degradation. Erosion is a natural process that can never be completely eliminated, but it can be greatly reduced. Not until this is done can the sustainable agriculture advocated by the World Commission on Environment and Development (Our Common Future, Oxford University Press, 1987) be achieved.
Traditional solutions
Over the centuries African farmers and pasturalists have developed effective systems of land use compatible with their environments, for example shifting cultivation in the humid tropics and nomadic grazing in the semi-arid areas.
Farmers practicing shifting cultivation would clear an area of forest and then cultivate the land for two or three years. When plant nutrients in the soil were depleted, and crop yields had fallen, farmers would move to a new plot, leaving the old one to regenerate under natural vegetation. It could be 20 or more years before the original plot was cultivated again. In the meantime its fertility would have been restored by the bush or forest fallow, and weeds and pests suppressed.
Nomadic pastoralists traditionally moved with herds of animals to different areas of good grazing and water supply as seasons and conditions changed. With low stocking levels they were able to move to new areas before the reserves of any single area were depleted and the soil laid bare.
"To achieve global food security, the resource base for food production must be sustained, enhanced, and, where it has been diminished or destroyed, restored."
The World Commission on Environment and Development
Our Common Future, 1987
These and other similar systems produced low yields - relatively large areas were needed to support a small population. Problems arose when populations started to increase, and the pressure on land resources became more severe. Unfortunately, new farming systems, which would increase sustainable production, have not been developed in many parts of Africa, and the old systems of land use have been retained. However there is now no longer enough land available to allow long fallow periods; more and larger herds compete for forage; and other traditional systems of land use are being placed under increasing strain.
Farmers have responded by trying to develop new land although most of the best land is already in use and as a result expansion has largely been on to marginal land: steep land, land in areas of uncertain rainfall and land with poorer, erodible soils. In the process, large areas of forest have been destroyed and much traditional pasture put under the plough. Nutrient inputs are far below what is being removed. The nett result is severe degradation.
The threat of desertification
More than one-third of Africa is at present under threat of desertification (see map). On the southern edge of the Sahara some 650000 km^2 of once productive land - an area the size of Somalia - have become desert over the past 50 years. An estimated 50000 to 70 000 km^2 go out of production every year. These changes are worsened by periodic droughts but not caused by them; it is the mismanagement of the land itself that is causing desertification.
Over-grazing is one of the principal causes of desertification. As livestock numbers have increased, vegetation has been stripped from rangelands, and the pounding hooves of hungry animals have turned the exposed soil to dust. A 1986 FAO study estimated that the number of livestock in the Sudano-Sahelian zone increased by 76 percent between 1963 and 1983; the area now contains some 160 million cattle, sheep, goats, horses and camels.
The threat of desertification
Over-grazing also changes the composition of plants in the rangelands. Useless and mildly poisonous plants such as Calotropis procera now infest vast areas of the Sudano-Sahelian belt because they no longer have competition from the nutritious grasses that used to make up the bulk of pasture plants.
In addition to over-grazing, the increasing use of trees and brushwood for fuel, leading progressively to deforestation, has accelerated desertification over much of semi-arid Africa.
Desertification
One result, found particularly in the arid and semiarid regions, is the desertification of land that was once productive and useful. As much as 34 percent of African land is now under threat from desertification (see box). Large areas of good land have al ready been buried by drifting sand, or the exposed topsoil has been blown away.
Desertification can happen quickly, placing large numbers of people at great risk. During the Sahel drought of the early 1970s, nearly one million 'environmental refugees', a sixth of the population, were forced to leave Burkina Faso. Half a million more left Mali.
Deforestation
At present deforestation is proceeding 30 times faster than reforestation. In the early 1980s an estimated at 3.7 million hectares was being lost each year. The destruction of the forests is mainly a result of clearance for agriculture. Both traditional techniques of slash-and-burn agriculture and permanent clearing for modern farms are taking their toll.
The search for fuelwood, as well as the growing frequency and severity of forest and bush fires, are also taking their toll. Deforestation has led to a crucial shortage of fuelwood and building materials in many areas. Crop residues and animal manure, which were previously returned to the soil to add valuable nutrients, are having to be burnt for fuel. At the same time, the ploughing of pasture has forced herders to move further into the marginal areas where their animals destroy the vegetation and land degradation is accelerated.
Effects on water resources
Hydrological conditions over much of Africa are being changed. With less vegetative cover to protect against the impact of raindrops causing surface sealing, less rain infiltrates the soil. Runoff increases, stream flows fluctuate more than before, flooding becomes more frequent and extensive, and streams and springs become ephemeral. These conditions encourage erosion; as a result, sediment loads in rivers are increasing, dams are filling with silt, hydro-electric schemes are being damaged, navigable waterways are being blocked and water quality is deteriorating. The inland fish catch is suffering in many areas. With less water entering the soil and being stored for use during dry periods, crop yields are also falling.
The extent of the damage
FAO studies indicate that more than 35 percent of land north of the equator is affected by either erosion or salinity. Zimbabwe alone could be losing, on average, 1.6 million tonnes of nitrogen and 240 000 tonnes of phosphorus each year though erosion (see box bellow). A 1987 FAO study suggested that sediment in many African rivers is increasing roughly 1.5 times as fast as the populations in their catchment areas.
Thus sediment levels are increasing at approximately 5 percent per year in Nigeria, Tanzania and Zimbabwe, 4.3 percent in the Sudan and 3.2 percent in Tunisia.
The degradation of Morocco's watersheds
Large dams in Morocco currently provide 500 million m^3 of water for household and industrial use, irrigation water for 600 000 hectares and 1 500 GWh of energy a year. Siltation of Morocco's reservoirs is reducing the available water by 0.4 percent - 40 million m^3 - a year. So far, 6 percent of installed capacity - some 600 million m^3 of water, enough to irrigate 60 000 ha - have been lost to sedimentation.
Major reservoirs such as Mohamed V on the Moulouya River - where 10 million m^3 of water are being lost annually - will be entirely filled in by the year 2030; others reservoirs are likely to become useless in as little as eight years. Dam heights on three of Morocco's major dams have already had to be increased to preserve storage capacity.
To maintain current levels of water storage in Morocco now requires the construction of one new reservoir storing 150 million m3 of water every year.
Zimbabwe: the hidden cost of soil erosion
Recent work by FAO on data gathered in Zimbabwe gives an indication of the extent and cost of the soil nutrient lost in that country. In 1986, a computer was used to reanalyse erosion data collected nearly 30 years ago in an important series of experiments conducted at Henderson Research Station in Zimbabwe.
The enrichment ratios, the measure of how much more concentrated a nutrient is in the material removed by erosion than it is in the soil from which it is taken, averaged about 2.5. This means that there is considerable selective removal of nutrients from the soil by the erosion process.
An extrapolation of these findings to national level suggests that erosion carries away an annual average of 1.6 million tonnes of nitrogen, 15.6 million tonnes of organic matter and 0.24 million tonnes of phosphorus. On this basis, the arable lands alone lose 0.15,1.5 and 0.02 million tonnes respectively each year. Nitrogen and phosphorus losses from the arable land were about three times the level of total fertilizer applied in Zimbabwe in the 1984/85 season.
If fertilizers were applied to compensate for these losses, the cost would have been US$ 1500 million per annum in 1985. Thus, the financial cost of erosion per hectare per year varied from US$20 to $50 on arable land and from US$10 to $80 on grazing lands. The implication of these figures is that erosion is a massive "hidden" cost on the economy of Zimbabwe - as indeed it must be in nearly every other African country.
The degradation of valuable bush and woodland as a result of forest fires is now a serious problem in many semi-arid areas.
Prospects of the future
Such conditions lead directly to human suffering and misery. Land stripped of most of its topsoil and vegetation, can produce little even when rainfall is adequate. Whereas in the past, farmers were able to harvest some production even after seasons of low rainfall, now they frequently harvest nothing and there are insufficient reserves of vegetation to carry livestock through poor seasons. This is now the position in Ethiopia, where recent famines can be at least partly blamed on land degradation. Unless the present trend is reversed, many other African countries may soon be placed in the same situation.
<section>4</section>
Lessons from the past
ALTHOUGH SOME TRADITIONAL SOCIETIES PRACTISED SOIL CONSERVATION SUCCESSFULLY, MANY RECENT ATTEMPTS TO HALT LAND DEGRADATION HAVE TURNED OUT TO BE COSTLY FAILURES
Although traditional systems of land use rarely led to rapid land degradation, problems did arise in some of the more fragile areas where large numbers of people were concentrated. Farmers often responded with sophisticated and effective conservation measures that were developed to overcome degradation threats, and to maintain or raise crop and livestock yields.
In southern Ethiopia, for example, the Konso people live in a steep, erodible area subject to unreliable rainfall. Over the years, the Konso have terraced most of their land and developed a complex system of agroforestry and water harvesting. Compost and manure are spread on the fields to maintain soil fertility, while cattle are stall fed. This system (see box below) appears to have worked well until recent times when population numbers became too great for the available land.
Another example of a traditional conservation system existed in the semi-arid areas of southern Burkina Faso and in neighbouring areas of Ghana. There the Birifor people developed a system which includes the use of stone ridges along the contour, small earth dams, the diversion of run-off water, the- use of manure and compost, and cultivation on mounds. This system minimized land degradation and at the same time maintained soil fertility and crop and livestock yields.
Systems such as these have two things in common: they are adapted to their own environmental conditions; and their primary aim is to maintain soil fertility and agricultural yields at a satisfactory level - the prevention of land degradation was seen simply as a desirable side effect.
Conservation in the recent past
Neither traditional systems of using the land, nor the responses of traditional societies to increasingly severe pressures on the land, have been able to cope with the rapid growth of population in Africa for most of this century. Many of Africa's colonial administrations, however, undertook large-scale programmes intended to halt or reduce high rates of erosion.
Typical of these was one launched in Lesotho in the mid-1930s. Over the following 30 years some 400 000 ha of land - virtually all the cultivable land of this small country - was treated: contour banks were built, grassed strips established to halt erosion, small dams erected in the water courses, trees planted in gullies and excessive run-off diverted from cultivated fields. Disappointingly, these achievements have not been maintained by the farmers, who had come to see maintenance as a government responsibility.
The programme Lesotho was typical of many of the large-scale, costly projects of that time. In spite of these efforts, the battle was not won. Vast areas of Africa continued to be eroded and the degradation of the semi-arid region became so serious that a new word, desertification, was coined to describe the gravity of the situation.
Few African governments can afford to repeat the expense of these large-scale programmes of the past. Indeed, many governments appear disheartened by the relatively poor results that past programmes have achieved. It is therefore important to ask why these programmes were not more successful.
What went wrong
The science of land conservation has existed for little more than 50 years. Over this period attempts to control land degradation have been directed mainly at preventing or reducing soil loss. Soil erosion was seen as a physical process, to be controlled mainly by physical measures; it was not recognized as the consequence of the more fundamental problems of incorrect land management and lack of vegetative cover.
Usually, the problem was identified only after the situation had become serious - a new dam had filled with silt, a bridge washed away or a road cut by gullies. By this time, large quantities of topsoil had already been lost and the productivity of the land seriously impaired. Even though the more important issue was loss of productivity, the problem was usually seen as one of soil loss producing physical damage downstream to rivers and reservoirs.
Physical measures designed to prevent or slow down the process of soil loss would then be considered. Plans would be produced which, if properly implemented and maintained, would greatly reduce the rate of land degradation.
The Konso: a traditional solution
The Konso of southwest Ethiopia have developed a complex and sophisticated form of agriculture which has allowed them to subsist in a mountainous area with fragile soils and an irregular rainfall which averages less than 900 mm annually.
Their farming is based on an elaborate system of terracing, a variety of soil and water management practices, and the integration of livestock and forestry with the rest of their agriculture.
Their terraces are built with stone walls to hold the soil in place and protect it from erosion until the crop roots are sufficiently established to take over. The terraces are often irrigated from collecting basins and by diverting runoff water from paths and roads.
On flatter land, the fields are formed into basins with rectangular ridges on an approximate 2 x 4 metre grid. Crop stubble covers the ridges as a protection measure while crops are planted in the basins where water accumulates.
The cabbage tree (Moringa stenopetala), from which young green leaves are collected as a vegetable, is planted together with fruit trees in the cropped fields, with increasing densities on the wetter sites. On steeper slopes, terrace walls are made from double layers of rock, and the space between them is filled with soil and planted with leguminous crops.
A variety of annuals and perennials is sown in staggered or relay-cropping sequences, usually with sorghum, finger millet or maize as the main crop, mixed with beans, peas, lentils, fruit trees, medicinal species, spices, oil seeds, firewood and building-timber species, root crops and cash crops such as cotton and coffee.
Many different species and cultivars are maintained, especially of sorghum, of which more than 23 cultivars have been selected for specific uses, both for tolerance to a range of soil and moisture conditions as well as a range of uses such as baking flour, beer and animal fodder. The latter is particularly important to the Konso, who live in stockaded villages and practice stall feeding of cattle for milk production. The villages contain large reserves of cactus (Opuntia), partly as a standing fodder reserve and partly as a firebreak. Stall feeding permits manuring of the land closest to the village. The fields far from the village receive little manure but are placed under rotations which include fallow periods.
The agriculture practiced by the Konso is essentially for subsistence. Few, if any, cattle are sold as markets are too distant.
Over many generations the Konso have thus developed an elaborate conservation system which includes:
o a range of effective conservation practices such as manuring, mulching, use of trash lines (contour lines of crop residue) and fallows;
o a complex cropping system which includes the use of a wide range of leguminous and non-leguminous plants and trees; and
o a flexible system of land use which can cope with harsh climatic conditions and erratic rainfall.
Elaborate terracing systems developed by the Konso are backed up by extensive manuring, mulching and fallow practices
Most of these plans depended heavily on the construction of bench terraces, contour banks, check dams and similar works. The problems were treated from an engineering perspective; the planners seldom paid much attention to incorrect land management and use, of which surface run-off and soil loss were only the symptoms. Rarely was there any direct contact between the farmer and the planner.
Plans developed in this way hardly took into account the effects they would have on future production or the immediate needs of farmers. They were aimed simply at keeping the soil in place.
A given plan was then explained to the farmers who were encouraged, cajoled, persuaded or even forced to implement it. At this point the problems really began: programmes proceeded more slowly than planned because few farmers had any interest in them or were only prepared to carry out the work if paid to do so. Even fewer were willing to maintain the work unless made to do so.
With land users so marginally involved, it is not surprising in retrospect that these schemes should so often have turned out to be expensive failures. Farmers, pastoralists and those who relied on woodlands and forests for their livelihoods were often regarded as part of the problem, rather than as the potential solution. No attempts were made to analyse the real causes of land misuse, such as land tenure systems, labour shortages and lack of economic incentives, information and advice.
Palm branches stop Moroccan sand dunes:
A simple but effective technology has been developed to halt the spread of sand dunes in southern Morocco. In the mid 1970s dunes were encroaching onto cultivated and settled areas, severely limiting plans for agricultural development. In 1980 a four-year UNDP/FAO project started to investigate methods of sand dune stabilization in the southern provinces.
It was originally thought that the sand came from the Sahara, but the project proved the sand was blown along the ground from the Atlas mountains in eastern Morocco. It was impossible to stabilize the source of the sand, so its encroachment had to be controlled where it threatened inhabited or cultivated areas.
The most effective technique identified was to build palm branch fences of less than a metre high in connecting squares with seven metre sides. Inside these squares the wind was not strong enough to move the sand, and vegetation could be established. Several types of shrubs and trees were tested and bred to improve their resistance to wind and sand.
Fourteen villages, seven palm plantations, and many irrigation canals, roads and railways in the area were protected, and substantial areas of land were reclaimed for agricultural use.
When the project ended, local staff continued the work, and a permanent base for desertification control was established which will benefit the entire north African and Near East region
Palm branches stop Moroccan sand dunes
The scars of erosion extend over vast areas of Lesotho, bearing witness to the failure of large-scale, expensive land conservation programmes of the past. Farmers had few incentives to maintain conservation structures once they were built.
Why conservation schemes often fail
<section>5</section>
The way forward
FUTURE PROGRAMMES TO TACKLE LAND DEGRADATION MUST FIND OUT WHY LAND IS BEING MISUSED AND HOW TO MOTIVATE LAND USERS TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT
Experience in Africa has proved that large-scale, top-down, government-run programmes to treat land degradation are seldom effective. They are also so expensive that probably no African country could now afford a programme of this type sufficiently large to tackle its land degradation problems.
Fortunately, alternatives now exist. Many depend essentially on promoting land-use systems that retain a permanent vegetative cover over the land surface. This protects the soil from wind and water erosion, increases soil fertility, improves the organic content and maximizes water penetration. Crops, grasses or trees grown under such systems inevitably benefit - as do the users of the land who find productivity and profits once again on the increase.
This point is critical because, ultimately, how a country's land is managed and used depends upon the perceptions and actions of its many thousands of individual farmers, pastoralists, foresters and other land users. These people have the ability to bring about fundamental changes in land use. The challenge is to create the conditions that will provide this motivation.
A new approach is needed - one that will ensure the large-scale participation of rural people in conservation because of the benefits it can bring. Governments will still need to take overall responsibility for conservation, but their main role will be to promote the participation of rural people in finding and applying the solutions.
Identifying the causes of land degradation
The first steps are to identify and remove those factors that are responsible for detrimental land use.
Degradation results primarily from incorrect land use and bad land management - from the land being used in a manner incompatible with its capacity. Farmers and other land users rarely deliberately degrade the land from which they have to make a living and feed their families. Incorrect use and bad management of the land are usually the result of ignorance or, more likely, economic, social and political pressures.
The first step is therefore to analyse why undesirable land uses are being practiced. There may be many answers - population pressures may be high, agricultural pricing policies inappropriate, inputs unavailable or land tenure systems may be forcing farmers to over-exploit land. Without an analysis of the underlying causes of land degradation much time, effort and money may be spent in dealing with the symptoms rather than the cause of the problem.
The analysis may lead to the conclusion that the problem cannot be overcome until some major constraint affecting land users is dealt with. This may mean providing outlets for alternative crops, providing some needed farm input or adjusting the land tenure system - subjects rarely considered in the conservation programmes of the past.
For example, an analysis of a badly eroded area may lead to the conclusion that the underlying problem is excessive population pressure on the land. In these circumstances the land is being used beyond its potential capacity, and any programme based only on the introduction of orthodox land conservation practices - no matter how cleverly designed and carefully installed - can have no real hope of success. All these measures can do is slow down the processes of degradation and give those dependent on the land a little more time before they are driven away by falling productivity.
Lasting solutions may involve easing the pressure on the land by relocating some of the farmers or developing alternative sources of livelihood. Even if such solutions are not immediately possible, a sound understanding of the underlying causes of land degradation can prevent governments embarking on costly but unsuccessful programmes.
Stall