--T
A forum for supporting interactive presentations to distributed audiences.
--A
Computer technology is available to build video-based tools for supporting presentations to distributed audiences, but it is unclear how such an environment affects participants' ability to interact and to learn.  We built and tested a tool called Forum that broadcasts live audio, video and slides from a speaker, and enables audiences to interact with the speaker and other audience members in a variety of ways. The challenge was to enable effective interactions while overcoming obstacles introduced by the distributed nature of the environment, the large size of the group, and the asymmetric roles of the participants. Forum was most successful in enabling effective presentations in cases when the topic sparked a great deal of audience participation or when the purpose of the talk was  mostly informational and did not require a great deal of interaction. We are exploring ways to enhance Forum to expand the effectiveness of this technology.
--B
INTRODUCTION
Over the last few years, the multimedia community has
been exploring ways to use distributed, interactive audio
and video. Point-to-point desktop video conferencing
and multi-way "video spaces" are two of the applications
that have received attention [Bly, et. al., 1993;
Tang and Isaacs, 1993; Root, 1988]. Another obvious
application is to enable people to broadcast live presentations
to audiences that are distributed across many
locations.
There has been a growing interest in such one-to-many
technology. Politicians have recently made popular the
idea of an "electronic town hall" meeting in which voters
all around a nation could not only watch but also
interact with policy makers. And at a time when many
institutions are struggling with budget cuts, both universities
and companies have shown interest in providing
live training over a computer network. By broadcasting
courses, schools can reach a wider set of potential students
and companies can train more of their work force
while reducing travel costs.
The distance learning industry has been using technologies
that provide one-to-many communication for quite
some time. The Open University, for example, has been
airing courses over British television for many years,
and, more recently, such programs as Stanford Univer-
sity's Instructional Television Network and the Chicago
College have enabled remote students to not only
watch but also phone in questions to the speaker [Gib-
bons, et. al., 1977]. These environments, although quite
successful, represent only a step toward supporting fully
interactive presentations. What they lack is a rich channel
for audiences to interact with speakers and with each
other. Although the phone does provide some audience-
to-speaker communication, it is a cumbersome mechanism
that does not allow for quick, spontaneous questions
and discussion. It also does not support audience-
to-audience interaction. With the development of technology
to support distributed video and audio over
existing computer networks, we are now in a better position
to support more fully interactive presentations.
One might question how important it is to provide better
interaction capabilities for presentations. After all, the
bulk of the information seems to flow from the speaker
to the audience. However, there are in fact many ways in
which speakers depend on information from the audience
to help ensure the success of the presentation. They
gauge the audience's level of interest and understanding
not only from overt responses, such as applause or
laughter, but also from monitoring audience member's
facial expressions, body posture, and activity level.
Speakers learn about the audience when they accept
To be published in the proceedings of Computer-
Suported Cooperative Work '94, Chapel Hill, NC,
October, 1994.
questions, and sometimes they ask the audience to raise
their hands to indicate their level of background knowledge
or experience with the topic. Sometimes just seeing
the physical characteristics of the audience (such as
age, attire, etc.) can help the instructor adjust her material
to better interest the audience.
Not only do speakers learn from audiences, but audience
members also gain important information from observing
and interacting with each other. If an attendee
doesn't understand a minor point the speaker made, she
can lean over to her neighbor and ask for a clarification
rather than stop the class by asking a question. When
instructors ask the audience to raise their hands to
"vote" on some question, everyone can see where they
stand in relation to the others. And of course the audience
is likely to be just as interested as the speaker in the
other participants' ongoing reactions to the talk (their
level of interest, their amusement at a joke, etc.
In addition, there is evidence to suggest that students in
an instructional setting learn more when they interact
with the speaker than when they do not [Moore, 1993;
Gibbons, et. al., 1977]. Although some researchers have
concluded that remote students tend to be at a slight disadvantage
relative to local students, there is evidence
that the degree of interactivity may be the most relevant
factor for quality training. In fact, one study found that
remote students outperformed classroom students when
they watched a tape of the class and stopped the tape to
discuss the content [Gibbons, et. al., 1977]. In light of
this finding, it seems worthwhile to look for effective
ways to enable interactivity among a presenter and distributed
participants.
A tool to support presentations over a network, then,
should not only enable speakers to transfer information
to audiences, but also enable audiences to interact with
speakers and the rest of the audience in a natural and
effective way. However, providing such interactive
capability represents a significant challenge, largely
because it requires overcoming three limitations inherent
to the environment:
. the participants are distributed over potentially large
distances,
. the size of the group can be quite large,
. the speaker and audience play asymmetric roles.
This paper describes how we designed an application
for broadcasting presentations over a network, which we
called Forum. It focuses on how we attempted to enable
interaction among participants and evaluates how successfully
people were able to use the tool.
Functionality
Forum is a distributed application that enables speakers
to broadcast talks over a network and enables audience
members to participate in the talks from their worksta-
tions. The audience receives live audio and video of the
speaker as well as the speaker's slides and slide annota-
tions. Audience members can interact with the speaker
in three ways. They can speak to the presenter, they can
"vote" anonymously on an issue raised by the speaker,
and they can send in written comments.
Speakers give presentations while sitting in front of a
workstation screen that displays the slides, a video preview
of themselves and the rest of the Forum interface.
Audience members also sit at their desks and watch the
talk through their interface. Since they are in a multi-tasking
environment, they can switch their attention

Figure

1. Forum's audience interface. A poll has been taken and an
audience member is asking a question while others wait in line to speak.

Figure

2. Audience list with a name
selected
between the Forum talk and any other application on
their desktop.
Forum runs on the Sun SPARCstation^TM line of computer
workstations running the Solaris- 2 UNIX operating
system. The speaker's workstation is equipped with
a camera, a microphone and a SunVideo card, which
digitizes and compresses the video. Audience members
need no special equipment on their workstation other
than a microphone. The 320x240 pixel video image is
compressed using CellB, a proprietary Sun video encod-
ing. The video is transmitted at 4 frames per second,
yielding a video data rate of 400 Kb/sec. The audio is
transmitted at 8KHz -law, with a data rate of 64Kb/s,
which gives adequate speech quality. The slides are in
PostScript- format, which makes them easy to scale.
Forum runs over one domain within Sun's Wide Area
Network. This domain is made up of standard Ethernets
connected by a high-bandwidth backbone. We use the
Internet multicast protocol for the broadcasts, which
enables us to keep the network load low regardless of
how many people attended a talk. Forum has had a negligible
effect on backbone traffic, and it has used up to
7% of the available Ethernet bandwidth.
User interface
Figure1 shows the audience's interface. The left side of
the main window shows video of the speaker, and the
controls below it manage the audio parameters. The
control panel on the right provides mechanisms to interact
with the speaker. To get in the queue to speak, a user
"raises her hand" by clicking on the button at the bottom
of the window; her name appears in the question queue
above it. When the speaker calls on her, she presses and
holds down the Speak button and her hand is automatically
lowered (i.e. her name is removed from the list).
While her voice is transmitted, a small picture or "icon"
of her face appears in the square region in the upper left
corner with her name above it. 1
To vote on a poll, the audience clicks on the Yes or No
option in the upper right, and the bar above it increases
one unit per vote. To submit a comment, the user clicks
on the Comments button, types in a comment and
sends it to the speaker. To find out who else is watching
a presentation, the user clicks on the Audience button
to bring up a window that shows a list of attendees (Fig-
ure 2). In that window, they can click on a name to see
that person's icon, their location and phone number.
They can send that person a short message by clicking
on the Message button, which brings up a small window
pre-addressed to that recipient. When they send the
message, it pops up on the other person's screen in a
small window with a Reply button.
Audience members see the speaker's current slide in the
slides window (Figure 3), and they can also click on a
thumbnail to view a different slide. To get back in synch
with the speaker, users either click on the Live button or
click on the thumbnail of the speaker's current slide.
Users can click on colored pens to annotate their own
copy of the slides with text or free-form lines.
1. If an audience member doesn't have an icon, a default icon
is displayed. We wrote an application to help people customize
their icon, but most audience members did not have a customized
icon.

Figure

3. The audience's view of the speaker's slides, with text and line annotations

Figure

4 shows the speaker's interface for giving pre-
sentations. The large slide area in the upper left shows
the current slide being presented to the audience. Speakers
can progress one by one through the slides by using
the arrow buttons, or they can go directly to a different
slide by clicking on one of the thumbnails in the region
below the main slide. They can also use the colored pens
in the upper left to annotate their slides, and their marks
are seen by the audience, as are their gestures with the
pointer. In the upper right panel are the interfaces to the
three mechanisms for audience interaction.
The upper right region shows the results of an audience
poll, which the speaker can clear by pressing the button
beneath the graph. (Before a presentation starts, a
speaker may elect to provide a poll with as many as five
choices, which several speakers did during the tests.) To
the left and below are the controls for audience voice
interaction, which are essentially the same as the audi-
ence's. The speaker usually manages the questions simply
by calling on the person at the top of the question
queue. The Comments button in the middle region
brings up a window that shows written comments submitted
by the audience. A speaker can show a comment
to the rest of the audience by pressing a button that
reproduces the comment as a slide. The lower part of the
canvas shows the list of audience members currently
running Forum.
Observing Forum usage
When designing an application, it is important to test it
with users and revise it based on their feedback. While
developing Forum, we conducted a series of tests in
which we presented talks to a group of people through-out
the company. We began this process with an early
version of Forum by giving relatively informal talks to a
pool of about 75 people who were familiar with our
project. As Forum became more stable and we added
more functionality, we began presenting regular weekly
one-hour talks to a larger set of people, sometimes sending
invitations to over 1000 people. A total of 26 presentations
were given over a 10 month period by people at
Sun who volunteered to talk about a topic of their
choice. Some were technical talks about projects going
on around the company and others were about non-
work-related topics of interest to a speaker. Audience
size ranged from 10 people to 95 people, with an average
of 41 people attending. Most of the early speakers
and audience members were sophisticated computer

Figure

4. Forum speaker's interface. An audience member is asking a question.
users, but over time more non-technical speakers and
audience members used the system.
In addition, we experimented with an early version of
Forum to give a course on a technical topic through
SunU, the company's in-house training organization.
That event was a structured experiment in which the
same three-hour course was given three times, once to a
live audience, once to an audience watching through
Forum, and once to a mixed audience: some in the room
with the speaker and some watching over Forum.
During every talk and during the technical course, we
videotaped the speaker and at least one audience mem-
ber, who was asked to watch the talk just as they normally
would. One person reviewed the tapes in detail
and the group met to look at highlights that brought out
interesting aspects of Forum's usage. (See Tang, 1991,
for a further description of this analysis methodology.)
In addition, questionnaires were e-mailed to audience
members four times over the 10 month period, yielding
responses. The speakers were usually interviewed
after their talks to learn more about their reactions.
Using these data, we tried to understand how effectively
Forum overcame the obstacles introduced by the distributed
nature of the audience, the large group size and the
asymmetric roles of the participants.
DISTRIBUTED PARTICIPANTS
It is a great convenience to participate in a talk from
one's own workstation. In fact, users' overwhelming
response to Forum was that they loved the convenience.
A typical survey response was as follows: "I appreciate
the fact that I can listen to a talk while I continue to
work in my office. It is nice that I don't have to track
down a conference room in some foreign building. It is
nice that I don't have to wait in the conference room for
the talk to start." However, this convenience comes at
the cost of reduced interactivity unless mechanisms are
provided to overcome the barrier of distance. The inter-action
mechanisms we provided in Forum did enable a
certain degree of audience participation, which most
users said greatly enhanced the experience of giving and
attending a talk. However, the distributed nature of the
audience had certain detrimental effects that were not
overcome by these interaction tools.
Effectiveness of interaction tools
Forum enabled audiences to see and talk to the speaker,
which are a natural part of face-to-face presentations,
and it also provided more technology-driven interaction
tools, namely the poll and the written comments. The
video and audio were the most effective elements for
enabling two-way interaction, but the technology-based
mechanisms played surprisingly important roles as well.
The audience asked spoken questions to varying degrees
in every talk. Some speakers used Forum to present their
prepared materials and then took questions from the
audience at the end, and others took questions as they
arose during the presentation. Nearly every speaker said
the voice interaction with the audience was very important
to give them a sense of the audience's interest level
and understanding, and to provide a sense that their
efforts had been worthwhile. Speakers also said they
liked seeing a picture of the person speaking, especially
when they were not familiar with the person by name.
From the audience's point of view, the video was very
important for creating a connection with the speaker.
When the speaker looked into the camera, it appeared to
each audience member as if she were speaking directly
to them. As one user put it, "it feels more intimate than a
live talk with a large audience - just me and the presenter
and maybe my officemate on the other side of the
room."
Written questions were a useful feature because they
enabled both speakers and audience members more flexibility
in handling questions. Some speakers used the
more traditional method of waiting until the end to take
written questions, but others used them as a chance to
take a break from the prepared materials and regain a
connection with the audience. One speaker said he
looked at written questions when he started to lose his
sense of the audience. From the audience's end, people
were able to ask questions as they arose in their minds
rather than waiting for a good time to break in. People
who tend to be shy about talking in front of a group
were able to contribute their comments, as were those
who did not have working microphones or were experiencing
other audio problems. And in general, written
comments tended to be expressed more concisely than
the spoken ones.
The poll meter was the most unconventional feedback
mechanism provided and also the most enthusiastically
received. Asking poll questions during the talk enabled
speakers not only find out the answer to a question, but
also to assure themselves that there were people "out
there." One speaker used a five-choice poll in her talk
about the upcoming Academy Awards. She presented
the choices for each major award, held a discussion
about each nominee and then asked the audience to vote
for the winner. This use of the poll kept the audience
highly engaged and gave the speaker a strong sense of
the audience's attitudes. In general, audiences liked that
the poll gave them the opportunity to indicate their presence
as well as express their opinion. Some said that
they especially liked having an anonymous method for
expressing feedback. "It was nice to be able to anonymously
raise my hand with, say, a wrong answer and not
feel embarrassed," one user wrote.
Finally, the slides were also effective for maintaining a
shared focus among the speaker and audience, just as
they do in a traditional talk. We were surprised that only
about one speaker in four used annotations, but when
they were used, audience members said they were very
effective for helping them focus their attention, especially
when they were first getting used to the interface.
In addition, just displaying the slides on everyone's
desktop eliminated visibility problems that often occur
in face-to-face talks with large audiences. Audience
members said that if they missed part of the talk, they
looked back in the slides to fill themselves in. Some said
that before asking a question, they checked previous
slides to make sure their question hadn't already been
covered.
Limitations of interaction tools
Although the mechanisms for interaction were effective,
it is clear that they did not provide for the full range of
communication. Interactions were reduced in part
because of limitations in the technology and design, but
also because the distributed environment changed the
affordance of certain behaviors. In particular, audiences
found it difficult to avoid splitting their attention
between the talk and other work activities available in
their offices.
Audience's gain is speaker's loss. The most dramatic
way in which Forum talks differed from face-to-face
ones was that the audience had more freedom to vary
their level of participation. But that freedom often came
at the expense of the speaker's satisfaction with the
experience. In Forum's one-to-many setting, information
about audience activity was much sparser than that
about the speaker. As a result, the social pressures that
regulate the behavior of co-located audiences were
greatly diminished, which allowed audience members to
behave in ways that are not as acceptable among a local
audience.
For example, it was very common for audience members
to pay attention to the talks during the more interesting
periods, but then read email or focus on other
work during slower periods. Nearly every user who
responded to surveys mentioned that Forum's greatest
advantage was that it enabled them to get other work
done during the less interesting parts of a talk. Audience
members also chose to take certain interruptions, such
as phone calls or visitors, that they would have missed
had they been attending the talk in a meeting room. This
freedom could also be a burden, however; many users
had trouble ignoring distractions in their office even
when they were very interested in the talk.
Because the amount of effort required to attend a talk
was so much lower, some people signed up for talks that
were only potentially of interest, knowing they could
decide to leave without calling attention to themselves. 1
1. Certain people who are well-known around the company
said they particularly appreciated having the ability to leave
discreetly because they are especially vulnerable to insulting
speakers if they leave a talk. Some said they regret having to
avoid talks of marginal interest for this reason.
In fact, because audience members could scroll through
the slides independently of the speaker, some people
scanned through the slides when the talk began to
decide whether they wanted to stay for the rest of the
presentation. And finally, sometimes people watched
talks in small groups, which enabled them to make comments
about the content of the talk, or even about the
speaker, without being rude.
From the speakers' point of view, however, the fact that
some of the audience was paying less attention than
usual created situations that detracted from their own
experience of giving the talk. For example, after asking
the audience to vote on an issue, some speakers felt dis-
appointed, if not insulted, when only a portion of the
audience responded. They had no way of knowing
whether some audience members were on the phone or
away from their desks. They certainly had no cues indicating
that some of the audience members were less
interested in the topic than usual because the cost of
attending was so low.
Some speakers found it disturbing when audience members
asked them about an issue they had already
addressed, clearly indicating they hadn't been paying
attention. In fact, when the technical course was taught
with a mixed audience, some local audience members
said the people attending over Forum seemed less intelligent
because they more often asked questions that had
already been addressed.
On the other hand, we were interested to find that certain
speakers who tended to get anxious giving talks in front
of a crowd said they found it more relaxing to give a talk
over Forum. Sitting in a comfortable office talking to
just a camera and perhaps one other person in the room
enabled them to treat the talk as a more informal presen-
tation. They said they were able to concentrate on their
material rather than worrying about how they were
being perceived. Still, dynamic speakers who depend
heavily on audience feedback felt quite constrained by
the technology.
Feedback reduced. As expected, there were a number
of ways in which the limited bandwidth reduced the
amount of feedback in ways that detracted from both the
audience and the speaker's experience.
Most disconcerting among these were the lack of laughter
or applause. We noticed that speakers tended to
pause after saying something amusing as if waiting for a
response, but then moved on awkwardly when they got
none. They seemed to find it particularly uncomfortable
to end their talks without any applause to provide clo-
sure. One speaker ended his talk by thanking the audience
members for their participation, expressing his
hope that they had learned something from the talk,
informing them how they could reach him after the talk,
and even wishing them a good afternoon before finally
signing off. Certain audience members said it was just
as uncomfortable for them to not have a smooth way of
expressing amusement at a joke or appreciation at the
end of the talk. In fact, we observed a number of cases
when audience members spontaneously thanked the
speaker at the end of a talk even though they weren't
transmitting their voice to the speaker.
Although the audience's apparent unresponsiveness was
uncomfortable for speakers, we found that many had
received feedback from audience members during the
week after their talk. Many said acquaintances and even
strangers approached them to tell them they had enjoyed
the talk or to ask follow up questions. These encounters
were not as gratifying as getting an immediate response
to a presentation, but most said it did enhance their satisfaction
with the experience.
Another problem for collaboration was that, after audience
members asked a question, they could not indicate
their satisfaction with the speaker's response. We
noticed occasions when the speaker spent a long time
addressing an issue, long after the questioner felt their
question had been answered. Some speakers handled
this problem by asking, "Does that answer your ques-
tion?" Others just said they had felt frustrated that they
couldn't tell if they had covered the issue the questioner
had in mind. At the other end, some audience members
mentioned they wished they could have indicated in
some subtle way when they were satisfied with the
answer. Of course, this same problem can occur in very
large presentations when a speaker may not be able to
see who asked a question and therefore cannot tell when
they have provided an adequate answer.
Behaviors interpreted differently. We noticed a few
interesting cases in which audiences behaved over
Forum similarly to the way they do at a face-to-face
talk, but their behavior was interpreted differently none-
theless. The use of the poll was one such example.
While using Forum, speakers sometimes asked the audience
to "vote" to indicate their opinion on a matter, just
as they sometimes ask local audiences to raise their
hands for the same purpose. In such situations at a face-
to-face talk, it is common for not everyone to express an
opinion, and for some people to wait until they see how
others are voting before they respond. Although these
same behaviors often happened over Forum, speakers
reported that they found the audience's behavior unre-
sponsive. Some explicitly prompted those not voting to
express an opinion, and others repeated the question
when the response wasn't immediate.
Part of this difference in interpretation may be due to
capabilities provided by the Forum interface. Because it
is trivial in Forum to add the number of votes for each
option and compare it with the total attendance, it is
obvious when not everyone votes. In a face-to-face talk,
audiences must first vote on one option and then on the
second, so it is not as clear when people abstain. Also,
speakers found it less comfortable waiting for the votes
to come in during a Forum talk because they could not
look around the room to see how people were reacting.
This effect was particularly interesting because it
stemmed from what we considered to be added functionality
compared with a face-to-face talk. It can be
nice to know exactly how many people are attending
and how many are voting for an option. It is interesting
that when concrete information was provided, people
were more likely to interpret rather ordinary behavior as
uncooperative.
Part of the appeal of technology to support distributed
presentations is that it enables potentially large groups
of people to participate. A particular audience member's
perception of a presentation can vary little whether the
audience has a dozen or several hundred members. This
effect makes large group presentations feel more inti-
mate, but it also reduces audience members' awareness
of each other. This awareness helps audiences understand
how to behave appropriately and it provides context
to interpret the impact of a talk. It is important for
tools designed to support large group participation to
enable some sense of awareness of the participants.
Effectiveness of awareness tools
Our initial attempt to create this awareness was providing
a list of attendee's names in the Audience window,
which users could click on to see the person's picture
and some basic information about them. Speakers and
audiences browsed through the list before and during
the talk to see who was attending. They often clicked on
each name to see the pictures of friends and to connect a
face with an unfamiliar name. A few times, audience
members visited other participants' offices during a talk
after seeing their name on the list. Some spoke about the
talk to participants they encountered several days after it
was over. The list was also important for helping speakers
target their talk to the audience. We decided not to
allow users to watch anonymously, because we felt participants
should be given the opportunity to adjust their
comments to the particular people in the audience.
Still, the list alone was fairly limited, so we added the
ability to send short text messages to other participants,
which enabled people to "pass notes" during the talk
without being rude. During the talks that included this
facility, about a quarter of those in an audience sent a
message, sometimes to make a comment about the talk,
other times to discuss other plans or even to crack jokes.
Messages were quite short and the exchanges consisted
of about four turns, sometimes spread out over an hour
talk. Participants usually, but not always, alternated
turns.
Audience members who had used the messages indicated
in the surveys that they found the capability effective
for interacting with others. As one user put it, "I can
tell another audience member that I agree/disagree with
what they just said. Or point out to them where they can
get more information, etc." Still, the majority of audience
members had yet to discover the messages. We
expect that the message capability is likely to increase in
use over time as more people discover it on their own or
receive a message from someone who has used them
before.
Limitations of awareness tools
Despite our attempts to create a sense of shared environ-
ment, it was clear that speakers and audiences did not
feel as much like they had shared a common experience
as they do after a face-to-face presentation. Several people
commented that their understanding of other audience
members largely depended on the extent to which
the speaker involved the audience in their presentations.
Talks in which speakers asked many poll questions and
encouraged audience questions left the audience with a
much greater sense of community than those who gave
more lecture-style presentations. Of course, this is also
true of face-to-face presentations, but audience members
have somewhat more control over their degree of
interaction with the people around them. They are also
free to look around the room to see how people are
reacting to particular parts of the talk and to chat with
others as they head back to their offices.
In addition, we noticed that participants sometimes
behaved in ways that were more appropriate for smaller
groups, apparently because the audience list was only a
subtle indication of the group size. 1 For example, sometimes
people raised their hands in the middle of a point
and when called on said, "Oh, I was just testing the
interface." Another time, when the speaker had already
moved on after asking a poll question, an audience
member asked the speaker to repeat the question
because he had been distracted when it was asked. In
fact, we found that the tone of the talk seemed to be
influenced more by the type of talk than the size of the
group. Lecture-style presentations with a small audience
tended to be more formal than discussion-style presentations
with a large audience.
Finally, we had not anticipated how frequently people
were going to watch in groups around one person's
desktop. Initially, the prototype ran on only one version
of the operating system, so people who were running a
different OS had to share a workstation to see a presen-
tation. As a result, when questions were asked by people
who were not at their own workstation, the wrong name
and picture appeared. When those people sent in written
questions, their signature didn't match the name of the
sender. The fact that people could watch from another
workstation also foiled our attempt to rule out anony-
1. People may also have felt freer to experiment because some
of the talks were considered tests.
mous participation. Although we are unaware of any
such cases, it was possible for someone to unwittingly
say something offensive to someone not listed as an
attendee.
ASYMMETRIC ROLES
In many synchronous collaborative activities supported
by CSCW tools, the participants play equivalent roles.
However, the nature of presentations is that the speaker
and the audience play different roles. This asymmetry
means that the tool cannot be designed strictly according
to the "What You See Is What I See" (WYSIWIS)
principle [Stefik, 1986, 1987]. Tools designed using this
principle help users interpret what is going on in an
interaction and enhance participants' ability to jointly
learn how to use the application. Because tools designed
to support presentations must provide different capabilities
for the speaker and the audience, it is important to
create environments that are as similar as possible.
Effectiveness of creating shared environment
In designing Forum, we attempted to create a shared
environment by making the overall layout of the controls
as similar as possible and using the same controls
any time the speaker and the audience shared the same
functionality. For example, the basic layout of the poll
and audience's speaking interface is almost identical,
and the UI elements for these components are the same.
Both the speaker and the audience see the same graph
develop as the poll results come in. Everyone sees the
same Hand Raised queue as well as the name and icon
of the audience member who is speaking.
In those cases where the speaker and audience had different
controls, we tried to suggest the other interface
whenever we could. For example, the speaker does not
have to hold down any controls to speak but the audience
does. 2 Since we were using a metaphor of raising
one's hand to request the floor, we used the label Hand
Raised for the question queue, and Lower Hand for
the button that enables them to remove someone from
the list. This encouraged them to use terminology that
made sense to the audience when referring to these
actions.
We also provided a video preview for speakers so that
they would know what the audience was seeing. They
used the preview to see when they were on the air, to
help them frame themselves and to make sure their gestures
were seen. One speaker said he also found that
having the video helped him relax as he gave his presentation
because, unlike at a face-to-face talk, he was able
2. We had originally hoped to provide continuous voice-activated
audio of the audience, but we encountered certain technical
problems. Not only were we unable to eliminate audio
echo but it was not obvious how to determine which sounds
from the audience were appropriate to transmit.
to make sure that his expressions and gestures came off
as he intended. He said he even used it to assure himself
that he looked presentable and that he didn't have
smudges on his face.
Limitations of creating shared environment
Despite efforts in the design of Forum, there were ways
in which the asymmetry of the situation and the user
interfaces caused collaboration problems. In particular,
the asymmetry made it more difficult for the participants
to jointly learn to use Forum in a number of ways. And
it was particularly difficult to help others troubleshoot
problems.
More difficult to learn. The fact that there was any
asymmetry at all between the speaker's and audience's
UIs created some doubt in users' minds as to which
aspects were shared and which were not. It was not
uncommon for new users to wonder aloud whether the
speaker or other audience members could see what they
were doing.
For example, when first using the Poll, some users wondered
whether the speaker could tell who was voting on
which option. As you can see from Figures 1 and 4, the
Poll meter is the same on everyone's interface, but audience
members could not be certain of this. This uncertainty
could affect their behavior, since they might vote
differently (or not at all) if they thought their vote was
not anonymous. Some users wondered whether just the
speaker or the entire audience could see their written
questions once they sent them in, even though they
never saw anyone else's written questions. A few times,
audience members sent written comments that were
never acknowledged by the speaker. Users were discon-
certed by this because they didn't know whether they
had been ignored or the technology hadn't worked. As
one person put it, "My comments have disappeared into
a black hole as far as I can tell."
It was interesting that in most of the cases where audience
members were confused about what others saw,
their view was equivalent to everyone else's. This is an
interesting problem because it indicates that, once the
notion of WYSIWIS is broken, users doubt whether
each aspect of the interface is shared among partici-
pants. It is not enough to provide similar views; one
must also provide cues to indicate which aspects of
users' views are shared.
On the other hand, there was at least one way in which
the asymmetry was useful for learning. By participating
as an audience member in Forum talks, users could
potentially learn how to give talks that were well
adapted to Forum's environment. Some speakers who
had been audience members realized the effectiveness
of the Poll, for instance, and used it regularly in their
talks. One speaker said he had been annoyed by other
speakers who had covered up parts of their slides with
the pointer, so he tried to avoid doing so. It is interest-
ing, however, that even experienced audience members,
who knew first hand how useful it is to split their attention
while watching a talk, still found it disconcerting as
speakers when the audience didn't appear to be paying
full attention. Apparently, this knowledge didn't over-ride
their need for audience feedback.
More difficult to troubleshoot. One of the more frustrating
aspects about using Forum was trying to help
someone who was having trouble. Symmetric applications
for small group use can manage this problem by
enabling everyone to see what everyone else is doing. A
shared drawing or editing tool, for instance, might show
everyone's cursor when users are over UI controls as
well as when they are actually drawing or writing [Min-
neman and Bly, 1991]. Doing so enables everyone to see
when someone is having trouble manipulating the UI,
and they can offer to step the person through the task.
However, if not everyone shares the same UI, this is not
possible. Nor is it practical to show the activities of a
few hundred users. Also, it is less appropriate in a large
group setting to stop focusing on the subject matter to
help one person carry out a task.
The most common problem that arose in using Forum
was that an audience member wasn't able to speak. An
earlier version of the speaking interface turned out to be
relatively difficult for audience members to use, and this
design caused certain common errors. Other times, audience
members' attempts to speak were foiled by technical
problems (microphone wasn't plugged in, battery
was dead) or by buggy software. (After all, these tests
were designed in part to help debug the software.)
The speaking interface also happened to be the one part
of the UI that differed most between the speaker and the
audience. As mentioned, the speaker did not have to
take any action to speak, but the audience members had
to hold down a button to speak, and they were expected
(but not required) to get in a queue to indicate they
wanted the floor. When a user had been called on by the
speaker and then didn't reply, it was very difficult for
the speaker to help them. They couldn't step them
through the process because they couldn't see the audience
interface. Even if they could have seen it, they still
wouldn't be able to see what that particular user was
doing and what problems they were having. There was
no way to know they were having trouble manipulating
the UI or that their microphone wasn't turned on.
After observing participants struggling with trouble-shooting
problems, we felt there were only limited
things we could do to reduce its occurrence. As a start,
we familiarized speakers with the audience interface if
they hadn't experienced it as an audience member. Once
we added the message capability, we found that it was
the most effective way for audience members to give
each other help. If someone's audio level was set too
high or they appeared to be trying to speak, another
audience member could send suggestions to that person,
rather than bothering the rest of the audience with their
advice. Ultimately, however, the best thing we could do
was to modify the interface to make it easier to use,
which we did. The fewer problems users had learning to
use the interface, the less they needed troubleshooting
help.
CONCLUSION
Design recommendations
The observations discussed so far emerged during our
highly iterative process of developing Forum. Each time
we tested a revised design with users, we learned more
about how certain design decisions affected partici-
pants' ability to collaborate during a talk. What emerged
were the following principles, which we believe apply
generally to distributed, one-to-many large group appli-
cations. Designing by these principles can improve the
ability of participants to collaborate in the joint activity
being supported.
Because participants are distributed, it is important to:
. enable them to express as much feedback as possible

. make feedback mechanisms as natural as possible.
It is helpful for tools for large group interaction to:
. provide as many cues as possible about the size of
the group,
. provide capabilities to enable a sense of awareness
among group members,
. focus on the application's ease of use to minimize
the need for joint troubleshooting, which can be difficult
for large groups to manage.
Designs of tools for participants with asymmetric roles
should:
. have UIs for the different roles that are as similar as
possible,
. provide cues to indicate which aspects of partici-
pants' interfaces are similar as well as different,
. indicate what other participants see whenever they
don't see the same thing.
A role for distributed presentations
When we began designing a tool for distributed presen-
tations, we recognized the importance of speaker-audi-
ence and audience-audience interactivity. However, the
experience of building and testing Forum has made it
much more vivid to us how critically the success of a
presentation can depend on the speaker's ability to
gauge the audience's ongoing reactions and on the audi-
ence's ability to build upon each other's participation.
Although Forum was quite successful in enabling interesting
and rewarding distributed presentations, its effectiveness
seemed to be highly dependent on the particular
topic and speaker.
In particular, Forum was most effective either when the
topic sparked a great deal of audience participation or
when the purpose of the talk was simply to provide
information to a wide audience. When the topic was
controversial, audience members tended to contribute
frequently, which not only gave the speaker feedback
about the audience's reaction but also prompted audience
members to react to each other's contributions.
These types of talks tended to be very satisfying for both
the speaker and the audience. During lecture-style talks,
speakers communicated a message to an audience that
included people who might not be able or willing to
attend a face-to-face talk. Forum enabled the speaker to
reach a wider audience than they would at a face-to-face
talk, and it enabled the audience to learn information
they would have missed had they been required to invest
more time and effort to attend.
From a speaker's point of view, Forum was clearly less
effective for talks that depended on a certain degree of
interaction but were not controversial enough to generate
strong audience participation. The lack of feedback
made speakers feel like they were "in a giant black
box," as one speaker put it, and they were likely to
blame themselves for not provoking interest. It is interesting
that even in these cases, audience members were
far less likely to be dissatisfied, however, because the
cost of attending was so low and they usually learned at
least some useful information even if it did not inspire
them to ask questions.
On the other hand, from the audience's point of view,
Forum's environment was in some ways less limited
than a face-to-face setting, primarily because the politeness
rules for the audience were more relaxed. Over
Forum, it was no longer rude to do other work while lis-
tening, to send notes to other audience members, or
even to leave in the middle of a presentation. In effect,
Forum provided audiences with the opportunity to get
the most out of the time spent during a presentation,
especially when they were only mildly interested in the
topic. Of course this change affected the atmosphere of
presentations, again putting more pressure on speakers
to reach out for interaction.
The fact that Forum is a more limited environment than
face-to-face settings does not mean that this kind of
technology should not be pursued. In fact, we think
Forum represents a step beyond many of the distance
learning technologies because it provides support for
real-time, spontaneous interaction among the speaker
and audience members. Still, our findings indicate that
distributed presentations must be treated as a different
kind of presentation environment. Speakers must consider
whether their goals in giving a talk can be met in a
less interactive setting. In cases where wide distribution
is the most important factor, for example, reduced feed-back
may be an acceptable price to pay. And over time,
we expect that new conventions will develop about
proper behavior in this kind of setting, which may help
enhance both speakers' and audiences' experiences with
distributed presentations.
It is also worth exploring ways to expand the range of
situations in which distributed presentations can be
effective. Indeed, we have considered a number of
approaches to improving the interactivity possible over
Forum. One approach is to change the nature of the
environment by actually including a local audience.
Another is to improve upon the technology and design
of the application.
Future directions
We are planning to build a specially equipped studio that
will accommodate up to 35 local audience members. A
remote audience would see video of the speaker and the
local audience, who in turn would see, on a screen at the
front of the room, the slides and the remote audience
feedback. Attention will be paid to providing adequate
studio audio capabilities so that remote audience members
can hear local participants without requiring the latter
to make a special effort to be heard. We are also
exploring the use of input devices that would enable the
speaker to walk around and interact with the screen
rather than standing in front of a monitor using a mouse.
During the technical course experiment, we simulated
such a studio and found that it raised a number of interesting
issues. For one, we found that the students who
received the talk in the "mixed environment" (half over
Forum and half in the classroom) performed worse on a
final exam than did either the classroom-only or Forum-
only students. We believe this result was caused by a
insufficient integration between the two audiences. The
speaker found it difficult to attend to both audiences,
partly because it was harder for the remote audience to
make their presence felt and partly because certain
aspects of the interface accentuated the difference
between the groups. For example, when the speaker
asked a yes/no question, the remote audience could
answer yes or no at once, but the local audience had to
be prompted for each response. Creating such a studio
will force us to reconsider the design of Forum to match
a more heterogenous environment.
Aside from building a studio, we are considering other
potential technology and design enhancements to
Forum. Since the feedback from the audience to the
speaker was relatively impoverished, one obvious
enhancement would be to provide video of the audience.
Although the large group size would preclude showing
everyone in the audience, one could experiment with a
matrix of small, slowly updating images, similar to Portholes
[Dourish and Bly, 1992]. Currently, most users do
not have machines equipped with cameras, and even if
they did, transmitting that much video data would probably
overload most networks.
However, it is feasible to experiment with audio without
waiting for technology advancements. As noted,
because of technical problems with echo and varying
audio levels, we compromised by forcing audience
members to hold down a button when speaking. During
that time, the speaker's audio was reduced, which lowered
the amount of sound feeding back into the micro-
phone. It would be worthwhile to spend more time
improving the audio so that spontaneous reactions from
willing audience members (such as applause and laugh-
ter) could be mixed and transmitted to the group.
In the absence of audio improvements, we have also
considered providing some interface widget to enable
the remote audience to indicate amusement and appreci-
ation. We are reluctant to simply put Applause and
Laughter buttons on the interface because they would
require users to take deliberate, artificial actions to indicate
emotions that are usually conveyed spontaneously
and naturally. However, we think it is worth experimenting
with different techniques because this information is
so valuable to the speaker.
Other options for increasing participant interaction and
awareness are likely to become available once computer
and network technology can better support the band-width
requirements of distributed multimedia applica-
tions. Although we should not expect to eliminate the
need for face-to-face talks, it should be possible to
broaden the range of situations in which computers can
support distributed presentations that are effective and
satisfying to both speakers and audiences.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the contributions of the
other members of the Collaborative Computing
(COCO) group within SunSoft. We would especially
like to thank Darrell Sano, who helped design the user
interface, Don Hoffman and Michael Speer, who provided
the video program used by Forum, and David
Gedye, who was instrumental in initiating the Forum
project. We thank SERA Learning Technologies as well
as Rob Harris of SunU and Amy Pearl for their efforts in
running the experiment on training over Forum. We
appreciate the support we received from Jim Kubon and
Sun's system support staff as we experimented with net-work
resources. And finally, we especially thank the
many people within Sun who gave or attended weekly
Forum broadcasts and gave us their candid feedback.



--R

Bringing people together in a video


A new use of electronics media in education
Managing a trois: a study of a multi-user drawing tool in distributed design work
The place of video in new styles of teaching and learning statistics
Design of a multi-media vehicle for social browsing



Why do users like video?
An Observational Methodology for Studying Group Design Activity
--TR
WYSIWIS revised: early experiences with multiuser interfaces
Beyond the chalkboard: computer support for collaboration and problem solving inmeetings (Reprint)
Design of a multi-media vehicle for social browsing
Managing a trois
Media spaces

--CTR
Ellen A. Isaacs , Trevor Morris , Thomas K. Rodriguez , John C. Tang, A comparison of face-to-face and distributed presentations, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, p.354-361, May 07-11, 1995, Denver, Colorado, United States
Trevor Morris , Alan Ruberg , Tom Rodriguez, Experience Using a Multimedia Framework in Collaborative Applications, ACM SIGOIS Bulletin, v.15 n.2, p.44-46, Dec. 1994
Stephen A. White , Anoop Gupta , Jonathan Grudin , Harry Chesley , Greg Kimberly , Elizabeth Sanocki, Evolving use of a system for education at a distance, CHI '99 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, May 15-20, 1999, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Judith Donath , Dana Spiegel , Matt Lee , Kelly Dobson , Ken Goldberg, Collaborative tele-directing, CHI '01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, March 31-April 05, 2001, Seattle, Washington
Chiung-Fang Chiu , Greg C. Lee , Ju-Hsush Yang, A comparative study of post-class lecture video viewing, Proceedings of the 5th IASTED international conference on Web-based education, p.126-130, January 23-25, 2006, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico
Gavin Jancke , Jonathan Grudin , Anoop Gupta, Presenting to local and remote audiences: design and use of the TELEP system, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, p.384-391, April 01-06, 2000, The Hague, The Netherlands
Mira Dontcheva , Steven M. Drucker , Michael F. Cohen, v4v: a View for the Viewer, Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Designing for User eXperience, November 03-05, 2005, San Francisco, California
Patrick Chiu , Ashutosh Kapuskar , Sarah Reitmeier , Lynn Wilcox, NoteLook: taking notes in meetings with digital video and ink, Proceedings of the seventh ACM international conference on Multimedia (Part 1), p.149-158, October 30-November 05, 1999, Orlando, Florida, United States
Jeremy Birnholtz, Back to school: design principles for improving webcast interactivity from face-to-face classroom observation, Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Designing Interactive systems, June 26-28, 2006, University Park, PA, USA
Boriana Koleva , Holger Schndelbach , Steve Benford , Chris Greenhalgh, Experiencing a presentation through a mixed reality boundary, Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, September 30-October 03, 2001, Boulder, Colorado, USA
Ellen A. Isaacs , John C. Tang , Trevor Morris, Piazza: a desktop environment supporting impromptu and planned interactions, Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, p.315-324, November 16-20, 1996, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
Anthony LaMarca , W. Keith Edwards , Paul Dourish , John Lamping , Ian Smith , Jim Thornton, Taking the work out of workflow: mechanisms for document-centered collaboration, Proceedings of the sixth conference on European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, p.1-20, September 12-16, 1999, Copenhagen, Denmark
Nicole Yankelovich , William Walker , Patricia Roberts , Mike Wessler , Jonathan Kaplan , Joe Provino, Meeting central: making distributed meetings more effective, Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, November 06-10, 2004, Chicago, Illinois, USA
Jason A. Brotherton , Gregory D. Abowd, Lessons learned from eClass: Assessing automated capture and access in the classroom, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), v.11 n.2, p.121-155, June 2004
Ron Baecker, A principled design for scalable internet visual communications with rich media, interactivity, and structured archives, Proceedings of the conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative research, p.16-29, October 06-09, 2003, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
