--T
The impact on retrieval effectiveness of skewed frequency distributions.
--A
We present an analysis of word senses that provides a fresh insight
into the impact of word ambiguity on retrieval effectiveness with potential broader implications for other processes of information retrieval. Using a methodology of forming artifically ambiguous words, known as pseudowords, and through reference to other researchers' work, the analysis illustrates that the distribution of the frequency of occurrance of the senses of a word plays a strong role in ambiguity's impact of effectiveness. Further investigation shows that this analysis may also be applicable to other processes of retrieval, such as Cross Language Information Retrieval, query expansion, retrieval of OCR'ed texts, and stemming. The analysis appears to provide a means of explaining, at least in part, reasons  for the processes' impact (or lack of it) on effectiveness.
--B
Introduction
A great many words in natural languages are ambiguous. The resolution
of ambiguity is a task that has concerned a great many
researchers in the field of Computational Linguistics. Over the
years, many programs have been built that, given a word appearing
in a certain context (with a definition of the word's possible
senses), attempt to identify the word sense in the context. Such
systems are known as word sense disambiguators. Early disam-
biguators were based on hand-built rule sets and only worked over
a small number of words and senses [Weiss 73], [Small 82]. This
changed, however, with the availability of dictionaries and thesauri
online. Using these reference works as a source of word sense definition
and information, many disambiguation systems were built
with the hope that they could be scaled up to work over a much
wider vocabulary[Lesk 86], [Wilks 90], [Sussna 93].
Such a possibility was of interest to researchers in the field of text
based Information Retrieval (IR) systems where it was thought that
word sense ambiguity was a cause of poor performance in the sys-
2tems. It was believed that if the words in a document collection
were correctly disambiguated, IR effectiveness would improve.
However, work where such disambiguation was performed failed
to show any improvement [Voorhees 93], [Wallis 93]. From these
results it becomes clear that research was needed to investigate the
relationship between sense ambiguity, disambiguation, and IR.
Investigations with similar aims but using different methods were
conducted by Krovetz & Croft [Krovetz 92] and by one of the
authors [Sanderson 94].
1.1 Krovetz & Croft
As part of a wide-ranging paper on disambiguation and IR,
Krovetz and Croft conducted a large-scale study on the relationship
of relevance to sense matches and mismatches between query
words and document words. Using the CACM and TIME test collections
([Salton 83], [Sparck Jones 76]), Krovetz & Croft performed
a retrieval for each of the queries in these collections. For
each retrieval, they examined the match between the intended
sense of each query word and that word's sense as it occurred in the
ten highest ranked documents. They counted the number of sense
mismatches between query and document words and examined this
figure in relation to the relevance or non-relevance of the docu-
ment. They found that when the document was not relevant to the
query, a sense mismatch was more likely to occur. From this anal-
ysis, it could be inferred that the level of sense match in the top
ranked relevant documents was high. Krovetz and Croft speculated
that this was due to the so-called query word collocation
effect, which can be explained through an example.
If one were to enter the single word query 'bank' into an IR sys-
tem, it is just as likely to retrieve economic documents as it is geographic
ones. If, however, one entered a query containing many
words, for example 'bank economic financial monetary fiscal'
for top ranked documents, it is likely that many of the query
words will collocate in those documents. It would be unlikely that
an occurrence of 'bank' in such a document would refer to the margin
of a river. Therefore, collocation can cause disambiguation to
be unnecessary. Krovetz and Croft also described a second cause
of the high degree of sense match in the top ranked documents,
which is explained in Section 4.1.
Krovetz and Croft's study did not predict any significant improvements
in retrieval effectiveness from the resolution of ambiguity in
document collections. Instead, they described a number of situations
where disambiguation may prove useful: where the effects of
collocation were less prevalent such as high recall searches; and
where query words were used in a less frequent sense.
1.2 Sanderson
Sanderson measured the effectiveness of an IR system retrieving
from the Reuters 22,173 test collection [Lewis 91] and then measured
it again after additional ambiguity was introduced into the
collection using artificial ambiguous words known as pseudo-words
. The drop in effectiveness resulting from their introduction
was a measure of the impact of that ambiguity. The results of the
experiments showed that the introduced ambiguity did not reduce
effectiveness as much as might have been expected. The published
analysis of the results [Sanderson 94] concentrated on the length
of queries showing that the effectiveness of retrievals based on a
query of one or two words was greatly affected by the introduction
2. Simulated words that have multiple senses. The manner of
their creation is explained in Section 2.
of ambiguity but much less so for longer queries. A confirmation
of the co-location effect shown by Krovetz and Croft.
Although it was not stated in the paper, query term co-location
within a document is also dependent on its length. If documents
being retrieved were particularly short (e.g. just document titles)
then co-location of query terms, regardless of query size, is likely
to be low. Therefore, in a situation of retrieving from short docu-
ments, one would expect to see the same impact of ambiguity on
retrieval effectiveness as was observed with short queries.
Sanderson also used pseudo-words to study the impact of automatic
disambiguation on retrieval effectiveness, concentrating particularly
on the impact of disambiguation errors. The number of
mistakes made by disambiguators appears to vary depending on the
subtlety of word sense to be discriminated between. A reasonable
sense selection error for a disambiguator performing the discrimination
task Sanderson assumed is around 20%-30% (taken from
[Ng 96] 3 ). He found that this level of error could cause effectiveness
to be as bad or even lower than when ambiguity was left unre-
solved. Disambiguation error was thought to be a likely cause of
the failures reported by Voorhees and by Wallis. To this end, Sanderson
concluded that a disambiguator was only of use in a retrieval
context if it disambiguated at a very high level of accuracy or if
queries (or documents) were very short.
3. Ng & Lee stated that the error rate of their disambiguator was
30%, however, it was trained and tested on manually
disambiguated corpora which themselves contained errors. This
will have impacted on the disambiguator accuracy, therefore, a
more generous error rate is suggested in this paper.
With reference to Sanderson's work, Sch-tze & Pedersen [Sch-tze
95] questioned the methodology of using pseudo-words to study
ambiguity after examining the pseudo-senses that make up a
pseudo-word. Looking at the distribution of these senses' frequency
of occurrence within a collection, they found that one
pseudo-sense of a pseudo-word typically accounts for the majority
of occurrences of that pseudo-word. They suggested, though did
not test, that this skewed frequency distribution of the pseudo-
senses within a pseudo-word was an additional cause of the low
impact of ambiguity on retrieval effectiveness. They further questioned
whether this type of distribution correctly reflected that
found in the senses of real ambiguous words. It is the two issues
they raised that are addressed in this paper.
First a description of pseudo-words is presented followed by examples
of their use in retrieval experiments. An analysis of the
skewed distribution of the frequencies of occurrence of a pseudo-
word's pseudo-senses is described next, along with an explanation
of how this type of distribution impacts on retrieval effectiveness.
Measurements are presented confirming that the senses of actual
ambiguous words have the same skewed distribution as pseudo-
senses and, therefore, pseudo-words are concluded to model well
this aspect of ambiguous words. Experimental results showing the
impact of pseudo-words on retrieval effectiveness are thus used to
describe the impact of actual ambiguous words on effectiveness.
Before concluding, the paper briefly examines additional applications
of the analysis presented which indicate that other processes
of retrieval may be better understood with such an analysis.
methodology using pseudo-words
The aim of Sanderson's experiments was to gain a greater understanding
of the relationship between word sense ambiguity, disambiguation
accuracy, and IR effectiveness. In order to achieve this,
it was necessary to be able to measure the amount of ambiguity in a
test collection. This was achieved by using a technique of adding
into the collection artificial ambiguous words called pseudo-words
4 .
A pseudo-word is formed by concatenating a number of words
chosen randomly 5 from a text collection. These words become the
pseudo-senses of a newly formed pseudo-word and all of their
occurrences within that collection are replaced by it: for example,
randomly choosing the words 'banana', `kalashnikov' & 'anec-
dote', and replacing all their occurrences in a collection by the
pseudo-word 'banana/kalashnikov/anecdote'. Note that pseudo-words
are mutually exclusive: a word can only be a member of one
pseudo-word.
By adding pseudo-words into a test collection in this manner, a
measurable amount of additional ambiguity is introduced into that
4. Pseudo-words were created by two groups in the same year
working independently of each other: Gale et al. and Sch-tze.
Gale, Church and Yarowksy introduced and tested a disambiguator
using pseudo-words in a 1992 paper [Gale 92c]. (In the following
year, Yarowsky [Yarowsky 93] incorrectly cited [Gale 92a] as
being the original pseudo-word paper.) At the same time, Sch-tze
introduced a means of testing a disambiguator using manually
created ambiguous words [Sch-tze 92], though he did not call them
pseudo-words. Note, that inspired by Sch-tze, Grefenstette
introduced the notion of artificial synonyms [Grefenstette 94].
collection and its impact on retrieval effectiveness can be deter-
mined. The size of pseudo-words can be varied by altering their
number of pseudo-senses. A pseudo-word with n senses is referred
to here as a size n pseudo-word.
2.1 What is meant by 'ambiguity'?
One aspect of ambiguity that was not addressed by Sanderson in
his paper, was the type of ambiguity simulated by pseudo-words.
This issue is described by Kilgarriff [Kilgarriff 97] who contended
that the distinction between senses of a word could only be defined
once the purpose for which they were intended was defined.
Assuming that a dictionary provides a definitive and objective distinction
between word senses is, according to Kilgarriff, unrealistic
(Section 5 discusses this issue further in the context of IR). In
Sanderson's work, pseudo-words were intended to mimic the
senses used in the work of Voorhees who used the WordNet thesaurus
[WordNet], [Miller 95] for her sense definitions. Indeed, it will
be shown later that an important quality of senses in this reference
work, are simulated well by pseudo-words. Unless otherwise
stated, references to senses and ambiguity in this paper should be
taken as meaning senses as defined in WordNet. It is believed,
however, that pseudo-words are a good simulation of senses
defined in other reference works such as dictionaries and some evidence
is presented to support this contention.
5. A pseudo random process was used based on a non-linear
additive feedback random number generator: the random and
srandom functions found in the math.h library of the C
programming language.
2.2 The experiments
To illustrate the impact of the introduction of pseudo-words into a
document collection, experiments on three conventional test col-
lections, CACM, Cranfield 1400 [Sparck Jones 76], and TREC-B,
are now presented. In these experiments, size five pseudo-words
were introduced into each collection and the effectiveness of an IR
system retrieving from these additionally ambiguous collections
was measured. All words in the collections and their respective
queries were transformed into pseudo-words 6 .
The CACM collection was composed of 3,204 documents and the
Cranfield 1400 collection contained 1,400. The TREC-B collection
used was that defined in the TREC-5 conference [Harman 96],
it contained ~70,000 documents; the queries used (known as topics
in TREC) were numbers 1 to 300.
The retrieval system used was a conventional ranking system using
a form of tf*idf term weighting scheme (1) which is an amalgam of
Harman's normalised within document frequency weight [Harman
92] and a conventional inverse document frequency measure. Stop
words were removed from the collection and the Porter stemmer
6. It was possible that up to four words in each collection were
left out of the transformation process due to the requirement that
each pseudo-word had five senses.
[Porter 80] was applied to the collection text before pseudo-words
were generated. A pessimistic interpolation technique (described
in the Interpolation section of Chapter 7 of Van Rijsbergen's book
[Van Rijsbergen 79]) was used to produce a set of precision values
measured at ten standard recall levels.
As can be seen from the results in Figures 1, 2, & 3, the effectiveness
resulting from this retrieval is little different from that resulting
from a retrieval on the unmodified collection. Considering that
(1)
log
length j
log
log
weight of term i in document j
frequency of term i in document j
length j number of terms in document j
N number of documents in collection
number of documents in which term i occurs

Figure

1. Introducing size five pseudo-words into
the CACM collection.

Figure

2. Introducing size five pseudo-words into
the Cranfield 1400 collection.0.250.75Precision
Recall
Size 5 pseudo-words
Unmodified
the introduction of size five pseudo-words reduced the number of
distinct terms in the collections to a fifth, the relatively small
decrease in retrieval effectiveness is perhaps striking. The differences
in reductions across the collections is most likely due to the
differences in query length. TREC-B queries are, on average, 41
non-stop words in length as opposed to 12 for the CACM collection
and 10 for the Cranfield 1400.
2.3

Summary

This section has presented a methodology that uses pseudo-words
to explore the relationship between ambiguity and retrieval effec-
tiveness. Experimental results showed the impact of introduced
word sense ambiguity on retrieval effectiveness was not as significant
as might have been thought. In addition, the results showed a
link between the length of query submitted to a retrieval system
and the impact of that ambiguity on effectiveness.
2.4 Postscript
Since conducting this work, it has come to light that experiments
with a similar methodology but with a different purpose were carried
out by Burnett et al. [Burnett 79] who were performing experiments
using document signatures. They were investigating how
best to generate small but representative signatures from a docu-
ment. One of their experiments involved randomly pairing
together words in the same way that size two pseudo-words are
formed. They noted that retrieval effectiveness was not affected
greatly by this pairing, a result that is in agreement with those presented
here.
3 Analysis of frequency distribution
Although the experiments of Section 2.2, and those presented in
[Sanderson 94], showed query (and by implication document)
length to be an important factor in the relationship between ambiguity
and retrieval effectiveness, further analysis, by Sch-tze &
Pedersen [Sch-tze 95] revealed that the skewed frequency distribution
of pseudo-senses could also be causing the relatively small
drops in effectiveness observed in those experiments. In this sec-
tion, this factor is analysed and experiments are conducted to
reveal its impact on retrieval effectiveness.
3.1 Examining the make up of pseudo-words
Words have very different frequencies of occurrence within a document
collection, as shown by Zipf [Zipf 49]. This can be demonstrated
by examining the text of the CACM collection which
contains approximately 7,500 distinct words occurring 100,000
times.

Figure

4 shows the distribution of the frequency of occurrence
of this set of words. The graph shows their distribution is
skewed. Such a distribution is often referred to as a Zipfian distri-
bution. Therefore, creating pseudo-words by random selection
from these words is likely to result in pseudo-words composed of
pseudo-senses with a similar (Zipfian) skew. This becomes apparent
after examining the frequency of occurrence of the senses of

Figure

3. Introducing size five pseudo-words into
the TREC-B collection.
four randomly selected pseudo-words generated from the CACM
collection:
. the senses of the size five pseudo-word '12/span/prospect/pre-
occupi/nonprogram' 7 occurred 218, 18, 3, 2, and 1 times in the
CACM collection respectively;
. the senses of 'assist/prohibit/minicomput/ness/inferior'
occurred 27, 5, 5, 2, and 1 times;
. the senses of 'taken/multic/purdu/beginn/pavlidi' occurred 28,
4, 2, and 1 times;
. and the senses of 'note/makinson/disappear/gilchrist/xrm'
occurred 97, 3, 2, 2, and 1 times.
7. The unusual ending of some of the words is due to the
application of a stemmer [Porter 80] to the words of the CACM
collection before formation of pseudo-words.
The extent to which this skewed distribution existed in pseudo-words
was more fully investigated: sets of size two, three, four,
five, and ten pseudo-words were created from the words of the
CACM collection, and the distribution of the frequency of occurrence
of their pseudo-senses, was examined. For each of these
pseudo-words, it was found that one sense accounted for the majority
of occurrences of the pseudo-word of which it was a part. The
results of this analysis are shown in Table 1 which displays the percentage
of occurrences accounted for by a pseudo-word's commonest
sense. From these figures, it was concluded that the distribution
of the frequency of occurrence of the pseudo-senses was skewed.
3.2 Why do skewed pseudo-words not affect
effectiveness?
An examination was undertaken to discover if the skewed frequency
distribution of pseudo-senses was in part responsible for
the retrieval results presented in Section 2.2. Initially, the frequency
of occurrence of test collection query words was examined.
It was found that the majority of these words had a relatively high
frequency of occurrence in their respective collections. This was
significant as, if a high frequency query word was made part of a

Figure

4. Distribution of the frequency of occurrence of words
in the CACM collection. Graph plotted on a logarithmic scale.
Point A shows that around 3,600 of the words (about half of all
words in the collection) occur in the collection only once. Point
B shows that one word occurs around 3,000 times in the
collection, accounting for 3% of all occurrences in the
collection.101000Words that have.
.this frequency of occurrence
A
No. of
senses
Commonest
sense

Table

1. Percentage of occurrences accounted for by
commonest pseudo-sense of a pseudo-word (computed by
micro averaging). The figures in brackets (shown for
comparison) are the percentages that would result if pseudo-
senses occurred in equal amounts. Measurements made on the
CACM collection.
pseudo-word, there was a high probability that the other pseudo-
senses of that pseudo-word would have low frequencies of occurrence
(because of skewed frequency distributions). Therefore, the
pseudo-word's commonest sense would account for the majority of
its occurrences and would, in effect, be little different from the
high frequency query word that was its main component. Conse-
quently, there would be little change in the retrieval effectiveness
of an IR system retrieving on that word.
To illustrate, query fourteen of the CACM collection contains the
word 'algorithm', which occurs in 1,333 documents. After pseudo-words
were introduced into the collection, this query word became
the commonest pseudo-sense of the word 'algorithm/telescop/
pomental/lanzano/mccalla', which occurred in 1,343 documents,
only ten more than the original query word. Therefore, turning this
relatively high frequency query word into a pseudo-word had little
impact on the word's frequency of occurrence and therefore, little
impact on its use in retrieval.
It was hypothesised that if the majority of query words were, like
'algorithm', the commonest sense of a pseudo-word, this would
help to explain the relatively small drop in retrieval effectiveness
resulting from the introduction of such words. To test this hypoth-
esis, size five pseudo-words were introduced into the CACM,
Cranfield 1400, and TREC-B collections and the number of query
words that were the commonest sense of a pseudo-word was
counted. As can be seen from the results in Table 2, the majority of
query words had this 'commonest sense' property. These results,
certainly suggested that the skewed frequency distribution of a
pseudo-word's pseudo-senses was an additional cause of the relatively
small drop in retrieval effectiveness found in the experiments
presented in Section 2.2.
To further confirm this, the experiments of Section 2.2 were
repeated exactly as before, except that the pseudo-words introduced
into the collection were of a different type: their pseudo-
senses had an equal frequency of occurrence 8 . The graphs in

Figures

show the difference in retrieval effectiveness
8. This type of pseudo-word was formed for a particular
document collection, by sorting that collection's word index by
(word) frequency of occurrence and then grouping contiguous sets
of sorted words into pseudo-words. This means of grouping
ensured that words with equal or almost equal frequency of
occurrence were joined together.
Number of CACM Cranfield TREC-B
queries 52 225 285
query words 645 2159 11848
query words
in collection
commonest
sense query
words
commonest

Table

2. Percentage of query words that were the
commonest sense of a pseudo-word.

Figure

5. Comparison of pseudo-word types on the
CACM collection.
AAAAAAA
when size five pseudo-words, whose senses have even distribu-
tions, are introduced into a collection. As can be seen, across all
three collections, the impact on effectiveness of introducing
pseudo-words with even distributions is significantly greater than
the introduction of pseudo-words with a skewed distribution.
From these results and the analysis of query words, it was concluded
that the relatively low impact of ambiguity reported in the
experiments of Section 2 was not only due to the relatively long
queries of the collections but also due to the skewed frequency distribution
of the pseudo-senses used in the experiments.
4 Do pseudo-words model ambiguous
words well?
Given the discussion so far, it would not be unreasonable to wonder
how well pseudo-words model ambiguous words. In other
words, do the senses of ambiguous words have the same skewed
distribution as pseudo-senses? There is a well known result from a
number of disambiguation researchers that suggests this is the case.
In their research on establishing a lower bound baseline for measuring
the significance of a disambiguator's accuracy, Gale et al.
[Gale 92a] found that if a disambiguator used a strategy of selecting
the commonest sense of a word, it would be correct 75% of the
time. More recently, Ng & Lee [Ng 96] reported on the creation of
a sense tagged corpus containing 191,000 word occurrences. They
found the commonest sense of the words they tagged (which had
on average nine senses per word) accounted for 64% of all occurrences

It is possible to measure the frequency distribution of word senses
using the SEMCOR sense tagged corpus which is publicly released
with WordNet [WordNet], [Miller 95]. It is a 100,000 word corpus
consisting of around 15,000 distinct words. All word occurrences
were manually tagged with senses as defined in the Wordnet thesaurus
(version 1.4). Using this corpus, the distribution of the frequency
of occurrence of ambiguous word senses can be plotted

Figure

8). Examining the graph in Figure 8 reveals that the senses
in the SEMCOR corpus have a skewed frequency distribution similar
to that of the words in the CACM collection as shown in

Figure

4.

Figure

6. Comparison of pseudo-word types on the
Cranfield 1400 collection.

Figure

7. Comparison of pseudo-word types on the
TREC-B collection.
AAAAAAA
AAAAAAA
AAAAAAA
AAAAAAA
AAAAAAA0.250.75Precision
Recall
AAA
AAA
Size 5 pseudo-words, even dist.
Size 5 pseudo-words, skewed dist.
Unmodified
As was done with pseudo-words, the distribution of the frequency
of occurrence of word senses within ambiguous words was
examined, Table 3 displays the percentage of occurrences
accounted for by a word's commonest sense. The percentage was
computed for separate sets of words, the set a word belongs to is
defined by the number of senses that word has. As can be seen, a
word's commonest sense accounts for the majority of that word's
occurrences, thus confirming the results of Gale et al. and of Ng &
Lee.

Tables

show a similarity. It was unexpected that the
frequency of occurrence of an ambiguous word's senses would be
modelled so well by the random word selection process used to
form pseudo-words. Although both senses and words were found
to have a similar skew within a collection, one might have
anticipated that the distribution of the senses of an ambiguous word
would be affected by other factors that would not be captured by
the pseudo-word creation process. This, however, did not seem to
be the case and therefore, it was concluded that the skewed
distribution of a pseudo-word's pseudo-senses is a good model of
this aspect of an ambiguous word 9 .
4.1 Does 'real' ambiguity impact on retrieval
effectiveness?
Given that the senses of ambiguous words have the same skewed
distribution as the pseudo-senses of pseudo-words, and that such a
distribution is an identified cause of the small drop in retrieval
9. The strength of similarity shown in Tables 1 & 3 may be co-
incidental, only more extensive tests on manually tagged corpora
(when available) will be able to confirm or deny this. Further, it
should be noted that a typical feature of most manually
disambiguated corpora, currently available, is the lack of multiple
manual assessments of their words. The observations of skew
described and referenced in this paper are largely based on corpora
having this property. It is well documented that levels of inter
assessor agreement in sense tagging tasks can be low [Gale 92a].
Therefore, it is possible that the skewed distribution of senses will
have different properties on multiply assessed corpora. Once such
resources are available, it may be prudent to re-examine this issue.

Figure

8. Distribution of the frequency of occurrence of senses
in the SEMCOR corpus. Graph plotted on a logarithmic scale.
No. of
senses
Size of
set
Commonest
sense
6 448 68 {17}
9 141

Table

3. Percentage of occurrences accounted for by the
commonest sense of a word (computed by micro averaging).
The figures in brackets (shown for comparison) are the
percentages that would result if senses occurred in equal
amounts. Measurements made on the SEMCOR corpus.1010000Word senses that have.
.this frequency of occurrence
effectiveness found in the experiments of Section 2.2, it might
seem reasonable to question if this small drop will also be found in
the case of real ambiguity. As was shown in the analysis of
pseudo-senses in Section 3.2, when the senses of a large percentage
of ambiguous query words have a skewed distribution and are
used in the commonest sense present in the collection (being
retrieved from), ambiguity will not greatly impact on effectiveness.
A short study of the senses of the query words of one hundred
TREC queries (No. 201-300) was undertaken to determine how
many words were used in their commonest sense. The short title
section of these queries were manually disambiguated (by one per-
son) with respect to the sense definitions of WordNet. This thesaurus
was chosen as it contains relative frequency of occurrence
information for senses, which allow one to determine the commonest
sense of any word in WordNet. Examining the nouns of these
queries, it was found that 158 out of 207 (76%) were used in their
commonest sense. (There were 11 nouns not found in WordNet or
whose intended sense was not defined.) For these queries at least,
the commonest sense predominates.
There is one caveat to the use of WordNet described here: the
measurement of the commonest sense is calculated from corpora
other than the collections the TREC queries were intended for.
Therefore, it is possible that a word's commonest sense in the
TREC collections is somewhat different from that defined in Word-
Net. In order to allow for this, it would be necessary to analyse the
frequency distributions of senses in both query and collection.
Such a study was performed in Krovetz & Croft's wide ranging
analysis of ambiguity and retrieval effectiveness [Krovetz 92].
They examined the patterns of usage of the senses of query words
in the CACM collection. Comparing their usage in the collection
as a whole to that found in the queries, they found a similar pattern
between the two: i.e. the commonest sense of a query word as used
in a collection was the commonest sense of that word in a query.
used this study to conclude that the skewed distributions
of ambiguous words were an important factor in the overall
low impact of ambiguity on retrieval effectiveness.
From their results and those of the short study described above, it
was concluded that pseudo-words accurately simulate the skewed
distribution of ambiguous words and the results drawn from
pseudo-word based retrieval experiments provide a good indication
of what will happen in the 'real case'.
4.2 Other aspects of ambiguity and pseudoword

Before drawing the discussion on pseudo-word simulation to a
close, it is necessary to address one other aspect of senses and its
simulation by pseudo-words, namely the relatedness of a word's
senses. Although there are some words, known as homographs or
homonyms, whose senses have no relationship (the geographic and
economic senses of 'bank' being one, oft-cited, example), the
majority of ambiguous words have senses that are related in some
manner. Such words are said to be polysemous.
Because of their random selection from a corpus, the pseudo-
senses of a pseudo-word have no relationships between them and it
is necessary to examine how important this deficiency of pseudo-words
is. The relationships between a word's senses can take one
of two forms. For one, the lack of pseudo-sense relatedness may
be important, for the other, it may be less so. The two are now discussed

4.2.1 Related but not important?
There are some words which have senses that are related but in a
manner that is of little importance when considering pseudo-
words. Two examples of this relationship are now described.
. Etymological relationships - senses that are related through
some historical link. The word 'cardinal' as a religious figure
and 'cardinal' as a mathematical concept are etymologically
related.
. Metaphorical relationships - 'surfing' as a water sport or 'surf-
ing' as a pursuit of browsing web pages.
Although the senses of these words are related, it is questionable
how important the relatedness is in relation to the accuracy of
pseudo-word simulation. The random formation of pseudo-words
brings together words that appear in different contexts and it could
well be that this is an accurate simulation of etymologically and
metaphorically related senses. One can imagine, that the two
senses of the word 'surf', will appear in quite different contexts
and so in that respect will be similar to the randomly selected
pseudo-senses of a pseudo-word.
This behaviour of ambiguous words has been observed in two anal-
yses. Yarowsky [Yarowsky 93] tested the hypothesis that a word's
different senses appear in different contexts. For the words he
examined, Yarowsky found the hypothesis to be "90-99% accurate
for binary ambiguities". Gale et al. [Gale 92b] examined the
broader context of senses showing that if a word is used in a particular
sense in a discourse, all other occurrences of the word in that
discourse were used in the same sense (this quality of senses was
mimicked by the pseudo-words used in the experiments of this
paper). From the two studies, it would appear that for the classes
of polysemous word described so far, the relatedness of senses may
not be as important as imagined.
4.2.2 Related and important
The applicability of the Yarowsky and Gale et al. studies may be
limited, however, as both works examined words which had a small
number of broadly defined and distinct senses. Many words have a
larger number of more tightly related senses and for these, the different
context and same discourse rules may not apply as consist-
ently. For example, it is not hard to imagine that the word 'French'
could refer to the language and the people within the same discourse
surrounded by similar contexts. For words of this kind, the
lack of pseudo-sense relatedness may be significant. It is not an
issue addressed by the experiments presented here. An examination
of this area is left for future work.
5 Applications of ambiguity analysis
From the work presented by the author in [Sanderson 94] and that
presented in this paper, it has been shown that sense ambiguity
impacts on retrieval effectiveness far less than was originally
thought. This does not mean, however, that ambiguity should be
ignored. It is believed that the factors of query/document length,
and of skewed distribution of senses can be used as a means of
assessing when ambiguity will be a significant problem to a
retrieval system and, therefore, suggest when some form of disambiguation
(on document or query) should be investigated.
Already the statements on the utility of disambiguation for short
queries have been supported through experimentation by Sanderson
[Sanderson 96] who showed a small improvement in effectiveness
for retrievals based on single word queries when documents
and queries were represented by word senses, identified by an automatic
disambiguator. Similarly, results of experiments investigating
manual disambiguation of short documents (image captions)
by Smeaton & Quigley [Smeaton 96] has also provided evidence
showing effectiveness improving for this type of retrieval.
The analysis of sense frequency distributions presented in this
paper provides an explanation for the results of Sch-tze & Pedersen
[Sch-tze 95] whose use of a disambiguator on large queries
and documents resulted in a 7-14% improvement in retrieval effec-
tiveness, the first published results showing an automatic disambiguator
working successfully with an IR system.
To understand the reasons for their results, which apparently contradict
those presented here, it is necessary to first explain how
Sch-tze & Pedersen's disambiguator worked. Unlike a `classic'
disambiguator, it did not use a dictionary or thesaurus as a source
of word sense definitions, instead it used only the corpus to be dis-
ambiguated. Its disambiguation method was as follows. For each
word in the corpus, the context of every occurrence of that word
within the corpus was examined and common contexts were clus-
tered. For example, given the word 'ball', one might find that
within a corpus of newspaper articles, this word appears in a
number of common contexts: a social gathering; and perhaps a
number of different sports (tennis, football, cricket, etc. For
Sch-tze & Pedersen's disambiguator, each one of these common
contexts constituted an individual sense of the word. This is what
is unusual about their disambiguator: the senses are quite unlike
those found in a dictionary. It is unlikely for instance, that a dictionary
would distinguish between different types of the sporting
sense of 'ball'. A further difference is that the disambiguator only
attempted to identify the commonest senses of a word: Sch-tze and
Pedersen stated that a common context was only identified as a
sense if it occurred more than fifty times in the corpus. So different
are Sch-tze & Pedersen's senses from the classic definition of the
word, that they are referred to here as word uses instead.
The differences between uses and senses identified here causes the
frequency distribution of word uses to be different from those of
word senses. The requirement that uses must occur at least fifty
times eliminates the very infrequent and therefore makes the frequency
distribution of uses less skewed. In addition, it is likely
that the commonest senses of a word will be employed in a number
of distinct uses: e.g. the sporting sense of 'ball', mentioned above,
written in tennis, football, and cricket contexts. The breaking up of
a word's commonest senses would have the effect of causing the
frequency distribution of word uses to be less skewed than those of
word senses.
From the results in Section 3.2 comparing the detrimental impact
on retrieval effectiveness caused by even and skewed distributions,
it was shown that even distributions impact more on effectiveness
than skewed. As it is believed that word uses have a less skewed,
and therefore more even, frequency distribution when compared to
word senses, it is concluded that the improvement in retrieval
effectiveness reported by Sch-tze & Pedersen is due to this difference
in the frequency distributions 10 .
5.1 Other skewed frequency analyses
In this section, other processes of IR are examined using the methodology
of analysing distributions of frequencies of occurrence in
relation to retrieval effectiveness. The examinations are brief and
10. As stated in the introduction, this explanation is suggested by
Sch-tze & Pedersen though not directly tested through
experimentation.
are intended only to show the potential of the analysis rather than
to provide a thorough study. Five areas are examined: document
signatures, stemming, Optical Character Recognition (OCR),
Cross Language Information Retrieval (CLIR), and query expansion

5.2 Document signatures
As was already shown in Section 2.4, pseudo-words have a potential
utility reducing the size of document signatures. Further investigation
of the relationship between signature size and retrieval
effectiveness, mediated through different forms of pseudo-words
may prove useful.
5.3 Stemming
The positive impact of stemming on retrieval effectiveness is at
best regarded as minimal. Harman [Harman 87] examined three
stemming techniques on a set of test collections and concluded that
stemming did not result in improvements in retrieval effectiveness.
In contrast, Krovetz [Krovetz 93] with his more sophisticated stemmer
showed a small but consistent and significant, improvement
over a number of test collections, in particular, those having short
documents. More recently, Xu and Croft [Xu 98], using a corpus
based enhancement to the Porter stemmer [Porter 80], have shown
further, but again small, improvements over Krovetz's stemmer.
One possible explanation for the relatively small improvements
brought about by stemming may lie in the skewed frequency of
occurrence of word stem variants. The process of stemming word
variants to a morphological root has similarities to the formation of
pseudo-words with the difference that stemming is intended to
improve retrieval effectiveness. Even with a cursory examination
of word variants as shown in Table 4, one can see that their frequency
of occurrence appears to follow a similar skew to that
found in the analysis of pseudo-words, although with the amount
of skew varying.
Stemming was also studied by Church [Church 95], who examined
the correlation (in terms of document co-occurrence) between the
variants of a word stem. Church presented his correlation measure
as a way of predicting the worth of stemming a particular word,
though it was not actually tested in retrieval experiments. By
examining the relative frequency of occurrence of stem variants, it
may be possible to complement Church's work by producing an
enhanced predictor of the worth of stemming.
5.4 OCR
Smeaton and Spitz [Smeaton 97] have examined a type of pseudoword
in OCR called a Word Shape Token (WST). These are words
composed of a seven letter alphabet, known as Character Shape
Codes (CSCs), into which the English 52 letter alphabet (capital
and lower case) is mapped based on characteristics of letter shape.
Smeaton and Spitz state that the advantages of recognising CSCs
over letters is an order of magnitude speed increase in recognition
along with greater accuracy. The disadvantage is that many words
are mapped to the same WST, making WSTs similar to pseudo-
words. The amount of concatenation varies depending on the let-
Variant Occs. Variant Occs.
water 121 wonderful 36
waters 31 wonder 28
wondering
watered 1 wondered 12
watering 1 wonders 3

Table

4. Frequency of occurrence of Porter stem
variants of the words 'water' and `wonder' as
measured in a small document collection.
ters of a word and on its length: longer words are, for example, less
likely to map to the same WST.
Smeaton and Spitz examined the impact on retrieval effectiveness
of retrieving from documents represented by WSTs instead of
words. Initial experiments conducted by them showed very large
reductions, however, they stated this was due to certain query
words mapping to the same WSTs with as many as a thousand
other words. Through a process of eliminating these massively
concatenated words from queries, the average number of query
words mapping to the same WST was around twenty and the
reduction in retrieval effectiveness compared to using just words
was approximately a half.
In the light of the work presented in this paper, it is anticipated that
an analysis of frequency distributions of the component words of
WSTs may provide indications of how better to choose which
WSTs should be eliminated from a query in order to maximise
retrieval effectiveness.
Given the evidence, already presented, on the skewed frequency
distribution of senses defined in dictionaries and thesauri, it would
seem reasonable to wonder if CLIR systems using translation dictionaries
will be good candidates for an analysis of the frequency
distribution of the possible translations of words. If for example,
the distribution of a word's translations were mostly skewed, and in
general its commonest translation was the correct one, then it may
be possible that translating a word into all its possible translations
would not harm retrieval effectiveness by much. In their experi-
ments, Hull and Grefenstette [Hull 96] used a translation dictionary
and reported that using a strategy of concatenating a word's
possible dictionary translations produces retrieval effectiveness
that "performs quite well given its simplicity". However, they also
state that introducing incorrect translations "seriously hurts per-
formance". From such statements, it is not really possible to determine
much about frequency distribution and ambiguity.
In order to gain an additional understanding about the use of translation
dictionaries in CLIR, an analysis of one dictionary, the Collins
English-Spanish bilingual machine readable dictionary (as
described in [Ballesteros 97]), was conducted by measuring the
frequency of occurrence of the English translations of Spanish
words. Using a method similar to that performed in Section 4 on
the sense tagged SEMCOR corpus, the translations were grouped
into sets based on the number of translations there were for a Spanish
word. The frequency of occurrence of the English translations
(after being stemmed) was measured in the TREC-B collection,
1991-93. The results are shown in Table 5. As can be seen, for
each of the sets, on average, the commonest translation accounts
Number of
translations
Size of
set
Commonest
translation
6 625 53 {17}
8 268 44 {13}

Table

5. Percentage of occurrences accounted for by the
commonest translation of a Spanish word (computed by
micro averaging). The figures in brackets (shown for
comparison) are the percentages that would result if
translations occurred in equal amounts. Measurements
made using the Collins Spanish to English dictionary and
the TREC-B collection.
for the vast majority of occurrences. The dominance of the commonest
sense is less strong than that shown in pseudo-words and
word senses, but, nevertheless, it is present. This short analysis,
seems to suggest that the skewed frequency of occurrence of the
possible translations of a word in some part accounts for the relative
success of the simplistic translation strategy reported by Hull
and Grefenstette.
5.6 Query expansion
The automatic expansion of query words with words chosen from a
thesaurus or dictionary has not been successful. Voorhees [Voor-
hees 94] tried automatically expanding the words of TREC queries
with related words taken from the WordNet thesaurus [WordNet]
without success. One of the unusual qualities of TREC queries is
their great length (on average 41 non-stop words per query) and
one might speculate that the reasons for Voorhees lack of success
can be attributed to this feature: perhaps the expansion terms were
poor quality and added little to the already large number of terms.
At TREC-6 a new task was introduced: the very short query task,
ad hoc retrieval based on the title section of TREC queries which
were on average 2.5 non-stop words in length.
It was hypothesised that because the queries were shorter, expansion
techniques like that tried by Voorhees may be more successful.
Therefore, such a method was attempted. The one chosen was a
semi-automatic form that required the manual identification of the
sense of each query word followed by the automatic expansion of
the identified senses with synonyms taken from the WordNet the-
saurus. The motivations and results of the experiment are
described in detail in the report to TREC-6 [Crestani 97]. The
main conclusion was that even with the short queries, the expansion
method did not improve retrieval effectiveness over a strategy
of leaving the query alone. Over the 45 queries tested 11 (queries
251-300), this strategy was found to leave 14 unchanged, improve
8 queries, and degrade 23. In the light of the frequency distribution
work reported in this paper, however, a possible improvement to
the expansion process was hypothesised.
Perhaps query words used in their commonest sense did not need
expansion as their sense would be so prevalent in the collection
anyway. If, however, a query word was used in one of its less common
senses, expansion might prove useful in ensuring that documents
containing that sense were ranked highly. (Assuming of
course that the expansion words were used in those documents in
their 'correct' sense.)
A repeat of the TREC experiment to test this hypothesis was conducted
on the TREC-B collection using the same 45 queries
described above. Expansion was conducted in the same manner:
manually identifying the sense of query words and expanding less
common senses with synonyms taken from WordNet. Information
on the frequency of occurrence of word senses was gained from
WordNet. Although this may not reflect the frequencies of occurrence
found in the document collection, it was hoped that this
information would be accurate enough for the purposes of this
experiment.
Using the strategy of only expanding the less common senses of
query words on the TREC queries resulted in 36 queries being left
unchanged, 4 improved, and 5 degraded. The increased number of
unchanged queries was not surprising given that fewer expansions
11. Five of the fifty queries had no relevant documents and were
ignored in this experiment.
took place. The ratio of improved to degraded queries changed
from around 1:3 to almost 1:1, although the degradation from the
five queries was worse than the improvement from the four. Never-
theless, the study appeared to indicate that the strategy of targeting
query words using a less common sense was promising, though
obviously one that required improvement before it could be
employed in any retrieval system.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, a series of experiments were presented that measured
and analysed the impact on retrieval effectiveness of word sense
ambiguity. All of these experiments applied a methodology that
used a form of artificial ambiguity known as pseudo-words. The
skewed frequency distribution of pseudo-senses was described and
shown to be one important factor in the impact of ambiguity on
effectiveness. Experiments and analyses were presented that
showed the skew to be a good model of the frequency distribution
of the senses of actual ambiguous words. This provided further
evidence that conclusions drawn from experiments based on
pseudo-words are applicable to cases of real ambiguity.
Through further experimentation and reference to previous work it
was confirmed that the self-disambiguating nature of long queries
and the skewed frequency distribution of the word senses are both
factors in the low impact on retrieval effectiveness of word sense
ambiguity. Recent research on disambiguation and IR was analysed
and the two factors were shown to play an important role in
explaining the success of these approaches.
Finally, a number of additional processes of retrieval were examined
in the light of knowledge about skewed frequency distribu-
tions. These analyses appeared to provided insight into the reasons
for these processes' impacts on retrieval effectiveness.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Ian Ruthven, Mounia Lalmas, Bob
Krovetz and the reviewers for their comments on earlier drafts of
this paper. This work was supported by the VIPIR project which
was funded by the University of Glasgow.



--R

Ballesteros 97 L.
Burnett 79 J.

Church 95 K.

Gale 92b W.
Gale 92c W.
Harman 87 D.
Harman 92 D.

Harman 96 D.
Hull 96 D.
Kilgarriff 97 A.
Krovetz 92 R.
Krovetz 93 R.
Lesk 86 M.
Miller 95 G.
Ng 96 Hwee Tou Ng
Rijsbergen 79 C.
Sanderson 94 M.
Sanderson 96 M.


Small

Smeaton 96 A.
Smeaton 97 A.
Sparck Jones 76 K.
Sussna 93 M.
Voorhees 93 E.
Voorhees 94 E.

Weiss 73 S.
Wilks 90 Y.

WordNet 'www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/'.
Miller (Principal Investigator).
--TR
A failure analysis of the limitation of suffixing in an online environment
Ranking algorithms
Representation and learning in information retrieval
Lexical ambiguity and information retrieval
Using WordNet to disambiguate word senses for text retrieval
Viewing morphology as an inference process
Word sense disambiguation for free-text indexing using a massive semantic network
Query expansion using lexical-semantic relations
Word sense disambiguation and information retrieval
One term or two?
WordNet
Querying across languages
Experiments on using semantic distances between words in image caption retrieval
Phrasal translation and query expansion techniques for cross-language information retrieval
Corpus-based stemming using cooccurrence of word variants
Automatic sense disambiguation using machine readable dictionaries
Extended Boolean information retrieval
Explorations in Automatic Thesaurus Discovery
Information Retrieval
Using Character Shape Coding for Information Retrieval

--CTR
I. Nakov , Marti A. Hearst, Category-based pseudowords, Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology: companion volume of the Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003--short papers, p.67-69, May 27-June 01, 2003, Edmonton, Canada
Sang-Bum Kim , Hee-Cheol Seo , Hae-Chang Rim, Information retrieval using word senses: root sense tagging approach, Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, July 25-29, 2004, Sheffield, United Kingdom
Christopher Stokoe, Differentiating homonymy and polysemy in information retrieval, Proceedings of the conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, p.403-410, October 06-08, 2005, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Athanasios Kehagias , Vassilios Petridis , Vassilis G. Kaburlasos , Pavlina Fragkou, A Comparison of Word- and Sense-Based Text Categorization Using Several Classification Algorithms, Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, v.21 n.3, p.227-247, November
Mike Thelwall, Text characteristics of English language university Web sites: Research Articles, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, v.56 n.6, p.609-619, April 2005
