--T
The consensus operator for combining beliefs.
--A
The consensus operator provides a method for combining possibly conflicting beliefs within the Dempster-Shafer belief theory, and represents an alternative to the traditional Dempster's rule. This paper describes how the consensus operator can be applied to dogmatic conflicting opinions, i.e., when the degree of conflict is very high. It overcomes shortcomings of Dempster's rule and other operators that have been proposed for combining possibly conflicting beliefs.
--B
Introduction
Ever since the publication of Shafer's book A Mathematical Theory of Evidence [1]
there has been continuous controversy around the so-called Dempster's rule. The
purpose of Dempster's rule is to combine two conflicting beliefs into a single belief
that reflects the two conflicting beliefs in a fair and equal way.
Dempster's rule has been criticised mainly because highly conflicting beliefs tend
to produce counterintuitive results. This has been formulated in the form of examples
by Zadeh [2] and Cohen [3] among others. The problem with Dempster's
rule is due to its normalisation which redistributes conflicting belief masses to non-conflicting
beliefs, and thereby tends to eliminate any conflicting characteristics
in the resulting belief mass distribution. An alternative called the non-normalised
Dempster's rule proposed by Smets [4] avoids this particular problem by allocating
all conflicting belief masses to the empty set. Smets explains this by arguing that
1 The work reported in this paper has been funded in part by the Co-operative Research
Centre for Enterprise Distributed Systems Technology (DSTC) through the Australian Federal
Government's CRC Programme (Department of Industry, Science & Resources).
Preprint of article published in Artificial Intelligence Journal, Vol.141/1-2 (2002), p.157-170
the presence of highly conflicting beliefs indicates that some possible event must
have been overlooked (the open world assumption) and therefore is missing in the
frame of discernment. The idea is that conflicting belief masses should be allocated
to this missing (empty) event. Smets has also proposed to interpret the amount of
mass allocated to the empty set as a measure of conflict between separate
beliefs [5].
In this paper we describe an alternative rule for combining conflicting belief functions
called the consensus operator. The consensus operator forms part of subjective
logic which is described in [6]. Our consensus operator is different from
Dempster's rule but has the same purpose; namely of combining possibly conflicting
beliefs. The definition of the consensus operator in [6] and earlier publications
does not cover combination of conflicting dogmatic beliefs, i.e. highly conflicting
beliefs. This paper extends the definition of the consensus operator to also cover
such cases. A comparison between the consensus operator and the two variants of
Dempster's rule is provided in the form of examples.
Subjective logic is a framework for artificial reasoning with uncertain beliefs which
for example can be applied to legal reasoning [7] and authentication in computer
networks [8]. In subjective logic, beliefs must be expressed on binary frames of dis-
cernment, and coarsening is necessary if the original frame of discernment is larger
than binary. Section 2 describes some basic elements from the Dempster-Shafer
theory as well as some new concepts related to coarsening. Section 3 describes the
opinion metric which is the binary belief representation used in subjective logic.
Section 4 describes the consensus operator which operates on opinions and section
5 provides a comparison between the consensus operator and the two variants of
Dempster's rule. A discussion of our results is provided in section 6.
Representing Uncertain Beliefs
The first step in applying the Dempster-Shafer belief model [1] is to define a set of
possible states of a given system, called the frame of discernment denoted by .
The powerset of , denoted by 2  , contains all possible unions of the sets in
including  itself. Elementary sets in a frame of discernment  will be called
atomic sets because they do not contain subsets. It is assumed that only one atomic
set can be true at any one time. If a set is assumed to be true, then all supersets are
considered true as well.
An observer who believes that one or several sets in the powerset of  might be
true can assign belief masses to these sets. Belief mass on an atomic set x 2 2  is
interpreted as the belief that the set in question is true. Belief mass on a non-atomic
set x 2 2  is interpreted as the belief that one of the atomic sets it contains is
true, but that the observer is uncertain about which of them is true. The following
definition is central in the Dempster-Shafer theory.
be a frame of discernment. If with
each subset x 2 2  a number m (x) is associated such
2:
3:
then m is called a belief mass assignment 2 on , or BMA for short. For each
subset x 2 2  , the number m (x) is called the belief mass 3 of x.
A belief mass m (x) expresses the belief assigned to the set x and does not express
any belief in subsets of x in particular. A BMA is called dogmatic if m
(see [5] p.277) because the total amount of belief mass has been committed.
In contrast to belief mass, the belief in a set must be interpreted as an observer's
total belief that a particular set is true. The next definition from the Dempster-Shafer
theory will make it clear that belief in x not only depends on belief mass assigned
to x but also on belief mass assigned to subsets of x.
be a frame of discernment, and let m be
a BMA on . Then the belief function corresponding with m is the function b :
defined by:
Similarly to belief, an observer's disbelief must be interpreted as the total belief
that a set is not true. The following definition is ours.
Definition 3 (Disbelief Function) Let  be a frame of discernment, and let m be
a BMA on . Then the disbelief function corresponding with m is the function
defined by:
The disbelief in x is equal to the belief in x, and corresponds to the doubt of x in
Shafer's book. However, we choose to use the term `disbelief' because we feel that
Called basic probability assignment in [1]
3 Called basic probability number in [1]
for example the case when it is certain that a set is false can better be described by
'total disbelief' than by `total doubt'. Our next definition expresses uncertainty regarding
a given set as the sum of belief masses on supersets or on partly overlapping
sets of x.
Definition 4 (Uncertainty Function) Let  be a frame of discernment, and let m
be a BMA on . Then the uncertainty function corresponding with m is the function
defined by:
y 6 x
The sum of the belief, disbelief and uncertainty functions is equal to the sum of
the belief masses in a BMA which according to Definition 1 is equal to 1. The
following equality is therefore trivial to prove:
For the purpose of deriving probability expectation values of sets in 2  , we will
show that knowing the relative number of atomic sets is also needed in addition to
belief masses. For any particular set x the atomicity of x is the number of atomic
sets it contains, denoted by jxj. If  is a frame of discernment, the atomicity of
is equal to the total number of atomic sets. Similarly, if x; y 2 2  then the overlap
between x and y relative to y can be expressed in terms of atomic sets. Our next
definition captures this idea of relative atomicity:
(Relative Atomicity) Let  be a frame of discernment and let x; y 2
2  . Then the relative atomicity of x to y is the function a defined by:
jx \ yj
It can be observed that (x \ and that (y  x) )
1). In all other cases the relative atomicity will be a value between 0
and 1. The relative atomicity of an atomic set to its frame of discernment, denoted
by a(x=), can simply be written as a(x). If nothing else is specified, the relative
atomicity of a set then refers to the frame of discernment.
A frame of discernment with a corresponding BMA can be used to determine a
probability expectation value for any given set. The greater the relative atomicity of
a particular set the more the uncertainty function will contribute to the probability
expectation value of that set.
Definition 6 (Probability Expectation) Let  be a frame of discernment with BMA
, then the probability expectation function corresponding with m is the function
defined by:
y
Definition 6 is equivalent to the pignistic probability justified by e.g. Smets &
Kennes in [9], and corresponds to the principle of insufficient reason: a belief mass
assigned to the union of n atomic sets is split equally among these n sets.
In order to simplify the representation of uncertain beliefs for particular sets we
will define a focused frame of discernment which will always be binary, i.e. it will
only contain (focus on) one particular set and its complement. The focused frame of
discernment and the corresponding BMA will for the set in focus produce the same
belief, disbelief and uncertainty functions as the original frame of discernment and
BMA. The definitions of the focused frame of discernment and the focused BMA
are given below.
Definition 7 (Focused Frame of Discernment) Let  be a frame of discernment
and let x 2 2  . The frame of discernment denoted by e
x containing only x and x,
where x is the complement of x in  is then called a focused frame of discernment
with focus on x.
Definition 8 (Focused Belief Mass Assignment) Let  be a frame of discernment
with BMA m where b(x), d(x) and u(x) are the belief, disbelief and uncertainty
functions of x in 2  , and let a(x) be the real relative atomicity of x in . Let e
x be
the focused frame of discernment with focus on x. The corresponding focused BMA
and relative atomicity a e  x (x) on e
x is defined according to:
a e  x
u(x) for u(x) 6= 0
a e  x
(2)
When the original frame of discernment  contains more than 2 atomic sets, the
relative atomicity of x in the focused frame of discernment e
x is in general different
from 1although e
x per definition contains exactly two sets. The focused relative
atomicity of x in e
x is defined so that the probability expectation value of x is equal
in  and e
x , and the expression for a e  x (x) can be determined by using Definition 6.
A focused relative atomicity represents the weighted average of relative atomicities
of x to all other sets in function of their uncertainty belief mass. Working with
focused BMAs makes it possible to represent the belief function of any set in 2
using a binary frame of discernment, making the notation very compact.
3 The Opinion Space
For purpose of having a simple and intuitive representation of uncertain beliefs we
will define a 3-dimensional metric called opinion but which will contain a 4th redundant
parameter in order to allow a simple and compact definition of the consensus
operator. It is assumed that all beliefs are held by individuals and the notation
will therefore include belief ownership. Let for example agent A express his or
her beliefs about the truth of set x in some frame of discernment. We will denote
A's belief, disbelief, uncertainty and relative atomicity functions as b A
x , d A
x , u A
x and
a A
x respectively, where the superscript indicates belief ownership and the subscript
indicates the belief target.
Definition 9 (Opinion Metric) Let  be a binary frame of discernment containing
sets x and x, and let m be the BMA on  held by A where b A
x , d A
x and u A
A's belief, disbelief and uncertainty functions on x in 2  respectively, and let a A
x
represent the relative atomicity of x in . Then A's opinion about x, denoted by
x , is the tuple:
The three coordinates (b; d; u) are dependent through Eq.(1) so that one is redun-
dant. As such they represent nothing more than the traditional Bel (Belief) and Pl
(Plausibility) pair of Shaferian belief theory, where Bel = b and
ever, using (Bel, Pl) instead of (b; d; u) would have produced unnecessary complexity
in the definition of the consensus operator below. Eq.(1) defines a triangle
that can be used to graphically illustrate opinions as shown in Fig.1.
UncertaintyProbability axis
a
E(
x
Projector
Director
Fig. 1. Opinion triangle with ! x as example
As an example the position of the opinion
as a point in the triangle. The horizontal base line between the belief and
disbelief corners is called the probability axis. As shown in the figure, the probability
expectation value 0:7 and the relative atomicity can be
graphically represented as points on the probability axis. The line joining the top
corner of the triangle and the relative atomicity point is called the director. The
projector is parallel to the director and passes through the opinion point ! x . Its intersection
with the probability axis defines the probability expectation value which
otherwise can be computed by the formula of Definition 6. Opinions situated on the
probability axis are called dogmatic opinions, representing traditional probabilities
without uncertainty. The distance between an opinion point and the probability axis
can be interpreted as the degree of uncertainty. Opinions situated in the left or right
corner, i.e. with either are called absolute opinions, corresponding
to TRUE or FALSE states in binary logic.
4 The Consensus Operator
The consensus opinion of two possibly conflicting argument opinions is an opinion
that reflects both argument opinions in a fair and equal way, i.e. when two observers
have beliefs about the truth of x resulting from distinct pieces of evidence about x,
the consensus operator produces a consensus belief that combines the two separate
beliefs into one. If for example a process can produce two outcomes x and x, and
A and B have observed the process over two different time intervals so that they
have formed two independent opinions about the likelihood of x to occur, then the
consensus opinion is the belief about x to occur which a single agent would have
had after having observed the process during both periods.
x
x ) be opinions respectively
held by agents A and B about the same state x, and let
x u A
x .
When u A
0, the relative dogmatism between ! A
x is defined by
so
that
x =u A
x . Let ! A;B
x ) be the opinion such that:
for
1: b A;B
x u A
x )=
2: d A;B
x u A
x )=
3: u A;B
x )=
4: a A;B
x u A
x (a A
x )u A
x
for
1: b A;B
b A
x
2: d A;B
d A
x
3: u A;B
4: a A;B
a A
x
x is called the consensus opinion between ! A
x , representing an
imaginary agent [A; B]'s opinion about x, as if that agent represented both A and
B. By using the symbol '' to designate this operator, we define ! A;B
It is easy to prove that the consensus operator is both commutative and associative
which means that the order in which opinions are combined has no importance. It
can also be shown that the consensus opinion satisfies Eq.(1), i.e. that b A;B
x +d A;B
independence must be assumed, which for example translates
into not allowing an agent's opinion to be counted more than once, and also that
that the argument opinions must be based on distinct pieces of evidence.
Briefly said, the consensus operator is obtained by mapping beta-probability density
functions to the opinion space. It can be shown that posteriori probabilities of
binary events can be represented by the beta-pdf (see e.g. [10] p.298). The beta-
family of density functions is a continuous family of functions indexed by the two
parameters  and . The parameters of beta-distributions, which for example can
represent the number of observations of events, can be combined by simple addi-
tion, and thus a way of combining evidence emerges. We refer the reader to [6]
for a detailed description of how the consensus operator can be derived from the
combination of beta-distributions.
The consensus of two totally uncertain opinions results in a new totally uncertain
opinion, although the relative atomicity is not well defined in that case. Two observers
would normally agree on the relative atomicity, and in case of two totally
uncertain opinions we require that they do so, so that the consensus relative atomicity
for example can be defined as a A;B
x .
In [6] it is incorrectly stated that the consensus operator can not be applied to two
dogmatic opinions, i.e. when The definition above rectifies this so that
dogmatic opinions can be combined. This result is obtained by computing the limits
of (b A;B
x ) as u A
using the relative dogmatism between A
and B defined by
x =u A
x . This result makes the consensus operator more
general than Dempster's rule because the latter excludes the combination of totally
conflicting beliefs.
In order to understand the meaning of the relative dogmatism
, it is useful to
consider a process with possible outcomes fx; xg that produces
times as many x
as x. For example when throwing a fair dice and some mechanism makes sure that
A only observes the outcome of 'six' and B only observes the outcome of `one',
'two', `three', 'four' and `five', then A will think the dice only produces 'six' and
will think that the dice never produces 'six'. After infinitely many observations
A and B will have the conflicting dogmatic opinions ! A
6 ) and
respectively. On the average B observes 5 times more
events than A so that B remains 5 times more dogmatic than A as u A
meaning that the relative dogmatism between A and B is
1=5. By combining
their opinions according to the case where inserting
the value of
, the combined opinion about obtaining a 'six' with the dice can be
computed as ! A;B
6 ), which is exactly what one would expect.
In the last example, the relative dogmatism was finite and non-zero, but it is also
possible to imagine extreme relative dogmatisms, e.g.
an infinitesimal (i.e. close to zero). This is related to the concept of epsilon belief
functions which has been applied to default reasoning by Benferhat et al. in [11].
Epsilon belief functions are opinions with b; d; u 2 f0; "; 1 "g, i.e. opinions
situated close to a corner of the triangle in Fig.1. Without going into details it can
be shown that some properties of extreme relative dogmatisms seem suitable for
default reasoning. For example, when the relative dogmatism between A and B
is infinite (
the consensus opinion is equal to A's argument opinion
x ), and when the relative dogmatism is infinitesimal (
the
consensus opinion is equal to B's argument opinion (! A;B
x ). However, with
three agents A, B, and C where
the consensus opinion
x is non-conclusive as long as the relationship between " 1 and " 2 is unknown.
5 Comparing the Consensus Operator with Dempster's Rule
This section describes three examples that compare Dempster's rule, the non-normalised
Dempster's rule and the consensus operator. The definition of Dempster's rule and
the non-normalised rule is given below. In order to distinguish between the consensus
operator and Dempster's rule, the latter will be denoted by  0 .
Definition 11 Let  be a frame of discernment, and let m A
be BMAs on
. Then m A
is a function m A
1: m A
(z) K ; and
2: m A
(z)
(z) and K 6= 1 in Dempster's rule, and where
in the non-normalised version.
5.1 Example 1: Dogmatic Conflicting Beliefs
We will start with the well known example that Zadeh [2] used for the purpose
of criticising Dempster's rule. Smets [4] used the same example in defence of the
non-normalised version of Dempster's rule.
Suppose that we have a murder case with three suspects; Peter, Paul and Mary and
two highly conflicting testimonies. Table 1 gives the
witnesses' belief masses in Zadeh's example and the resulting belief masses after
applying Dempster's rule, the non-normalised rule and the consensus operator.
Non-normalised Consensus
rule Dempster's rule operator
Peter
Mary

Table
Comparison of operators in Zadeh's example
Because the frame of discernment in Zadeh's example is ternary, a focused binary
frame of discernment must be derived in order to apply the consensus operator. The
focused opinions are:
The above opinions are all dogmatic, and the case where
must be invoked. Because of the symmetry between W 1 and W 2 we determine the
relative dogmatism between W 1 and W 2 to be
1. The consensus opinion values
and their corresponding probability expectation values can then be computed as:
Peter
Mary
The column for the consensus operator in Table 1 is obtained by taking the 'belief'
coordinate from the consensus opinions above. Dempster's rule selects the least
suspected by both witnesses as the guilty. The non-normalised version acquits all
the suspects and indicates that the guilty has to be someone else. This is explained
by Smets [4] with the so-called open world interpretation of the frame of discern-
ment. In [5] Smets also proposed to interpret m(;) (= 0.9999 in this case) as a
measure of the degree of conflict between the argument beliefs.
The consensus operator respects conflicting beliefs by giving the average of beliefs
to Peter and Mary, whereas the non-conflicting beliefs on Paul is kept unal-
tered. This result is consistent with classical estimation theory (see e.g. comments
to Smets [4] p.278 by M.R.B.Clarke) which is based on taking the average of probability
estimates when all estimates have equal weight.
5.2 Example 2: Conflicting Beliefs with Uncertainty
In the following example uncertainty is introduced by allocating some belief to the
set Maryg. Table 2 gives the modified BMAs and the results of
applying the rules.
Non-normalised Consensus
rule Dempster's rule operator
Peter 0.98 0.00 0.490 0.0098 0.492
Mary

Table
Comparison of operators after introducing uncertainty in Zadeh's example
The frame of discernment in this modified example is again a ternary, and a focused
binary frame of discernment must be derived in order to apply the consensus
operator. The focused opinions are given below:
The consensus opinion values and their corresponding probability expectation values
are:
Peter
Mary
The column for the consensus operator in Table 2 is obtained by taking the 'be-
lief' coordinate from the consensus opinions above. When uncertainty is intro-
duced, Dempster's rule corresponds well with intuitive human judgement. The
non-normalised Dempster's rule however still indicates that none of the suspects
are guilty and that new suspects must be found, or alternatively that the degree of
conflict is still high, despite introducing uncertainty.
The consensus operator corresponds well with human judgement and gives almost
the same result as Dempster's rule, but not exactly. Note that the values resulting
from the consensus operator have been rounded off after the third decimal.
The belief masses resulting from Dempster's rule in Table 2 add up to 1. The 'be-
lief' parameters of the consensus opinions resulting from the consensus operator
do not add up to 1 because they are actually taken from 3 different focused frames
of discernment, but the following holds:
Peter
Mary
5.3 Example 3: Harmonious Beliefs
The previous example seemed to indicate that Dempster's rule and the consensus
operator give very similar results in the presence of uncertainty. However, this is
not always the case as illustrated by the following example. Let two
and W 2 have equal beliefs about the truth of x. The agents' BMAs and the results
of applying the rules are give in Table 3.
Non-normalised Consensus
rule Dempster's rule operator

Table
Comparison of operators i.c.o. equal beliefs
The consensus opinion about x and the corresponding probability expectation value
are:
It is difficult to give an intuitive judgement of these results. It can be observed that
Dempster's rule and the non-normalised version produce equal results because the
witnesses' BMAs are non-conflicting. The two variants of Dempster's rule amplify
the combined belief twice as much as the consensus operator and this difference
needs an explanation. The consensus operator produces results that are consistent
with statistical analysis (see [6]) and in the absence of other criteria for intuitive
or formal judgement, this constitutes a strong argument in favour of the consensus
operator.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
In addition to the three belief combination rules analysed here, numerous others
have been presented in the literature, e.g. the rule proposed by Yager [12] that
transfers conflicting belief mass m A
(y) to  whenever x \
the rule proposed by Dubois & Prade [13] that transfers conflicting belief mass
(y) to x[y whenever These rules are commutative, but unfortunately
they are not associative, which seems counterintuitive. Assuming that
beliefs from different sources should be treated in the same way, why should the
result depend on the order in which they are combined? After analysing the rules
of Dempster, Smets, Yager, Dubois & Prade as well as simple statistical average,
Murphy [14] rejects the rules of Yager and Dubois & Prade for their lack of as-
sociativity, and concludes that Dempster's rule performs best for its convergence
properties, accompanied by statistical average to warn of possible errors when the
degree of conflict is high. Our consensus operator seems to combine both the desirable
convergence properties of Dempster's rule when the degree of conflict is low,
and the natural average of beliefs when the degree of conflict is high. As mentioned
in Lef-evre et al. [15], Dempster's rule and it's non-normalised version require that
all belief sources are reliable, whereas Yager's and Dubois & Prade's rules require
that at least one of the belief sources is reliable for the result to be meaningful. The
consensus operator does not make any assumption about reliability of the belief
sources, but does of course not escape the 'garbage in, garbage out' principle.
An argument that could be used against our consensus operator, is that it does
not give any indication of possible belief conflict. Indeed, by looking at the result
only, it does not tell whether the original beliefs were in harmony or in conflict,
and it would have been nice if it did. A possible way to incorporate the degree of
conflict is to add an extra 'conflict' parameter. This could for example be the belief
mass assigned to ; in Smets' rule, which in the opinion notation can be defined
as c A;B
x d A
x where c A;B
1]. The consensus opinion with conflict
parameter would then be expressed as ! A;B
x ). The
conflict parameter would only be relevant for combined belief, and not for original
beliefs. A default value could for example indicate original belief, because
a default value could be misunderstood as indicating that a belief comes from
combined harmonious beliefs, even though it is an original belief.
Opinions can be derived by coarsening any frame of discernment and BMA through
the focusing process, where focusing on different states produces different opin-
ions. In this context it is in general not meaningful to relate belief, disbelief and
uncertainty functions from opinions that focus on different states even though the
opinions are derived from the same frame of discernment and belief mass assign-
ment. The only way to relate such opinions is through the probability expectation
value E(! x ) (which can also be written as E(x)), and this leads to interesting re-
sults. The proof of the following theorem can be found in [6].
Theorem 1 (Kolmogorov Axioms) Given a frame of discernment  with a BMA
m , the probability expectation function E with domain 2  satisfies:
1: E(x)  0 for all x
2:
3: If x are pairwise disjoint, then E([ j2  j
This shows that probability theory can be built on top of belief theory through the
probability expectation value. As such belief functions should not be interpreted
as probabilities, instead there is a surjective (onto) mapping from the belief space
to the probability space. Belief and possibility functions have been interpreted as
upper and lower probability bounds respectively (see e.g. Halpern & Fagin [16] and
de Cooman & Ayles [17]). Belief functions can be useful for estimating probability
values but not to set bounds, because the probability of a real event can never be
determined with absolute certainty, and neither can upper and lower bounds to it.
Our view is that probability always is a subjective notion, inasmuch as it is a 1-
dimensional belief measure felt by a given person facing a given event. Objective,
physical or real probability is a meaningless notion. This view is shared by e.g. de
Finetti [18]. In the same way, an opinion as defined here, is a 3-dimensional belief
measure felt by a given person facing a given event.
It has also been suggested to interpret belief functions as evidence (see e.g. Fagin
and Halpern [16]). Belief can result from evidence in the form of observing an event
or knowing internal properties of a system, or from more subjective and intangible
experience. Statistical evidence can for example be translated into belief functions,
as described in [6], and other types of evidence can be intuitively translated into
belief functions, but belief and evidence are not the same. We prefer to leave belief
functions as a distinct concept in its own right, and in general not try to interpret
them as anything else.
The opinion metric described here provides a simple and compact notation for beliefs
in the Shaferian belief model. We have presented an alternative to Dempster's
rule which is consistent with probabilistic and statistical analysis, and which seems
more suitable for combining highly conflicting beliefs as well as for combining
harmonious beliefs, than Dempster's rule and its non-normalised version. The fact
that a binary focused frame of discernment must be derived in order to apply the
consensus operator puts no restriction on its applicability. The resulting beliefs for
each event can still be compared and can form the basis for decision making.



--R

A Mathematical Theory of Evidence.
Review of Shafer's A Mathematical Theory of Evidence.
An expert system framework for non-monotonic reasoning about probabilistic assumptions
Belief functions.
The transferable belief model for quantified belief representation.
A Logic for Uncertain Probabilities.
Legal Reasoning with Subjective Logic.
An Algebra for Assessing Trust in Certification Chains.
The transferable belief model.
Statistical Inference.
Belief Functions and Default Reasoning.
On the Dempster-Shafer framework and new combination rules
Representation and combination of uncertainty with belief functions and possibility measures.
Combining belief functions when evidence conflicts.
A generic framework for resolving the conflict in the combination of belief structures.
Two views of belief: Belief as generalised probability and belief as evidence.
Supremum preserving upper probabilities.
The value of studying subjective evaluations of probability.
--TR
On the Dempster-Shafer framework and new combination rules
Two views of belief
The transferable belief model
Supremum preserving upper probabilities
Combining belief functions when evidence conflicts
Belief functions and default reasoning
A logic for uncertain probabilities

--CTR
Audun Jsang , Daniel Bradley , Svein J. Knapskog, Belief-based risk analysis, Proceedings of the second workshop on Australasian information security, Data Mining and Web Intelligence, and Software Internationalisation, p.63-68, January 01, 2004, Dunedin, New Zealand
Audun Jsang, Probabilistic logic under uncertainty, Proceedings of the thirteenth Australasian symposium on Theory of computing, p.101-110, January 30-February 02, 2007, Ballarat, Victoria, Australia
Audun Jsang , Ross Hayward , Simon Pope, Trust network analysis with subjective logic, Proceedings of the 29th Australasian Computer Science Conference, p.85-94, January 16-19, 2006, Hobart, Australia
Weiru Liu, Analyzing the degree of conflict among belief functions, Artificial Intelligence, v.170 n.11, p.909-924, August 2006
Philippe Smets, Analyzing the combination of conflicting belief functions, Information Fusion, v.8 n.4, p.387-412, October, 2007
