--T
Data Semantics for Improving Retrieval Performance of Digital News Video Systems.
--A
AbstractWe propose a novel four-step hybrid approach for retrieval and composition of video newscasts based on information contained in different metadata sets. In the first step, we use conventional retrieval techniques to isolate video segments from the data universe using segment metadata. In the second step, retrieved segments are clustered into potential news items using a dynamic technique sensitive to the information contained in the segments. In the third step, we apply a transitive search technique to increase the recall of the retrieval system. In the final step, we increase recall performance by identifying segments possessing creation-time relationships. A quantitative analysis of the performance of the process on a newscast composition shows an increase in recall by 59 percent over the conventional keyword-based search technique used in the first step.
--B
Introduction
A challenging problem in video-based applications is achieving rapid search and retrieval of content
from a large corpus. Because of the computational cost of real-time image-based analysis for searching
such large data sets we pursue techniques based on off-line or semi-automated classification,
indexing, and cataloging. Therein lies the need for "bridge" techniques that have rich semantics
for representing motion-image-based concepts and content, yet are supported by fast and efficient
algorithms for real-time search and retrieval. At this intersection we have been investigating techniques
for video concept representation and manipulation. In particular we have sought the goal
of automatic composition of news stories, or newscasts based on an archive of digital video with
supporting metadata.
In The 8th IFIP 2.6 Working Conference on Database Semantics, Rotorua, New Zealand, January 1999. This
work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IRI-9502702.

Introduction

Field Scene
Interview

Figure

1: Scenes from an Example News Item
To retrieve video clips we need to process video data so that they are in clip-queryable form.
We need to extract information from video clips, represent the information in a manner that can be
used to process queries, and provide a mechanism for formulating queries. Presentation of discrete
clips matching a query is not engaging. After retrieval, composition of these clips towards a theme
(e.g., a news topic) adds value to the presentation.
The general process in automatic composition of news (or any) digital video towards a theme
is based on selecting desired video data within some domain (e.g., sports), filtering redundant
data, clustering similar data in sub-themes, and composing the retrieved data into a logical and
thematically-correct order [1]. All of these tasks are possible if we have sufficient information
about the content of the video data. Therefore, information (metadata) acquisition and techniques
to match, filter, and compose video data are critical to the performance of a video composition
system. The quality of data retrieved depends on the type of metadata and the matching technique
used.
However, news audio and video (and associated closed-captioning) do not necessarily possess
correlated concepts (Fig. 1). For example, it is common in broadcast news items that once an
event is introduced, in subsequent segments the critical keywords are alluded to and not specifically
mentioned (e.g., Table 1, the name Eddie Price is mentioned only in the third scene). Segments can
share other keywords and can be related transitively. If a search is performed on a person's name,
then all related segments are not necessarily retrieved. Similarly, related video segments can have
different visuals. It is not prudent to rely on a single source of information about the segments in
retrieval and composition (e.g., transcripts or content descriptions). The information tends to vary
among the segments related to a news item. Therefore, we require new techniques to retrieve all
the related segments or to improve the recall [16] of the video composition system.
In this paper, we propose a transitive video composition and retrieval approach that improves

Table

1: Example Transcripts of Several Segments

Introduction

Field Scene Interview
A ONE-YEAR-OLD A MAN EMERGED DARYN: JUST IN THE
BABY BOY IS SAFE FROM HIS CAR AT RIGHT PLACE AT
WITH HIS MOTHER THE U.S. MEXICAN RIGHT TIME
THIS MORNING, THE BORDER, CARRYING HIS ESPECIALLY FOR THIS
DAY AFTER HIS OWN LITTLE SON, AND A LITTLE BABY. CAN
FATHER USED HIM AS KNIFE. WITNESSES YOU TELL US WHAT
A HOSTAGE. POLICE WITNESSES SAY HE HELD YOU WERE SAYING
SAY IT WAS A THE KNIFE TO HIS SON, TO THE MAN
TO MAKE IT ACROSS AND IT ALL EDDIE PRICE AND
BORDER TO AVOID LIVE TV. ON BACK TO YOU?
ARREST. CNN'S ANNE OFFICIALS AND POLICE I JUST ASSURED HIM
MCDERMOTT HAS THE FROM BOTH SIDES OF THAT THE BABY
DRAMATIC STORY. THE BORDER. WOULD BE OKAY.

Table

2: Content Metadata
Entity Tangible object that are part of a video stream.
The entities can be further sub-classified,
(e.g., persons, and vehicles).
Location Place shown in video.
(e.g., place, city, and country).
Event Center or focus of a news item.
Category Classification of news items.
recall. That is, once a query is matched against unstructured metadata, the components retrieved
are again used as queries to retrieve additional video segments with information belonging to the
same news item. The recall can be further enhanced if the union of different metadata sets is used
to retrieve all segments of a news item (Fig. 2). However, the union operation does not always
guarantee full recall as a response to a query. This is because no segment belonging to a particular
instance of a news item may be present among the segments acquired after the transitive search
(data acquired from different sources or over a period of time containing data about the same news
event).
This work is an outcome of our observations of generative semantics in the different forms of
information associated with news video data. The information can be in the visuals or in the audio
associated with the video. We also study the common bond among the segments belonging to a
single news item. The composition should possess a smooth flow of information with no redundancy.
Annotated metadata are the information extracted from video data. In our previous work
[3, 12] we have classified annotated metadata that are required for a newscast composition as content
metadata and structural metadata. The content metadata organize unstructured information
within video data (i.e., objects and interpretations within video data or across structural elements).
Some of the information extracted from news video data is shown in Table 2. Information such as
the objects present in visuals, the category of a news item, and the main concept (focus or center
depicted by the new item are stored as metadata. The structural metadata organize linear
video data for a news item into a hierarchy [2] of structural objects as shown in Table 3.

Table

3: Structural Metadata
1. Headline Synopsis of the news event.
2.

Introduction

Anchor introduces the story.
3. Body Describes the existing situation.
a. Speech Formal presentation of views
without any interaction
from a reporter.
b. Comment Informal interview of people
at the scene in the
presence of wild sound.
c. Wild Scene Current scenes from the
location.
d. Interview One or more people answering
formal structured questions.
e. Enactment Accurate scenes of situations
that are already past.
4. Enclose Contains the current closing lines.
The development of the proposed hybrid video data retrieval technique is based the availability
of segment metadata. We have explored the use of these data for the following reasons.
ffl By utilizing both annotated metadata and closed-caption metadata, precision of the composition
system increases. For example, keywords of "Reno, Clinton, fund, raising," if
matched against closed-caption metadata, can retrieve information about a place called
"Reno" (Nevada). Therefore, annotated metadata can be used to specify that only a person
called should be matched. The results from annotated and closed-captioned
searching can be intersected for better precision.
ffl Recall of a keyword-based search improves if more keywords associated with an event are
used. Transcripts provide enriched but unstructured metadata, and can also be used to
improve recall. Utilizing transcripts increase the number of keywords in a query; therefore, in
some cases precision of the results will be compromised (irrelevant data are retrieved). The
transitive search technique is based on this principle (Section 4).
ffl If the relationships among segments of a news event are stored, recall of a system can be
increased. For example, if news about "Clinton" is retrieved, then related segment types can
be retrieved even if the word "Clinton" is not in them.
As a result of the above observations, we propose a hybrid approach that is based on the union
of metadata sets and keyword vector-based clustering as illustrated in Fig. 2. The precision of
vector-based clustering improves by using multiple indexing schemes and multiple sets of metadata
(annotated and unstructured). Unstructured data describe loosely organized data such as free-form
text of the video transcripts.
The organization of the remainder of this paper is as follows: In Section 2 we describe existing
techniques for video data retrieval. In Section 3 we discuss metadata required for query processing,
classification of annotated metadata, and the proposed query processing technique. In Section 4 we
Query
Semi-Structured
Objects
Clustered
Semi-Structured
Objects
Retrieve
Corresponding
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Increase
Recall
Composition/
Presentation
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Matched
Semi-Structured
Objects ID
Clustered
Object ID
Transitive Search/
Union Operation
Items
User Query
Search

Figure

2: Process Diagram for Newscast Video Composition
present an analysis of the proposed approach. In Section 5 we present of our observations. Section
6 concludes the paper.
Related Work in Video Information Retrieval
A variety of approaches have been proposed for the retrieval of video data. They can be divided into
annotation-metadata-based, transcript-metadata-based, and hybrid-metadata-based techniques. Each
is described below.
For annotation-based techniques, manual or automatic methods are used for extraction of information
contained in video data. Image processing is commonly used for information extraction
in the automatic techniques. Techniques include automatic partitioning of video based on information
within video data [4], extraction of camera and object motion [5, 18], and object, face,
texture, visual text identification [6, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17]. The metadata describing large digital
video libraries can also be extracted off-line and stored in a database for fast query processing and
retrieval [6].
Transcripts associated with video data can provide an additional source of metadata associated
with video segments. Brown et al. [8] use transcript-metadata to deliver pre-composed news data.
Wachman [19] correlates transcripts with the scripts of situation comedies. The Informedia project
[20] uses a hybrid-metadata approach to extract video segments for browsing using both the visual
and transcript metadata.
In the above works, keyword searching is either used to retrieve a pre-assembled news item
or the segments associated with the query keywords. In this work, our objective is to search

Table

4: Symbols Used to Define the Retrieval Technique
Symbols Descriptions
s A video segment
S Universe of video segments
N Size of the universe S
binary relationship on S for transitive search
Ru A binary relationship on S for related segment search
Frequency of a concept (term) i in unstructured metadata
Number of unstructured metadata components with term i
weight assigned to a concept i for query match
Final weight assigned to a concept i for query match
Final weight assigned to a concept i for transitive search
q A query
Sq A set of segments returned as a result of a query
b) The similarity distance between two sets of keywords
QS A subset of Sq
threshold
cluster
query comprised of unstructured metadata component
segment retrieved as a result of a query q(s)
S q(s) Set of segments s t retrieved as a result of a query q(s)
extended cluster CL i resulting from a transitive search
Sa A candidate set resulting from cluster TCL i
for segments that belong to the various instances of the same event and to cover various time
periods (e.g., retrieve information about Albright's trip to the Middle East). Therefore, we seek
to maximize the availability of information to support the creation of a cohesive video piece. For
this purpose we require, in addition to the the segments matching a query, any segments that are
related via a transitive or structural relationship. In this manner, segments belonging to various
instances of a news event can be merged to create a new composition. Our technique uses a four-step
approach applied to both annotation-based and transcript-based (unstructured) metadata. We
use a transitive search on transcripts and the union operation on structural metadata to retrieve
related video segments.
3 The Proposed Four-Step Hybrid Technique
The four-step hybrid retrieval technique is based on establishing transitive relationships among
segment transcripts and the use of annotated metadata. After introducing our terminology (symbols
used throughout the paper are summarized in Table 4), we describe the different types of metadata
and how they are used to support the four-step process.
3.1 Preliminaries
Metadata described in this paper include unstructured metadata, such as free-form text and annotation
metadata. The former is used for transitive search. The latter is comprised of content
metadata and structural metadata.
Unstructured Metadata and Transitivity Transcripts originating from closed-caption data
(audio transcripts), when available, are associated with video segments when the segments enter
the content universe S. These transcripts comprise the unstructured metadata for each segment.
Unstructured metadata are used for indexing and forming keyword vectors for each semi-structured
metadata segment. Indexing is the process of assigning appropriate terms to a component
(document) for its representation. Transitivity on the unstructured data is defined below.
Let R f define a binary relationship f on the universal set of video segments S (i.e., (s a
R f () s a is similar to s b ). If similarity distance, defined as d(s a ; s b ) for segments s a and s b , is
greater than an established value then the two segments are considered to be similar. The transitive
search satisfies the following property (for all s a 2
Therefore, in a transitive search we first match a query with unstructured metadata in the
universe S. The results are applied as a query to retrieve additional unstructured metadata (tran-
scripts) and associated segments, increasing the the recall of the process.
Annotated Metadata Annotated metadata consist of content and structural metadata as described
in Section 1. Structural metadata exist if segments are annotated as such when they enter
the segment universe S, either as video shot at a single event (e.g., a sporting event) or as decomposed
segments originating from preassembled news items (as is the case for our dataset). We call
such segments siblings if they posses either of these relationships.
A shortcoming of the aforementioned transitive search is that it may not retrieve all segments
related via siblings. This can be achieved by the following.
Let R u define a binary relationship u on the universal set S (i.e., (s a
are part of the same news event). The final step expands the set of segments as a union operation
as follows:
S a / S a [ fs b j 9s a 2 S a : (s a
where, S a represents the candidate set of segments used as a pool to generate the final video
piece (or composition set) [1]

Table

5: Sample Unstructured Metadata
.videoFile:
d65.mps
Justice correspondent Pierre Thomas looks at the long-awaited decision.
After months of intense pressure, attorney general Janet Reno has made
a series of decisions sure to ignite a new round of political warfare.
Regarding fund raising telephone calls by Mr. Clinton at the White
House: no independent counsel. On vice president Gore's fund raising
calls: no independent counsel. Controversial democratic campaign
fund-raiser Johnny Chung has alleged he donated 25,000 to O'Leary's
favorite charity in exchange for a meeting between O'Leary and a
Chinese business associate. Three calls for an independent counsel.
All three rejected.
Hierarchical structure of related segments is stored as structural metadata that are utilized in
the proposed hybrid retrieval technique (Table 3).
3.2 Segment Keyword Analysis and Weighting
We use text indexing and retrieval techniques proposed by Salton [16] and implemented in SMART
[9] for indexing the unstructured metadata. To improve recall and precision we use two sets of
indices, each using different keyword/term weighing. In the remainder of the paper we use s
interchangeably to represent a video segment or its associated unstructured metadata. The similarity
distance of a segment with a query or a segment is measured by the associated unstructured
metadata.
The selection process is comprised of an initial segment weighting followed by a clustering step.
Initial Segment Weighting Initially, a vector comprised of keywords and their frequency frequency
(term frequency tf) is constructed using the unstructured metadata of each segment without
stemming and without common words. The frequency of a term or keyword indicates the importance
of that term in the segment. Next, we normalize the tf in each vector with segment (document)
frequency in which the term appears by using Eq. 1.
log
where N is the number of segments in the collection, and N i represents the number of segments
to which term i is assigned. The above normalization technique assigns a relatively higher weight w 1 i
to a term that is present in smaller number of segments with respect to the complete unstructured
metadata. Finally, w 1 i is again normalized by the length of the vector (Eq. 2). Therefore, the
influence of segments with longer vectors or more keywords is limited.
(2)
Clustering and Transitive Weighting Here we use word stemming along with stop words to
make the search sensitive to variants of the same keyword. In segments belonging to a news item,
the same word can be used in multiple forms. Therefore, by stemming a word we achieve a better
match between segments belonging to the same news item. For the transitive search and clustering,
we use the complete unstructured metadata of a segment as a query, resulting in a large keyword
vector because we want only the keywords that have a high frequency to influence the matching
process. Therefore, we use a lesser degree of normalization (Eq. 3) as compared to the initial
segment weighting.

Table

Weight Assignment
barred
weapons 0.15533 2.50603
continues 0.31821 2.58237
sights 0.50471 4.04180
log

Table

6 shows a comparison of the weighting schemes for the same unstructured metadata.
The two concepts "Iraq" and "Iraqi" in the second scheme are treated as the same and hence the
concept "Iraq" gets a higher relative weight.
For the purpose of a query match we use the cosine similarity metric (Eq. proposed by Salton.
The metric measures the cosine or the measure of angle between two unstructured metadata segment
vectors. The product of the length of the two segment vectors divides the numerator in the cosine
metric. The longer length vectors produce small cosine similarity. In Eq. 4, n is the number of
terms or concepts in the universe.
cosine( ~
The proposed query processing technique is a bottom-up approach in which the search starts
from the unstructured metadata. We describe the details next.
3.3 The Selection Mechanism
The four-step selection mechanism is illustrated Fig. 2. A query enters the system as a string of
keywords. These keywords are matched against the indices created from the unstructured metadata.
The steps of this process are query matching, clustering the results, retrieval based on the transitive
search, and sibling identification. These are described below.
Query Matching This stage involves matching of a user-specified keyword vector with the available
unstructured metadata. In this stage we use indices that are obtained as a result of the initial
segment weighting discussed in the previous section. As the match is ranked-based, the segments
are retrieved in the order of reduced similarity. Therefore, we need to establish a cut-off threshold
Semi-Structured
Objects
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Retrieve
Corresponding
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Object IDs
Semi-Structured
Metadata
Object ID
Semi-Structured
Metadata

Figure

3: Process Diagram of the Clustering Process
below which we consider all the segments to be irrelevant to the query. Unfortunately it is difficult
to establish an optimum and static query cut-off threshold for all types of queries as the similarity
values obtained for each query are different. For example, if we are presented with a query with
keywords belonging to multiple news items then the similarity value with individual object in the
corpus will be small. If the query has all keywords relevant to single news item then the similarity
value will be high. Because of this observation, we establish a dynamic query cut-off threshold
(D \Theta maxfd(s; q)g) and we set it as a percentage D of the highest match value maxfd(s; q)g
retrieved in set S q . The resulting set is defined as:
(D \Theta maxfd(s; q)g)g;
where s is the segment retrieved and d(s; q) is the function that measures the similarity distance
of segment s returned as a result of a query q.
Results Clustering In this stage, we cluster the retrieved segments with each group containing
yet more closely related segments (segments belonging to the same event). We use the indices
acquired as a result of the transitive scheme (Fig. 3). During the clustering process, if the similarity
(d(s a ; s b )) of the two segments is within a cluster cut-off threshold T c , then the two segments are
considered similar and have a high probability of belonging to the same news event. Likewise,
we match all segments and group the segments that have similarity value within the threshold,
resulting in a set
where CL i are a clusters (sets) each consisting of segments belonging to a single potential news
item. An algorithm for forming the clusters is as follows:
clusters
Results from the initial search
d 22
d 21 One of the formed clusters
Universe of segments (S)

Figure

4: Similarity Measure based on the Transitive Search
For each s a 2 QS Loop on segments in QS
segment to the cluster
For each s b 2 QS Loop on remaining segments
If d(s a Segments similar to the reference?
Assign segment to the cluster
QS Remove the elements from the set QS
cluster
This algorithm, although fast, is neither deterministic nor fair. A segment, once identified
as similar to the reference, is removed from consideration by the next segment in the set. An
alternative approach does not remove the similar element from QS but results in non-disjoint
clusters of segments. We are exploring heuristic solutions that encourage many clusters while
maintaining them as disjoint sets.
Transitive Retrieval We use the transitive search (Fig. 4). The transitive search increases
the number of segments that can be considered similar. During query matching, the search is
constrained to the similarity distance (d 1 ) and segments within this distance are retrieved. During
the transitive search we increase the similarity distance of the original query by increasing the
keywords in the query so that segments within a larger distance can be considered similar. In the
transitive search we use unstructured metadata of each object in every cluster as a query, q(s), and
retrieve similar segments. Again, we use item cut-off threshold that is used as a cut-off point for
retrieved results and the retained segments are included in the respective cluster.
Clustered
Semi-Structured
Objects
Retrieve
Related
Objects
Clustered
Object ID
Metadata
Annotated Object ID

Figure

5: Process Diagram for Retrieving Related Segments
The transitive cut-off threshold (T \Theta maxfd(s t ; q(s))g) is set as the percentage (T ) of the highest
similarity value retrieved maxfd(s t ; q(s))g. For example, the distances d
fall within the transitive cut-off thresholds of respective segments.
Consider a cluster CL formed in the results clustering step. The extended
cluster resulting from the transitive search can be defined as:
where, s t is a segment returned as a result of a transitive search of a segment s 2 CL i , d(s t ; q(s))
is the function that measures the similarity value of a segment s t to query q(s).
Sibling To further improve recall we use the structural metadata associated
with each news item to retrieve all other related objects (Fig. 5). Structural information about
each segment in a cluster is annotated; therefore, we have the information about all the other
segments that are structurally related to a particular segment. We take the set of segments that
are structurally related to a segment in a cluster and perform a union operation with the cluster.
Suppose is one of the cluster resulting from the third step then the final
set can be defined as:
Here R(s) is a set of segments related to the segments s. Likewise, the union operation can be
performed on the remaining clusters.
Using the four-step hybrid approach we are able to increase the recall of the system. Next we
discuss the quantitative analysis of the retrieval, clustering, and proposed transitive search process.
4 Analysis of the Proposed Hybrid Technique
We evaluated the performance of our technique based on 10 hours of news video data and its
corresponding closed-caption data acquired from the network sources. Our results and analysis of
the application of our techniques on this data set are described below.
Because the objective of our technique is to yield a candidate set of video segments suitable
for composition, we focus on the inclusion-exclusion metrics of recall and precision for evaluating
performance. However, subsequent rank-based refinement on the candidate set yields a composition
set that can be ordered for a final video piece [1].
The data set contains 335 distinct news items obtained from CNN, CBS, and NBC. The news
items comprise a universe of 1,731 segments, out of which 537 segments are relevant to the queries
executed. The most common stories are about bombing of an Alabama clinic, Oprah Winfrey's
trial, the Italian gondola accident, the UN and Iraq standoff, and the Pope's visit to Cuba. The
set of keywords used in various combinations in query formulation is as follows:
race relation cars solar planets falcon reno fund raising
oil boston latin school janet reno kentucky paducah rampage
santiago pope cuba shooting caffeine sid digital genocide
compaq guatemala student chinese adopted girls isreal netanyahu
isreal netanyahu arafat fda irradiation minnesota tobacco trial
oprah beef charged industry fire east cuba beach varadero
pope gay sailor super bowl john elway alabama clinic italy
gondola karla faye tuker death advertisers excavation Lebanon
louise woodword ted kaczynski competency
The number of keywords influences the initial retrieval process for each news item used in a
query. If more keywords pertain to one news item than the other news items, the system will tend
to give higher similarity values to the news items with more keywords. If the query cut-off threshold
is high (e.g., 50%), then the news items with weaker similarity matches will not cross the query
cut-off threshold (the highest match has a very high value). Therefore, if more than one distinct
news item is desired, a query should be composed with equal number of keywords for each distinct
news item. All the distinct retrieved news items will have approximately the same similarity value
with the query and will cross the query cut-off threshold.
For the initial experiment we set the query cut-off threshold to 40% of the highest value retrieved
as a result of a query, or 0:4 \Theta max(S q ). The transitive cut-off threshold is set to 20% of the highest
value retrieved as a result of unstructured metadata query, or 0:2 \Theta max(S q (s)). The results of 29
queries issued to the universe are shown in Fig. 6. Here we assume that all the segments matched
the query (we consider every retrieved segment a positive match as the segments contain some or
all keywords of the query).
Not all the keywords are common among the unstructured metadata of related segments, nor
are they always all present in the keywords of a query. Therefore, to enhance the query we use a
transitive search with a complete set of unstructured metadata. The probability of a match among
related segments increases with the additional keywords; however, this can reduce precision.
Query Number
Number
of
Segments
Segments in Initial Retrieval
Segments in Transitive Retrieval
Segments in Related Retrieval
Relevant Segments

Figure

Summary of Performance of Different Retrieval Techniques

Table

7: System Performance
Search Technique Total Segments Relevant Segments Recall Precision
Retrieved Retrieved
Query Match 137 137 25% 100%
Transitive Search 293 262 48% 89%
Sibling 517 517 96% 100%
As the result of the transitive search the recall of the system is increased to 48% from 25%
(another level of transitive search may increase it further). The precision of the results due to this
step is reduced to 89% from 100%.
A cause of such low recall of the initial retrieval and subsequent transitive search is the quality
of the unstructured metadata. Often this quality is low due to incomplete or missing sentences and
misspelled words (due to real-time human transcription).
Using the structural hierarchy (Section 3.1) we store the relationships among the segments
belonging to a news item. Therefore, if this information is exploited we can get an increase in
recall without a reduction in precision (as all segments belong to the same news item). In the last
step of the query processing we use structural metadata to retrieve these additional segments. As
observed from the above results, the recall is then increased to 96%. The remaining data are not
identified due to a failure of the prior transitive search.
Query Query
Object IDs
Metadata
Annotated Semi-Structured
Metadata
Matched
Object IDs
Matched
Semi-Structured
Object ID
Intersect
Matched
Object IDs

Figure

7: Process Diagram for Using Visual Metadata to Increase Precision
The results demonstrate that the combination of different retrieval techniques using different
sources of metadata can achieve better recall in a news video composition system as compared to
a the use of a single metadata set.
5 Observations
To emulate news items which encompass multiple foci (i.e., concepts from each are associated with
many segments), it becomes difficult to balance the clustering of segments for these foci with our
techniques. For example, the query "State of the Union Address" applied to our data set will yield
foci for the address and the intern controversy. However, there are many more segments present in
the data set for the intern controversy.
The query precision can also be increased by forming the intersection of the keywords from the
content and unstructured metadata sets.
For example, consider the scenario for composing a news item about Clinton speaking in the
White House about the stalemate in the Middle East. From the content metadata, we might be
able to retrieve segments of type Speech for this purpose. However, many of the returned segments
will not be associated with the topic. In this case an intersection of the query results of the salient
keywords applied to the unstructured metadata will give us the desired refinement (Fig. 7).
If a query retrieves a set of new items based on a date or period then access can be achieved
directly from the content metadata. For the process of composition, the broader set of metadata
need to be used.
6 Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a four-step hybrid retrieval technique that utilizes multiple metadata sets
to isolate video information for composition. The technique relies on the availability of annotated
metadata representing segment content and structure, as well as segment transcripts that are
unstructured. The retrieval applies a conventional approach to identifying segments using the
segment content metadata. This is followed by clustering into potential news items and then a
transitive search to increase recall. Finally, creation-time relationships expand the final candidate
set of video segments.
Experimental results on our data set indicate a significant increase in recall due to the transitive
search and the use of the creation-time relationships. Additional work will seek a heuristic clustering
algorithm that balances performance with fairness.



--R

"Automatic Composition Techniques for Video Production,"
"A Language to Support Automatic Composition of Newscasts,"
"A System for Customized News Delivery from Video Archives"
"A Survey of Technologies for Parsing and Indexing Digital Video,"
"Video Tomography; An Efficient Method for Camerawork Extraction and Motion Analysis,"
"Automatic Video Database Indexing and Retrieval,"
"Narrative Schema,"
"Automatic Content-Based Retrieval of Broadcast News,"
Implementation of the SMART Information Retrieval System.
"Visual Information Retrieval from Large Distributed Online Repositories,"
"Efficient Color Histogram Indexing for Quadratic Form Distance Functions,"
"The Use of Metadata for the Rendering of Personalized Video Delivery,"
"Video Abstracting,"
"Chabot: Retrieval from a Relational Database of Images,"
"Vision Texture for Annotation,"
Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval.
"Similarity is a Geometer,"
"Active Blobs,"
"A Video Browser that Learns by Example,"
"Intelligent Access to Digital Video: The Informedia Project,"
--TR
