Discovery of Regulatory Elements by a Computational Method for Phylogenetic Footprinting
Phylogenetic footprinting is a method for the discovery of regulatory elements in a set of orthologous regulatory regions from multiple species. It does so by identifying the best conserved motifs in those orthologous regions. We describe a computer algorithm designed specifically for this purpose, making use of the phylogenetic relationships among the sequences under study to make more accurate predictions. The program is guaranteed to report all sets of motifs with the lowest parsimony scores, calculated with respect to the phylogenetic tree relating the input species. We report the results of this algorithm on several data sets of interest. A large number of known functional binding sites are identified by our method, but we also find several highly conserved motifs for which no function is yet known.

One of the great challenges currently facing biologists is to understand the varied and complex mechanisms that regulate gene expression. We focus on one important aspect of this challenge, the identification of binding sites for the factors involved in such regulation. A number of computer algorithms have been proposed for the discovery of novel regulatory elements in nucleotide sequences. Most of these try to deduce the regulatory elements by considering the regulatory regions of several (putatively) coregulated genes from a single genome. Such algorithms search for overrepresented motifs in this collection of regulatory regions, these motifs being good candidates for regulatory elements. Examples of this approach include , , , , and . We adopt an orthogonal approach of deducing regulatory elements by considering orthologous regulatory regions of a single gene from several species. This approach is called "phylogenetic footprinting" . The simple premise underlying phylogenetic footprinting is that selective pressure causes functional elements to evolve at a slower rate than that of nonfunctional sequences. This means that unusually well conserved sites among a set of orthologous regulatory regions are excellent candidates for functional regulatory elements. This approach has proved successful for the discovery of regulatory elements for many genes, including epsilon-globin , gamma-globin , rbcL , cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator , tumor necrosis factor-alpha , and interleukin (IL)-4, IL-13, and IL-5 . See the review by  for more details. The same idea of using comparative analysis to identify conserved elements, but among only two or three species (particularly human and mouse), has recently become popular . The major advantage of phylogenetic footprinting over the single genome, multigene approach mentioned earlier is that the latter requires a reliable method for assembling the requisite collection of coregulated genes. In contrast, phylogenetic footprinting is capable of identifying regulatory elements specific even to a single gene, as long as they are sufficiently conserved across many of the species considered. Genome projects are quickly producing sequences from a wide variety of organisms, so the data necessary for phylogenetic footprinting are becoming increasingly available. The standard method that has been used for phylogenetic footprinting is to construct a global multiple alignment of the orthologous regulatory sequences and then to identify conserved regions in the alignment. A tool such as CLUSTALW  is appropriate for this purpose, as it can take advantage of knowledge of the phylogeny relating the species. To see why this approach to phylogenetic footprinting does not always work, consider typical lengths of the sequences involved. Regulatory elements tend to be quite short (5 to 20 nucleotides long) relative to the entire regulatory region in which we search for them (a 1000-bp promoter region would be typical). Given these relative lengths, if the species are somewhat diverged, it is likely that the noise of the diverged nonfunctional background will overcome the short conserved signal. The result is that the alignment may not align the short regulatory elements together. In that case, the regulatory elements would not appear to belong to conserved regions and would go undetected. Thus, when the entire regulatory regions considered are moderately to highly diverged, global multiple alignment is likely to miss significant signals.  made similar observations in conjunction with their comparative analysis of several Saccharomyces species. They discovered that if the species are too closely related, the sequence alignment is obvious but uninformative, because the functional elements are not sufficiently better conserved than the surrounding nonfunctional sequence. On the other hand, if the species are too distantly related, it is difficult or impossible to find an accurate alignment (for discussion of these issues, see ). Rather than relying on multiple alignment, a more successful recent approach to phylogenetic footprinting is to use one of the existing motif discovery programs ---such as MEME , Projection , Consensus , AlignAce , or ANN-Spec  ---or the segment-based multiple alignment program DIALIGN . , for instance, reported some successes using AlignAce when global multiple alignment tools failed. Another example of this approach is the work of , who used a Gibbs sampler to perform phylogenetic footprinting in bacterial sequences. Such general motif discovery algorithms were designed for a different purpose, however, and have their own drawback: None take into account the phylogenetic relationship of the given sequences; that is, these methods assume the input sequences to be independent. This can be problematic, for example, in data sets containing a mixture of some closely related species and some distant ones. If the phylogeny underlying the data is ignored, similar sequences from the set of closely related species will have an unduly high weight in the choice of motifs reported. Even if these methods were modified to weight the input sequences unequally, this would still not capture the information in an arbitrary phylogenetic tree. The method we present does capture this information. In this paper, we describe an algorithmic method designed specifically for phylogenetic footprinting in multiple species. Because it is tailored to this purpose, it avoids the drawbacks described above of both multiple alignment and general motif discovery algorithms. Given a set of unaligned orthologous sequences, our approach identifies all DNA motifs that appear to have evolved unusually slowly compared with the surrounding sequence. More precisely, given n orthologous input sequences and the phylogenetic tree T relating them, our algorithm is guaranteed to produce every set of k-mers, one from each input sequence, that have parsimony score at most d with respect to T, where k and d are parameters that can be specified by the user. As orthologous sequences from more and more species are included in the input, the distinction between conserved motif and diverged background generally becomes clearer. However, when including many orthologous sequences, particularly distantly related ones, there is increased chance that some of them may have lost or completely altered some regulatory elements over the course of evolution. For example, a species may not need the regulatory mechanism in which some regulatory element was involved, in which case selective pressure would no longer operate. As an example of an altered regulatory element, LexA has an entirely different binding motif in gram-positive bacteria than in gram-negative bacteria . For these reasons, we developed a variant of our phylogenetic footprinting algorithm that identifies motifs that occur in many, but not necessarily all, of the input sequences. This variant requires some way of comparing the levels of conservation among motifs that occur in different subsets of the input species and with different parsimony scores. For example, should one prefer a motif that occurs in all the species with parsimony score 2 or a motif that occurs in most of the species but with parsimony score 0? To address this, for each parsimony score s, we allow the user to set a minimum threshold on the fraction of the phylogeny that must be spanned by any reported motif with score s. For example, the user can ask to see all motifs with parsimony score 0 that span at least 200 Myrs of the phylogenetic tree (i.e., the sum of all branch lengths induced by the leaves containing the motif is at least 200 Myrs), plus those with score 1 that span at least 350 Myrs, plus those with score 2 that span at least 500 Myrs. Thresholds are to be set in such a way that the motifs reported are conserved at a statistically significant level (see Methods). The focus of the present paper is an explanation of what the new algorithms do and a discussion of the results obtained on several interesting data sets available in the public databases. Although a high-level description of how the algorithm works is given in Methods, the details of the algorithm, and in particular several algorithmic optimizations that render it practical on realistic problems, are beyond the scope of the present paper. These algorithmic details are described in a companion paper devoted to that purpose . The algorithms are implemented in a program called FootPrinter that has been used to obtain the results presented here. FootPrinter is available at .
In this section, we report the highly conserved motifs found by FootPrinter in nine sets of orthologous or paralogous sequences. We identified many previously known regulatory elements, as well as many highly conserved motifs with unknown function. The data sets considered in this study were chosen according to two main criteria: (1) the availability of several orthologous promoter sequences in GenBank and (2) the availability of information about the regulation of the genes considered (to validate our results). Some sets of orthologous sequences come from the ACUTS database , which lists a number of genes for which regulatory regions have been sequenced in several vertebrates. Other data sets were built by the authors directly from GenBank. The sequences, accession numbers, phylogenetic trees, and detailed results from FootPrinter can be found at . The phylogenetic relationships among the sequences considered were derived from  and , unless mentioned otherwise (see Discussion). All results are summarized in Table , but there is more detail available at the web site mentioned above.  Table 1 | Motifs Found by Phylogenetic Footprinting Metallothionein Gene Family | The metallothionein gene family is particularly well suited to show the merits of our approach, as a large number of promoter sequences are available from a wide variety of species, the phylogenetic relationships among these sequence have been studied, and a large number of regulatory elements have been experimentally determined in several species. Notice that although we described phylogenetic footprinting as applied to orthologous sequences, the approach applies equally well to paralogous sequences, in which two sequences diverged because of duplication rather than speciation, as long as the gene family tree is known. The primary function of proteins in the metallothionein family is to bind to heavy metal ions and to mediate cellular detoxification of metals. They have also been shown to act as antioxidant agents, protecting DNA from free radicals (for review on the function of metallothionein, see ). The metallothionein gene family appears to have evolved through a series of gene tandem duplications and losses. Most mammals have four major isoforms (MT-I, -II, -III, and -IV). Humans actually have 13 copies of the MT-I gene. Some nonmammals (Caenorhabditis elegans, sea urchin, icefish, and trout) also have several copies of the metallothionein gene, but the duplication events that led to this situation most likely took place quite recently, in such a way that, for example, the MT-I C. elegans gene is not more closely related to the MT-I mouse gene than to the MT-II mouse gene. The phylogenetic relationships among the various members of the gene family have been studied by , and the phylogenetic tree used here (see Fig. ) is derived from theirs.  Figure 1 | FootPrinter identified 12 highly conserved motifs in the metallothionein gene family. FootPrinter identified 12 highly conserved motifs in the metallothionein gene family. Each input sequence is the 590 bp located upstream of the start codon. For more details on each motif, see Table . The phylogenetic tree is derived from ; branch lengths not to scale). Numbers along branches indicate when each motif was created (unboxed) or lost (boxed), ignoring any less conserved occurrences of the motif not reported by FootPrinter. Genes from the metallothionein family are known to be regulated by a number of transcription factors. The most important of them, MTF-1, required for basal expression, binds to cis-acting elements known as metal response elements (MREs). A metallothionein promoter typically contains several MREs. In addition to MREs, the mouse MT-I promoter contains one or more GC boxes bound by Sp1, and major late transcription factor/antioxident response element (MLTF/ARE) binding site. The human MT-II promoter contains three basal level enhancer (BLE) elements known to bind transcription factors from the AP-2 family, and a glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE), bound by the glucocorticoid receptor. Some of these bindings sites have also been identified in other metallothionein promoters. Most binding sites known in any of the species we consider occur within 300 bp of the start codon (for more on the regulation of genes in the metallothionein family, see ). We ran FootPrinter on the 590 bp of sequence located upstream of the start codon of each of the metallothionein genes listed in Figure . The 5'-UTR is usually short (between 50 and 100 bp for species for which the transcription start site is known), and was included in the sequences considered. We searched for conserved elements of the lengths 7, 8, 9, and 10, in consecutive runs, each time adjusting the parameters to ensure that the motifs reported are well conserved at a statistically significant level (see Methods). Because the family contains both orthologous and paralogous genes, the ability of FootPrinter to allow for losses of regulatory elements is particularly crucial. Indeed, duplicated copies of a gene may evolve to have slightly different functions, and it is likely that the same holds for their promoter regions. Our analysis identified 12 motifs, plotted in Figure  and listed in Table . Motifs labeled 3, 4, 5, and 10 all correspond to different variants of MREs. That is, they are all experimentally verified binding sites of the same transcription factor MTF-1 in at least one of the sequences. The most common motif, labeled 3, corresponds to MREs located on the reverse strand, whereas the others are on the forward strand. Motif 3 is present in all isoforms of all deuterostomes (echinoderms and vertebrates) studied. It is often present in multiple copies, with up to four copies in human MT-IV and rat and hamster MT-II. Note that other promoter regions in Figure  may also contain more copies of this motif than shown, but not sufficiently conserved to be reported (see Discussion). Motif 5 was only found in mammalian MT-I and MT-II, and motif 10 was only found in mammalian MT-II, whereas motif 4 appears to have been lost on the branch leading to mammalian MT-I, -II, and -IV. In all, FootPrinter identified five of the seven MREs documented in the TRANSFAC database for human MT-II, but only two of the six known in rat MT-I (see Discussion for an explanation of why these were missed). The other motif known to have regulatory function is motif 1, a TATA-box, which was found in all isoforms of all mammals, except in MT-I of nonrodents. Had we insisted that the motif be present in all genes of the MT-I/MT-II mammal phyla, its parsimony score would have increased greatly, as it is so poorly conserved in nonrodent MT-I, to a point at which it would no longer have been significant. The other seven conserved motifs identified are not documented in TRANSFAC . None of them were found in the mammalian MT-I and MT-II families, which may partly explain our lack of knowledge about them, as genes in these families have received much more attention than the other isoforms. Motifs 7, 8, and 9, found only in frog and in the MT-III gene family, may be of particular interest. (Motif 2 also occurs in this set of sequences, but its order with respect to that of the other motifs is not as well conserved.) Another interesting point is that most of the motifs found are present in more than one isoform family, which indicates that we gained accuracy by considering the gene family as a whole, instead of running FootPrinter separately on each of the four mammal isoforms.  Insulin Gene Family | The upstream sequences of insulin genes are currently known only for three primates, two rodents (with two gene copies in each), and pig. This set of species is much less diverged than the metallothionein gene family. Because of this, we searched only for motifs with 0 mutations (for motif length 8) or 1 mutation (for motif lengths 9 and 10) at most, as motifs with more mutations would be likely to happen by chance in nonfunctional sequences. Our search identified four conserved motifs, all of them corresponding to known binding sites for that gene. (See Table  for this gene family and those that follow in the remainder of this section.) Several other binding sites were missed by FootPrinter because they contained a few too many mutations (see Discussion). Had we had a few more diverged species (or many other mammalian sequences), we may have been able to identify these sites as well. Another way to counteract the lack of diversity is to search for longer motifs, as we would then be able to accept motifs with more mutations. However, in this case, searches for motifs of the lengths 12 and 15 did not yield any new motifs.  IL-3 | The data set for IL-3 is quite similar to that of insulin, as only six mammalian sequences are available. We were thus limited to reporting only motifs with at most one mutation. Two of the five motifs identified are known binding sites. In fact, motif 3 actually contains binding sites for a number of factors.  C-myc Promoter | The upstream sequences of c-myc are known for only 7 species, but these contain members from diverse animal phyla (fishes, batrachians, birds, and mammals). This allowed us to do a much more sensitive motif search. Four of our nine predictions are known binding sites. Notice that some of these were found only in mammals and chicken, others in all terrestrial animals, and one in all species considered, which again illustrates the necessity to search for conservation in subsets of the species. All these known binding sites are located in a 120-bp promoter region known to be very rich in binding sites. We also identified motifs with unknown function but which are as well conserved as those corresponding to known sites. Most of these novel motifs are located well upstream of the known regulatory-rich region, in an area where very few binding sites were previously known.  C-myc Second Intron | Although regulatory elements are often located in the 5'-promoter region, some genes also have regulatory elements in their introns, and this is believed to be the case for c-myc. The second intron of c-myc varies in size between 971 bp (in chicken) and 1376 bp (in human). This intron was shown by  to contain an antisense promoter that results in the transcription of the reverse strand of part of the c-myc gene. Our analysis indeed identified 10 highly conserved motifs. Many of these are located just downstream of the transcription start site for the reverse strand (located at position 832 in rat, corresponding to position 860 in human). All but one of these are novel motifs.  C-fos Promoter | Our set of sequences for c-fos covers a set of species that is similar to that for c-myc. The results are also quite similar. Five of our eight predictions are known binding sites, four of them concentrated in an 80-bp area located about 500 bp upstream of the start codon.  C-fos First Intron | The first intron of the c-fos gene is known to contain a long sequence that acts as a transcription terminator by blocking elongation . The presence of Ca2+ has been shown to prevent this premature termination of transcription. The mechanism that underlies this interesting regulation mode is still unclear. FootPrinter very clearly identified that long sequence, as it is almost perfectly conserved in all tetrapoda considered. However, we also observed that this 103-bp-long sequence is broken into three segments. The first segment is conserved in all species considered, except fugu. The second one was found only in tetrapoda. The third segment is conserved in all species and contains a cAMP response element in humans . This division into three segments indicates that each segment has a different function. Notice that in the absence of the two fish species, we would not have seen this division and would not have learned anything new about the region.  Growth Hormone 1 | The growth hormone data set is our second largest; it contains sequences from nine fishes, one bird, and six mammals. Again, the subsets of species containing the motifs found vary greatly, from mammals only or fishes only to 15 of the 16 species. Five of the eight motifs identified are known binding sites in either rat or human.
Known Versus Predicted Binding Sites | In the Results section, we showed that FootPrinter identifies a large number of binding sites with a function that has been established experimentally. However, there are also many known binding sites that were not found by our approach. It is illuminating to analyze why FootPrinter did not detect those motifs. Of course, in the end, the reason must be that these motifs were not sufficiently well conserved to be reported, but a more detailed study is instructive. The known binding sites missed by FootPrinter can be divided into five categories. First, some binding sites appear to have no significant matches in most other species. For example, the thyroid hormone receptor T3R binding site upstream of the rat growth hormone 1, and the Pur-1 binding site upstream of the rat insulin gene are both conserved only in rodents. There is very little hope of detecting these sites by phylogenetic footprinting, unless a large number of closely related species (in this case, rodents) are available. Second, some binding sites show very good conservation, but only over a region that is shorter than the ones we looked for. This is the case for the GC-box of metallothionein, the sequence GGGGCGG of which is perfectly conserved in the four MT-II sequences and has only one mutation in the MT-III sequences. The substring GGGG is actually conserved in almost all mammalian isoforms. We may have been able to detect these kinds of motifs, had we searched for motifs of that length. (We did search for motifs of length 7, but the GC-box was not reported because it did not span a large enough part of the tree.) However, such short motifs are often likely to occur simply by chance in nonfunctional sequences. We could have allowed such short motifs, but our results would have been more likely to contain false positives. Third, a small number of binding sites appear to be relatively well conserved but have had insertions or deletions (although it is not clear if the sequences with insertions or deletions are still functional). FootPrinter can allow for insertions and deletions in the motifs found, but we chose not to use this option, as it is believed that insertions and deletions are rare in binding sites. Allowing for insertions and deletions would thus have produced a few more true positives, but most likely at the price of many more false positives. Fourth, some motifs are quite well conserved, but they barely fail to meet our statistical significance thresholds. This is the case for the CREB binding sites and CT-I regulatory element of insulin, both of which have parsimony score 3 over a motif of length 8. Again, allowing for that many mutations would have produced a number of false positives. However, if sequences from more organisms had been available, these two motifs might have been detected without increasing the false positive rate. Fifth, some transcription factors bind as dimers, in which case the binding site may consist of two conserved regions, separated by a few variable nucleotides. For example, in metallothionein MT-II, transcription factors from the AP-2 dimer family are known to bind the BLE element. Visual inspection reveals that the pattern TGACnnnnnGCGG (where n is a variable nucleotide) is perfectly conserved in all four MT-II genes. Because of the variable internal sequence, FootPrinter did not discover this motif. However, a future version of the program will allow one to search for motifs containing a variable sequence in the middle, where mutations should not be counted. More generally, it is well known that some transcription factors can tolerate more than one type of nucleotide at a given position of the binding site. For example, the MRE binding sites of metallothionein can be described by the consensus string CTCTGCRCNCSGCCC, in which bold characters are absolutely required for metal response, R is A or G, and S is C or G . In this case, one would want to assign a smaller penalty to purine-purine transitions at position 7 of the motif than to other substitutions. The current implementation of FootPrinter assigns equal cost to each type of substitution, but we are investigating ways for the program to learn different mutation cost matrices for each position in the sequence. When reading the results presented in Figure  or Table , the reader should be aware that there may be more occurrences of regulatory elements than shown, if they are not sufficiently well conserved.  Comparison to Other Computational Methods | A number of existing computational techniques have been used or could be used to identify conserved motifs in orthologous sequences, although none has been designed precisely for that purpose (see Introduction). By far the tool most commonly used for phylogenetic footprinting is CLUSTALW , a tree-based global multiple alignment program. We also consider DIALIGN , a segment-based multiple alignment program, and MEME , a motif-finding technique based on expectation maximization. The output of both CLUSTALW and DIALIGN is a global multiple alignment of the input sequences. Given a correct multiple alignment, one can easily identify conserved motifs, for example, by computing the parsimony score of each column of the alignment and outputting motifs with low overall parsimony score. One could also allow for motif losses and compare the score of a motif to its evolutionary span, as we propose in this paper. (Note that neither CLUSTALW nor DIALIGN currently uses either of these approaches.) However, correctly aligning a set of diverged sequences is a difficult task. For example, CLUSTALW produces very good alignments for closely related sequences (e.g., those from the insulin family and from IL-3, which all come from mammals), but most often incorrectly aligns more highly diverged sequences, thus failing to show the conservation of some motifs. DIALIGN produces better alignments for the purpose of phylogenetic footprinting, because it starts by identifying short conserved regions and then incorporates them into a multiple alignment. In fact, for most data sets, DIALIGN correctly aligned most of the conserved motifs found by FootPrinter (and vice versa: Most conserved regions present in the alignment of DIALIGN were reported by FootPrinter). However, in the metallothionein data set, several conserved sites were misaligned by DIALIGN. In general, we believe that for large data sets containing weakly conserved motifs, or motifs present in a small subset of the input sequences, the advantage of FootPrinter over DIALIGN will become clearer. MEME is a motif-finding program that searches for motifs with high information content, but makes no use of phylogenetic information. Moreover, MEME does not consider the position at which motifs are found in each sequence, so that the motifs reported may occur in a different order in each input sequence (see Methods). Nonetheless, the majority of the motifs reported in this paper are also found by MEME. This is probably because these motifs are very highly conserved, which makes them relatively easy to identify. A notable exception is again the large metallothionein gene family, for which MEME fails to find many of the motifs that occur in small subsets of the input sequences. From the point of view of running time, DIALIGN is about 10 times slower than FootPrinter on large data sets, with motif lengths and scores as in Table , whereas CLUSTALW and MEME run roughly as fast as FootPrinter. A more quantitative analysis of the accuracy of each method on biological data such as that considered here is problematic, as there is no definitive classification of false positives and false negatives. We are currently conducting such comparative experiments on simulated data. Please refer to  for more details on how the methods compare on biological sequences.  Phylogenetic Information | Throughout this paper, we assume that we are given the correct phylogenetic relationship among the sequences under study. It is the use of this phylogenetic information that allows FootPrinter to accurately identify regions of interest. The phylogenetic tree should represent the evolutionary history of the sequences considered, which may be different from that of the species they come from, because of lateral gene transfers. In vertebrates, such events appear relatively rare, and we thus used the species tree as an estimate of the sequence tree. When such a trusted tree is unavailable, one could infer the phylogenetic tree directly from the sequences considered or from their neighboring coding regions. (This is what Binz and Kagi [1997] did in the case of the metallothionein gene family, and this is what we did for the insulin gene family.) In cases in which the correct topology of the phylogenetic tree remains unclear, an unresolved multifurcating tree can be used. The correctness of the parsimony scores computed obviously depends on that of the tree. Using a completely incorrect tree may greatly affect the accuracy of FootPrinter. However, using a tree with a small number of topological errors should still yield better results not than using a tree at all.  Improving Accuracy | The predictions of FootPrinter could be made more accurate by injecting more prior knowledge as to what interesting solutions ought to look like. For example, the order and orientation in which regulatory elements occur in a sequence should be the same in all species, unless large-scale genome rearrangements occurred. Using this information may allow us to reject spurious motifs with order that is not consistent across species. Regulatory elements often occur several times in the same promoter (e.g., some metallothionein promoters contain up to 15 imperfect copies of MREs). Incorporating this type of information may allow us to detect regulatory element that are not sufficiently conserved to be reported by FootPrinter but that occur in several copies in each input sequence, thus boosting the statistical significance of the motif. Finally, if one had some idea about the transcription factors potentially regulating a given gene, one may want to allow motifs that look like potential binding sites for those factors to have slightly larger parsimony scores.
Algorithm | For the sake of clarity, we present here the simplest (but least efficient) version of the algorithm of FootPrinter, and we also assume that the only mutations allowed are point substitutions. The interested reader can find the extension to handle more general mutations, and the details of optimizations that make the algorithm truly practical, in a companion paper . The basic method is a dynamic programming algorithm similar to one presented by  for the computation of the parsimony score of a fixed set of aligned sequences (whereas what we seek is the most parsimonious choice of k-mer from each of the input sequences). The inputs to the algorithm are n homologous se