Integration of Cot Analysis, DNA Cloning, and High-Throughput Sequencing Facilitates Genome Characterization and Gene Discovery
Cot-based sequence discovery represents a powerful means by which both low-copy and repetitive sequences can be selectively and efficiently fractionated, cloned, and characterized. Based upon the results of a Cot analysis, hydroxyapatite chromatography was used to fractionate sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) genomic DNA into highly repetitive (HR), moderately repetitive (MR), and single/low-copy (SL) sequence components that were consequently cloned to produce HRCot, MRCot, and SLCot genomic libraries. Filter hybridization (blotting) and sequence analysis both show that the HRCot library is enriched in sequences traditionally found in high-copy number (e.g., retroelements, rDNA, centromeric repeats), the SLCot library is enriched in low-copy sequences (e.g., genes and "nonrepetitive ESTs"), and the MRCot library contains sequences of moderate redundancy. The Cot analysis suggests that the sorghum genome is approximately 700 Mb (in agreement with previous estimates) and that HR, MR, and SL components comprise 15%, 41%, and 24% of sorghum DNA, respectively. Unlike previously described techniques to sequence the low-copy components of genomes, sequencing of Cot components is independent of expression and methylation patterns that vary widely among DNA elements, developmental stages, and taxa. High-throughput sequencing of Cot clones may be a means of "capturing" the sequence complexity of eukaryotic genomes at unprecedented efficiency. [Online supplementary material is available at . The sequence data described in this paper have been submitted to the GenBank under accession nos. -. Reagents, samples, and unpublished information freely provided by H. Ma and J. Messing.]

When a solution of denatured genomic DNA is placed in an environment conducive to renaturation, the rate at which a particular sequence reassociates is proportional to the number of times it is found in the genome. This principle forms the basis of DNA renaturation kinetics (also called Cot analysis), a technique by which the redundant nature of eukaryotic genomes was first demonstrated (; see Fig. A in the online supplement to this article for a review of Cot analysis, ). In a typical renaturation kinetics study, samples of sheared genomic DNA are heat-denatured and allowed to reassociate to different Cot values [Cot value = the product of nucleotide concentration in moles per liter (C0 or Co), reassociation time in seconds (t), and, if applicable, a factor based upon the cation concentration of the buffer; for review, see ]. For each sample, renatured DNA is separated from single-stranded DNA using hydroxyapatite (HAP) chromatography, and the percentage of the sample that has not reassociated (%ssDNA) is determined. The logarithm of a sample's Cot value is plotted against its corresponding %ssDNA to yield a Cot point, and a graph of Cot points ranging from little or no reassociation until reassociation approaches completion is called a Cot curve . Mathematical analysis of a Cot curve permits estimation of genome size, the proportion of the genome contained in the single-copy and repetitive DNA components, and the kinetic complexity of each component. Interspecific comparison of Cot data has provided considerable insight into the structure and evolution of eukaryotic genomes (e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ). With the advent of molecular cloning techniques, most genome researchers abandoned Cot analysis. However, the principles of nucleic acid hybridization developed through Cot research form the basis of many molecular biology techniques, and information generated in Cot studies remains central to current knowledge of genome structure (for review, see ). Repetitive DNA has proven a particularly difficult problem in the investigation of eukaryotic genomes, especially in plants where large genomes are common. In some plants (e.g., maize, ), recent retroelement amplification has made BAC end sequencing and assembly of shotgun-sequenced clones almost impossible. Consequently, substantial efforts are taken to isolate DNA regions that do not contain repetitive sequences. One means of obtaining single/low-copy sequences is to prepare cDNA libraries. However, the representation of genes in a given cDNA library is only indicative of gene expression in the source tissue(s), and gene copy number is not accurately reflected in cDNA libraries even if "normalization" techniques (e.g., ; ; ; ) are employed. Repetitive DNA is often more highly methylated than low-copy DNA, and consequently some researchers have used methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes (e.g., ) or bacterial host strains that preferentially restrict methylated DNA  to produce genomic libraries enriched in low-copy (ostensibly genic) DNA. However, cloning strategies involving the preferential exclusion of hypermethylated DNA may result in the loss of important/interesting genes because the pattern and significance of DNA methylation can differ markedly between species (e.g., ), genes within an organism (e.g., ; ), developmental stages (for review, see ), and different regions of the same gene (e.g., ; ). Clearly, alternative strategies for isolating and sequencing the unique elements of genomes are needed. The results of a Cot analysis provide the information needed to isolate the major kinetic components of a genome in a manner independent of sequence expression  and/or methylation . However, to our knowledge DNA fractionated via Cot/HAP techniques has not previously been used in the construction of genomic libraries. Here we describe the production and characterization of genomic libraries derived from the three major kinetic components of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) DNA. Sorghum was chosen for this study because (to our knowledge) it has not been the subject of a Cot analysis, it has a 4000 --6000 year history of cultivation , it is one of the most agronomically important plant species in the world , and its relatively small genome is a valuable "window" into the low-copy sequence diversity of closely related, large-genome crops such as maize and sugarcane (see ). Our results suggest that cloning of isolated kinetic components is a useful and powerful means to clone genomic sequences based upon their relative iteration and to efficiently discover new DNA sequences in a manner independent of expression and/or methylation patterns. The combination of Cot-based cloning and high-throughput sequencing of Cot libraries [Cot-based cloning and sequencing (CBCS)] represents a means by which the sequence complexity of large genomes can be "captured" at a fraction of the cost of shotgun sequencing.
Melting Temperatures and GC Content of Sorghum DNA | Melting curves were generated for sheared sorghum DNA in 0.03, 0.12, and 0.5 M sodium phosphate buffer (SPB), and melting temperatures (Tm) for DNA in each buffer were determined using first-derivative analysis. The melting temperatures for sorghum DNA in 0.03, 0.12, and 0.5 M SPB are 75.1, 84.1, and 93.1C, respectively. For DNA dissolved in buffers with a monovalent cation concentration (Mmvc) between 0.01 and 0.2 M, the GC content of the DNA can be calculated using the formula %GC = 2.44 (Tm - 81.5 - 16.6 log Mmvc) . Consequently, the sorghum DNA samples in 0.03 M SPB (Na+ = 0.045 M) and 0.12 M SPB (Na+ = 0.18 M) result in %GC estimates of 38.9% and 36.5%, respectively. The average of these two values is 37.7%.  Cot Analysis | A Cot curve for Sorghum bicolor was prepared according to  and analyzed using the computer program of . The analysis providing the lowest RMS (root mean square deviation) and goodness of fit values (0.02554 and 0.02712, respectively) is a three-component fit with no constrained variables. In all Cot analyses, a certain fraction of the DNA forms duplexes even at Cot values approaching zero. Such early renaturation is thought to be due to base pairing between complementary sequences on the same DNA molecule (i.e., foldback DNA; ). As shown , approximately 16% of sorghum DNA had reassociated by the earliest Cot point (10-5 M*sec) and consequently was not included in the curve. No detectable reassociation was observed until a Cot value of about 0.02 M*sec.  Figure 1 | Sorghum cot analysis. Sorghum cot analysis. (A) Complete Cot curve, data analysis, and component isolation. A least-squares curve (thick black line) was fitted through the data points (open circles) using the computer program of . The curve consists of highly repetitive (HR), moderately repetitive (MR), and single/low-copy (SL) components characterized by fast, intermediate, and slow reassociation, respectively. For each component, the following values have been placed to the right of the component's general location: Fraction = the proportion of the genome found in that component, Kinet. Comp. (kinetic complexity) = the length in nucleotide pairs of the longest nonrepeating sequence calculated from the Cot data, k = the observed reassociation rate in M-1*s-1, and Cot1/2 = the value on the abscissa of the complete Cot curve at which half the DNA in the component has reassociated. Black diamonds mark the positions on the complete Cot curve of the Cot1/2 values for HR, MR, and SL components. For a Cot component, 80% of the sequences in that component will renature in the "two Cot decade region" (TCDR) flanking the component's Cot1/2 value (brackets centered at Cot1/2 markers; ). We utilized this principle in isolating HR, MR, and SL Cot components for Cot library construction. In brief, all double-stranded DNA within a component's TCDR was isolated except for areas that overlap the TCDRs of other components (regions marked by upward vertical dashes, diagonal stripes, and crosshatching delimit areas of the curve used in HRCot, MRCot, and SLCot library construction, respectively). Note that the area isolated for use in constructing the SLCot library extends a short way past the right end of the TCDR for the SL component; this is presumably not a problem as any double-stranded DNA in the region to the right of the SL component TCDR is likely to be single-copy. (B) The predicted individual renaturation profiles of the HR component, MR component, and SL component are shown. Four percent of the sorghum DNA did not reassociate by the highest Cot value (20,000 M*sec). DNA that does not reassociate by such a high Cot value is thought to be damaged and incapable of binding to HAP (e.g., ). The sorghum Cot curve consists of a fast, an intermediate, and a slow reassociating component. The complete Cot curve, renaturation profiles of the three Cot components, and the reassociation rate (k), Cot1/2 value, kinetic complexity, and genome fraction of each component are presented in Figure . In diploid organisms, the slowest reassociating component of a Cot curve generally represents single-copy DNA sequences. In such cases, genome size can be estimated by comparing the k value of the slow reassociating component to E. coli's rate constant (k = 0.22 M-1*sec-1) and DNA content . The genome of E. coli (strain K12, substrain MG1655) is 4,639,221 bp . Assuming that the sorghum slow reassociating component (k = 0.001474 M-1*sec-1) is composed of single-copy DNA, the estimated 1C genome size of sorghum would be G = (4,639,221 bp x 0.22 M-1*sec-1) / 0.001474 M-1*sec-1 = 6.92 x 108 bp or 692 Mbp. While this value is slightly lower than the reported values based on Feulgen densitometry (753 --837 Mbp, ) and flow cytometry (748 --772 Mbp, ), there is only a 7.5% --17% difference between the Cot-based genome size and these previous estimates. Consequently, it is likely that the slow reassociating component is primarily single-copy DNA, and thus we refer to it as the single/low-copy (SL) component. Assuming that the SL component has a repetition frequency of 1, the average repetition frequency of the DNA in the other components can be estimated by dividing their k values by the k value of the SL component . The predicted repetition frequencies of sequences in the fast reassociating component and in the intermediate reassociating component are 7.8864/0.001474 (5350.3) and 0.1062/ 0.001474 (72.1), respectively. In light of their relative repetitiveness, the fast and intermediate reassociating components are hereafter referred to as the highly repetitive (HR) and moderately repetitive (MR) components.  Library Construction, Blot Analysis, and Sequencing | HRCot, MRCot, and SLCot libraries were generated from isolated Cot components (see Methods for details on component isolation and cloning). The relative iteration of the insert DNA in the three Cot libraries was examined by comparing the intensity with which Cot clone probes hybridized to replica Southern blots of sorghum genomic DNA. The average intensity of hybridization to blots incubated with radiolabeled HRCot sequences was 43,067 cpm (+- 6248) while the average values for the MRCot and SLCot blots were 3783 cpm (+- 1419) and 1377 cpm (+- 253), respectively. We sequenced a total of 384 HRCot, 480 MRCot, and 576 SLCot clones of which 253, 409, and 499 (respectively) met our sequence quality criteria (i.e., Ph/Pr value >16 over 300 continuous bases, high-quality insert sequence >=50 bp). The (253 + 409 + 499 = 1161) "quality clones" were BLASTed against the GenBank Nr (nonredundant), GenBank EST, and SUCEST Sugarcane EST  databases. For each quality clone, only bit scores (S') of 55.44 or greater were deemed significant and used in characterizing the clone. Unlike E values (E) commonly used to compare the quality of hits, bit scores provide a means of comparing the significance of database hits independent of database and query size (see  for details). For a database of 3.5 billion nucleotides (slightly larger than the effective size of the GenBank Nr and EST databases at the time of sequence analysis) and an effective query length of 159 nt, a bit score of 55.44 is roughly equivalent to an E value of 1 x 10-5. For a given quality clone, the term "primary hit" was used to indicate the database sequence (if any) showing the highest significant homology to that clone.  Categorization of Cot Clones | Each Cot clone was placed into a single descriptive category ("BLAST category") based upon the scheme shown in Figure . Because of the difficulty associated with evaluating EST hits (see Limitations of the EST Data and Table A in the online supplement to this article, ), GenBank Nr database hits were given priority in the classification scheme with EST hits used only to categorize clones without significant Nr hits or with Nr hits to genomic sequences of unknown character. Results of category assignment and a list of characterized gene and repeat sequences recognized by various Cot clones are given in Table . An overview of the data is shown in Figure .  Figure 2 | Classification of Cot clones based on sequence analysis. Classification of Cot clones based on sequence analysis. For comparative purposes, each of the sequenced Cot clones meeting the minimum sequence quality requirements (see Methods section) was assigned to a single descriptive "BLAST category" based upon its significant database hits according to the classification scheme shown. Table 1 | BLAST-Based Categorization of HRCot, MRCot, and SLCot Clonesu Figure 3 | Sequence composition of different Cot libraries. Sequence composition of different Cot libraries. Black bars represent HRCot clones, white bars represent MRCot clones, and diagonally striped bars represent SLCot clones. The BLAST group "Dispersed repeat sequences" is composed of the Retroelement, MITE, and Other dispersed repeat BLAST categories (see Fig.  and Table ). All three libraries possessed more clones in the no significant hitBLAST category than any other. Roughly 70% of the SLCot clones showed no significant database hits, whereas about 50% of the MRCot clones and 35% of the HRCot clones fell into this category. HRCot hits were primarily to plant repetitive DNA sequences  including retrotransposons and other dispersed repeat sequences, rDNA sequences, and sorghum centromeric repeat sequences. The relative percentage of clones showing homology to repetitive ESTs was considerably higher for the HRCot library (19.4%) than the other two libraries (6.6% for MRCot, 2.2% for SLCot). None of the HRCot clones produced a significant hit to a characterized gene sequence, and the percentage of unique EST clones in the HRCot library was much lower than corresponding values for the MRCot and SLCot libraries (Table , Fig. ). Among the three Cot libraries, the SLCot library showed the highest percentage of hits to characterized gene sequences and unique ESTs. No centromeric sequences were detected, and only 6.2% of the SLCot clones fell into any of the repeat sequence categories. The MRCot library showed intermediate levels of repeat sequences and unique sequences. With regard to low-copy sequences, the percentage of MRCot sequences in the unique EST category was roughly the mean of the corresponding values for the HRCot and SLCot libraries . Of the characterized gene sequences detected in the Cot libraries, 25% were found in the MRCot library (the remaining 75% were in the SLCot library). Although the HRCot library had the greatest fraction of clones with homology to known repeats , some repeat sequences (presumably of moderate iteration) were more abundant in the MRCot library. For example, clones with homology to the retroelement Leviathan were three times more common in the MRCot library than the HRCot library. Likewise, sequences with homology to retrotransposon genes/pseudogenes in the GenBank Nr database were limited to MRCot clones . Of particular note, 10% of the MRCot sequences correspond to chloroplast DNA, presumably a contaminant in the nuclear DNA isolation process . However, chloroplast sequences were detected in less than one percent of the SLCot clones and none of the HRCot clones. While chloroplast DNA was not a desired end product of Cot library construction, the observation that chloroplast sequences are almost exclusively limited to MRCot clones neatly illustrates the "two Cot decade" principle used in the isolation of individual Cot components; that is, 80% of the copies of a given DNA sequence are contained within a span of two Cot decades (Fig. ; ). Based on the Cot curve, the MR component constitutes 41% of the genome, but if a tenth of this component is actually chloroplast DNA, the percentage of the genome found in the MR component may be closer to 37%. Of the 1161 Cot clone sequences used in sequence analysis, only one clone showed a significant primary hit to a mitochondrial DNA sequence. This clone (SLCot4G05) appears to contain a portion of the Sorghum bicolor F0-F1 ATPase alpha subunit gene (GenBank ).  Retrosor-6 | One of the largest continuous sorghum DNA sequences in the GenBank Nr database is a 126 kb BAC clone containing the 22 kD kafirin cluster (GenBank ; V. Llaca, A. Lou, and J. Messing, unpubl.). A total of 15.2% of the HRCot clones, 2.4% of the MRCot clones, and 1.0% of the SLCot clones showed primary hits to this BAC. Interestingly, 34 of 39 (87.1%) of the HRCot and 7 of 7 (100%) of the MRCot primary hits to the kafirin cluster BAC are localized within a 7377 bp sequence found only once in the BAC (bases 127,895 --135,271). None of the SLCot hits to the kafirin cluster BAC recognize the 7377 bp sequence. Although the 7377 bp sequence represents only 4.5% of the bases in the kafirin cluster BAC, it accounts for 13.4% of all primary HRCot hits, making it the most frequently recognized S. bicolor sequence. In their annotation of the kafirin cluster BAC, (GenBank ) V. Llaca, A. Lou, and J. Messing have deemed the 7377 bp sequence a "retroelement". Although they have named five other sorghum retroelements (Retrosor-1, Retrosor-2, Retrosor-3, Retrosor-4, and Retrosor-5), they did not name the 7377 bp retroelement sequence. Our study of the sequence likewise suggests that it is a retroelement (see Fig. A), and with the support of J. Messing (pers. comm.), we have named the sequence Retrosor-6. Retrosor-6 possesses no large open reading frames (ORFs) although nucleotide-protein BLAST (blastx) results indicate that it shares limited homology to an ORF1 polyprotein (S' = 43.9 bits) of the gypsy-type retroelement Athila  and a putative Arabidopsis pol protein (S' = 42.4 bits). The apparent absence of gag and env genes and the limited homology to known pol sequences suggest that the copy of the retroelement found in the kafirin cluster is no longer capable of autonomous replication.  Figure 4 | Retrosor-6. Retrosor-6. (A) The structure of Retrosor-6 and the distribution of the 41 sorghum Cot clones with primary homology to Retrosor-6. Retroelement features of Retrosor-6 include (alpha) duplicated target site sequences flanking both ends of the sequence, (beta) long terminal repeats (LTRs) (bases 1 --1279 and 6098 --7377) with the canonical LTR start/end nucleotides 5'-TG...CA-3', (chi) a primer binding site complementary to the plant tRNA for asparagine (bases 1286 --1301), (delta) an internal sequence region with homology to ORF1 of the Arabidopsis gypsy-type retroelement Athila, and (epsilon) a polypurine tract (bases 6083 --6095) (see  for review of retroelement structure). A scale showing distance in base pairs has been positioned underneath the diagram of the retroelement. For each Cot clone recognizing Retrosor-6, a thin black line has been placed above the retroelement marking the relative position(s) and length of the sequence shared by that clone and Retrosor-6. Because the LTRs have almost identical sequences (99.5% sequence identity), all of the clones with homology to one LTR have a similar/identical degree of homology to the other LTR. For these clones, lines have been positioned above both LTRs. (B) Hybridization of a Retrosor-6 probe (diamond-headed arrow in A) to a Southern blot. The labels at the head of each lane indicate the source of DNA in that lane and the restriction enzyme with which the DNA was digested. Specifically, b = S. bicolor, p = S. propinquum, E1 = EcoRI, H3 = HindIII, E5 = EcoRV, and X1 = XbaI. The two species show essentially identical hybridization patterns and intensities. (C) S. bicolor grid probed with a sequence from the Retrosor-6 LTR (chevron-headed arrow in A). (D) A grid identical to that in 'C' probed with a Retrosor-6 partial internal sequence (triangular-head arrow in A). The hybridization patterns observed for grids probed with the internal Retrosor-6 sequence are virtually identical to those produced by the LTR sequence probe for both S. bicolor (C and D) and S. propinquum (data not shown). (E) A section of the S. propinquum BAC grid probed with part of the LTR sequence of Retrosor-6. The number of copies of Retrosor-6 in the S. propinquum and S. bicolor genomes were estimated as described in Table B (available in the online supplement to this article, ) and the Methods section. The region on the grid used as "background" is enclosed within a circle. Examples of clones showing relatively intense hybridization signals are marked by arrows (triangular-heads) whereas clones with relatively weak but interpretable hybridization signals are marked by arrowheads (chevrons). To examine the abundance and dispersal pattern of Retrosor-6 in the genome of S. bicolor and to check for its presence in the wild species S. propinquum, a Cot clone containing 190 bp of the Retrosor-6 sequence was radiolabeled and used to probe a Southern blot containing restriction-digested S. bicolor and S. propinquum DNA. As shown in Figure B, the Retrosor-6 hybridization pattern for both sorghum species is essentially the same, consisting of a few dark bands within a smear of hybridization signal. While most of the Retrosor-6 retroelement shows numerous Cot clone hits (Fig. A), the region between bases 2000 and 4000 has only two hits. To explore whether this region has diverged more rapidly than other parts of Retrosor-6, high-density BAC grids from both sorghum species were probed with a Cot clone containing part of the Retrosor-6 LTR sequence (e.g., Fig. C), and duplicate copies of the grids were probed with a sequence from the 2 --4 kb region of the retroelement (Fig. D). When the autoradiograms for the LTR region and the 2 --4 kb region were digitally aligned and compared, only minimal differences could be detected in the hybridization patterns for a particular species (e.g., Fig. C and D). To estimate the copy number of Retrosor-6 in the genomes of S. bicolor and S. propinquum, the BAC grids probed with the Retrosor-6 LTR sequence were analyzed using a densitometer (see Fig. E). The grid densitometry results suggest that there are approximately 6275 copies of Retrosor-6 in the S. bicolor genome and 6748 copies in the S. propinquum genome (see Table B in the online supplement to this article, ). Assuming an average size for the retroelement of 7377 bp, Retrosor-6 accounts for approximately 6.0% and 6.3% of genomic DNA in S. bicolor and S. propinquum, respectively. Of note, two of the randomly selected HRCot clones hybridized to Southern blots (see Library Construction, Blot Analysis, and Sequencing above) were later shown to contain portions of Retrosor-6. One clone (HRCot2G11) containing part of the Retrosor-6 LTR produced the highest level of hybridization of any of the randomly selected Cot clones with a specific activity of 10,000 cpm. The second clone (HRCot3B01), carrying part of the internal sequence of Retrosor-6, resulted in a hybridization intensity of 5000 cpm, that is, half that of the clone containing the LTR sequence.  Molecular Genetic Markers, BAC End Sequences, and Cot Clones | Cot clones were BLASTed against approximately 1500 molecular markers (see the section Molecular Markers in the online supplement to this article, ) from a high-density sorghum molecular map based on RFLP segregation in the progeny of a cross between S. bicolor and S. propinquum . Fourteen Cot clones contained inserts with significant homology (S' >=76.28) to a total of nine markers on the molecular map (see Table C in the online supplement). The Cot clone sequences also were compared to 116 sorghum BAC end sequences (H. Ma, J. Bowers, and A. Paterson, unpubl.). None of the BAC ends showed significant homology to SLCot clones. However, 12 BAC ends possessed significant homology to HRCot clones, six recognized MRCot clones, and two recognized both HRCot and MRCot clones. In total, 20 of the 116 BAC ends (17%) exhibited significant homology to at least one of the 1161 sorghum Cot clone sequences. Assuming that the Cot libraries are representative of the sequence complexities of the components from which they were prepared, a 15% probability that any randomly selected sorghum genomic sequence will share significant sequence identity with one or more of the 1161 quality Cot clones (see the section Probability of Significant BAC End/Cot Clone Homology in the online supplement) would be predicted. The observed percentage of BAC ends with homology to the Cot clones (17%) and predicted percentage (15%) are not significantly different (see Test of Significance of a Binomial Proportion in the online supplement), suggesting that the Cot libraries are reflective of their respective Cot components.
Although renaturation kinetics has long been used to characterize genomes , to our knowledge the present study is the first report in which Cot components isolated from genomic DNA have been cloned and sequenced. Our results indicate that (1) the Cot libraries differ with regard to sequence iteration and composition in a predictable manner, (2) most of the highly repetitive DNA in the sorghum genome is found within the sequenced HRCot quality clones, (3) a previously unnamed sorghum retroelement is a major component (and perhaps the most abundant sequence) in both the S. bicolor and S. propinquum genomes, (4) Cot clones can be used to augment the information content of both molecular and physical maps, and (5) sequencing of clones from Cot libraries may represent a means by which the diversity of sequences found in a genome can be efficiently "captured". Effectiveness of Cot-Based Cloning | The three Cot libraries differ in relative sequence iteration and composition in a manner reflecting the nature of the components from which they were derived; that is, construction of repetition-based DNA libraries using Cot techniques is effective. When Southern blots of sorghum genomic DNA were probed with randomly selected, radiolabeled Cot clone inserts, those blots hybridized with HRCot sequences exhibited a mean labeling intensity (cpm) >10 times that of MRCot-probed blots and >30 times that of SLCot-probed blots. Detailed sequence analysis of 250 --500 Cot clone inserts from each of the three Cot libraries revealed that the HRCot library is rich in sequences traditionally found in high-copy numbers (e.g., retrotransposons, rDNA, centromeric repeats), the SLCot library is enriched in sequences with homology to characterized genes and unique ESTs, and the MRCot library possesses its own subset of repeat sequences as well as exhibiting some overlap with the HRCot and SLCot libraries (Table , Fig. ). Additionally, the observed percentage (17%) of random sorghum BAC end sequences recognizing one or more of the 1161 sorghum Cot clone sequences was found to be statistically indistinguishable from the percentage expected if the Cot libraries are representative of their respective Cot components (15%). Because the methods employed do not rely upon differential expression and/or methylation of sequences, Cot-based cloning provides a means by which any genomic sequence (including genes expressed at low levels or during short developmental timeframes) can be isolated and cloned based upon its relative iteration.  Retrosor-6 | The previously discovered sequence exhibiting primary homology to the greatest number of Cot clones is a 7377 bp retroelement found in the sorghum kafirin cluster sequence (GenBank ; V. Llaca, A. Lou, and J. Messing, unpubl.). This retroelement (now called Retrosor-6) is highly reiterated in both S. bicolor and S. propinquum (Fig. B). These two species possess the same chromosome number and can be crossed (e.g., ), but the resulting progeny exhibit the aberrant segregation and partial sterility that typifies interspecific hybrids. Two lines of evidence suggest that most copies of Retrosor-6 in both sorghum species are similar to the copy of the retroelement found in the kafirin gene cluster. First, S. bicolor and S. propinquum BAC grids probed with part of the Retrosor-6 LTR showed hybridization patterns nearly identical to those observed for duplicate blots probed with part of the internal region of the retroelement (Fig. C,D). Second, a Southern blot probed with a portion of the Retrosor-6 LTR exhibited hybridization signal about twice that of a duplicate blot probed with an internal sequence of similar length ---an observation suggesting that there are roughly two copies of the LTR for each copy of the internal sequence. Based on the assumption that most copies of Retrosor-6 are similar to the kafirin cluster copy of the retroelement, densitometric analysis of BAC grids indicates that Retrosor-6 accounts for approximately 6% of the DNA in both sorghum species (see Table B in the online supplement for this article, ). Because S. bicolor and S. propinquum have similar genome sizes and possess roughly the same number of copies of Retrosor-6, the retroelement may have been introduced into a common ancestor of the two species rather than into the species separately. However, on the assumption that Retrosor-6 provides no selective advantage to the genome and hence can undergo mutation without influencing fitness, the preponderance of apparently intact copies of Retrosor-6 and the relatively high level of shared sequence identity between the LTRs of the kafirin cluster copy of Retrosor-6 (615/618 bp matches, S' = 1171 bits) suggest that the retroelement may be fairly new to the Sorghum genus.  Cot Clones and the Sorghum Molecular Map | Cot clone sequences were compared with the sequences of markers on the sorghum molecular map . Three of the nine molecular markers recognized by Cot clones appear to be rDNA sequences. The three "rDNA molecular markers" are found at essentially the same locus on S. bicolor linkage group C (see Table C in the online supplement to this article, ). The 18S-5.8S-26S rDNA locus has been localized by fluorescence in situ hybridization to the longest S. bicolor mitotic metaphase chromosome . Likewise, we recently