The Candida dubliniensis CdCDR1 Gene Is Not Essential for Fluconazole Resistance
The present study investigated the role of the Candida dubliniensis CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 genes in the development of fluconazole resistance. The C. dubliniensis CdCDR1 gene was 92% identical at the nucleotide sequence level to the corresponding C. albicans gene. However, 58% (14 of 24) of C. dubliniensis genotype 1 isolates tested harbored a nonsense mutation in the CdCDR1 open reading frame that converted codon 756 (TAT) to a TAG translational stop codon. Analysis of five of these C. dubliniensis isolates by Western immunoblotting showed that they expressed a truncated 85-kDa CdCdr1p compared to the full-length 170-kDa CdCdr1p. Expression of CdCDR1 alleles from six C. dubliniensis isolates in a pdr5 Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain revealed that CdCDR1 alleles from three isolates that encoded truncated proteins were unable to confer resistance to drugs and antifungals. However, reassignment of the TAG sequence at codon 756 to TAT (encoding tyrosine) in an allele from strain CD36 conferred the ability to mediate resistance to multiple drugs. Fluconazole-resistant isolates of C. dubliniensis harboring functional alleles of CdCDR1 were found to exhibit two- to ninefold-higher levels of CdCDR1 mRNA than did matched fluconazole-susceptible isolates. By comparison, levels of CdMDR1 expression ranged from approximately 50- to 100-fold greater in resistant isolates. Fluconazole resistance was also identified in isolates harboring nonfunctional CdCDR1 alleles, but resistance in these isolates was only associated with increased CdMDR1 expression. Targeted disruption of two functional alleles of CdCDR1 in a fluconazole-resistant derivative of C. dubliniensis that overexpressed both CdCDR1 and CdMDR1 revealed that although CdCDR1 was important for mediating reduced susceptibility to itraconazole and ketoconazole, there was no affect on fluconazole susceptibility in the double mutant. Evidence presented in this study reveals that CdCDR1 is not essential for the development of fluconazole resistance in C. dubliniensis.

Resistance to azole antifungal drugs in Candida species is now recognized as a major clinical problem . Several studies have shown that a significant proportion of oral Candida albicans isolates recovered from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients are resistant to the azole antifungal drug fluconazole and that some non-C. albicans Candida species, such as Candida krusei, are inherently resistant to this agent . Fluconazole resistance has also been described in Candida dubliniensis, a species that was first described in 1995 . C. dubliniensis is a significant cause of oral disease in the HIV-infected patient population, who routinely receive fluconazole therapy for the suppression of oral candidiasis . Recently, several studies have reported the recovery of C. dubliniensis from the bloodstream, although the true incidence of systemic infection caused by this organism has yet to be determined . We and others have previously reported the recovery of C. dubliniensis isolates with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole from the oral cavities of HIV-infected patients . In addition, we have shown that fluconazole-susceptible C. dubliniensis clinical isolates can readily develop fluconazole resistance when exposed to this agent in vitro . Molecular analysis of fluconazole-resistant C. dubliniensis isolates and in vitro-generated fluconazole-resistant derivatives has shown that in each case, the fluconazole resistance phenotype is associated with increased expression of the CdMDR1 gene encoding the multidrug transporter CdMdr1p . Wirsching et al. demonstrated that targeted deletion of both copies of CdMDR1 in a C. dubliniensis clinical isolate with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole was sufficient to render the null mutant susceptible to fluconazole . A second multidrug transporter-encoding gene, termed CdCDR1, has also been identified in C. dubliniensis, and it is homologous to the C. albicans ABC transporter-encoding gene CDR1 . Almost all isolates of C. albicans (83%) with reduced susceptibility to azoles analyzed to date exhibit increased expression of CDR1 . However, the role of the homologous CdCDR1 gene in C. dubliniensis in determining susceptibility to fluconazole is less clear. Although increased expression of CdMDR1 has been observed in all fluconazole-resistant C. dubliniensis isolates and derivatives analyzed to date, increased CdCDR1 gene expression has only been reported in approximately 50% of fluconazole-resistant C. dubliniensis isolates and derivatives . For these reasons, the objectives of the present study were to functionally characterize the C. dubliniensis CdCDR1 gene and to examine its role in determining azole susceptibility in C. dubliniensis.
Candida strains and culture conditions. | Forty clinical isolates of C. dubliniensis from diverse geographic locations were included in this study . Isolates of C. dubliniensis were routinely cultured on potato dextrose agar (Oxoid) medium, pH 5.6, at 37C . For liquid culture, cells were grown in yeast extract-peptone-dextrose (YEPD) broth, also at 37C. Transformants of C. dubliniensis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were selected and maintained on minimal agar medium (6.7 g of yeast nitrogen base without amino acids [Difco], 20 g of glucose, 15 g of Bacto agar [Difco], and 50 mg [each] of uracil, lysine, adenine, tryptophan, and histidine [Sigma-Aldrich] per liter). For induction of the SAP2 promoter and excision of the mycophenolic acid (MPA) resistance flipper cassette (MPAR-flipper), cells were grown in YCB-BSA medium (23.4 g of yeast carbon base [Difco], 4 g of bovine serum albumin [Sigma-Aldrich] per liter [pH 4.0]).  Antifungal drug susceptibility testing. | Susceptibility testing of C. dubliniensis clinical isolates and their derivatives to antifungal drugs and metabolic inhibitors was performed by using a broth microdilution assay based on the approved NCCLS procedure . Susceptibility tests were carried out in RPMI 1640 medium (10.4 g of RPMI 1640 [Sigma-Aldrich], 20 g of glucose, 34.5 g of morpholinepropanesulfonic acid [pH 7.0] per liter) as described by Moran et al. . Metabolic inhibitors were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, fluconazole was a gift from Pfizer Central Research (Sandwich, Kent, United Kingdom), and itraconazole and ketoconazole were gifts from Janssen Pharmaceutical (Cork, Republic of Ireland). The following antifungal drugs and metabolic inhibitors were prepared as stock solutions in water at the concentrations indicated: fluconazole, 5 mg/ml; fluphenazine, 20 mg/ml; and rhodamine 6G, 5 mg/ml. Stock solutions of other drugs were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide at the concentrations indicated: ketoconazole, 1 mg/ml; itraconazole, 1 mg/ml; cycloheximide, 20 mg/ml; cerulenin, 1 mg/ml; and brefeldin A, 5 mg/ml. Crystal violet (2 mg/ml) was dissolved in methanol. Stock solutions of drugs were diluted in RPMI 1640 medium to the following concentrations, from which serial twofold dilutions were prepared in 96-well microtiter dishes (Corning): fluconazole, 64 mug/ml; itraconazole, 4 mug/ml; ketoconazole, 2 mug/ml; cerulenin, 64 mug/ml; rhodamine 6G, 16 mug/ml; cycloheximide, 512 mug/ml; brefeldin A, 512 mug/ml; and fluphenazine, 128 mug/ml.  PCR amplification of C. dubliniensis CdCDR1 alleles. | Amplification of CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 genes was carried out by using the Expand high-fidelity PCR system (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). To amplify the entire C. dubliniensis CdCDR1 open reading frame (ORF), the oligonucleotide primer pair 1F-1R (Table ; Fig. ) was designed based on the nucleotide sequence of the C. albicans CDR1 gene. Similarly, for amplification of the CdCDR2 ORF, the primer pair 8F-8R was designed based on the nucleotide sequence of the C. albicans CDR2 gene. These primers contained cleavage sites for the restriction endonuclease XbaI . Template DNA was isolated from C. dubliniensis isolates as described by Sullivan et al. . Sequences flanking the CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 genes were amplified from the C. dubliniensis type strain CD36 by inverse PCR. Briefly, PCR amplification was carried out under the same conditions with self-ligated EcoRI-digested total genomic DNA as template. The 5' flanking region of the CdCDR1 gene was amplified with the oligonucleotide primer pair 3F-3R, which contained the EcoRI restriction endonuclease recognition sequence (Table ; Fig. ). The 3' region of the CdCDR1 gene was amplified with the oligonucleotide primer pair 4F-4R (Table ; Fig. ). Similarly, the 5' and 3' flanking sequences of the CdCDR2 gene were amplified with the oligonucleotide primer pairs 9F-9R and 10F-10R, respectively. PCR products were purified from the reaction mixture by using the Wizard PCR system (Promega). PCR primers were designed with restriction endonuclease recognition sequences at their 5' ends  that allowed PCR products to be digested and ligated directly to the plasmid vector pBluescript II KS(-), transformed into Escherichia coli DH5alpha as described previously, and subjected to DNA sequence analysis .  Heterologous expression of CdCDR genes in S. cerevisiae. | The oligonucleotide primer pairs 1F-1R and 8F-8R (Table ; Fig. ) were used to amplify the entire CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 ORFs, respectively. The CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 ORFs were amplified from genomic DNA purified from C. dubliniensis isolates CD36, CD57, CD51-II, CD47-IIb, CM1, and CM2 and C. albicans strain CA132A. These products were cloned by using standard techniques into the XbaI site of the expression plasmid pYES  and transformed into the Deltapdr5 S. cerevisiae strain YKKB-13 as described by Sanglard et al. . Transformants of YKKB-13 were selected on minimal medium without uracil. In order to induce expression from the GAL1 promoter of pYES, transformants were subsequently maintained on minimal medium without uracil containing 2% (wt/vol) galactose as the sole carbon source. S. cerevisiae transformants were tested for susceptibility to antifungal drugs and metabolic inhibitors on minimal medium containing galactose as described by Sanglard et al. . Briefly, a suspension (2 x 107 CFU/ml) of each transformant to be tested was prepared in sterile saline. This solution was then serially diluted 10-fold, and 5 mul of each dilution was spotted onto plates containing fixed concentrations of each metabolic inhibitor (see Fig. ). Susceptibility to each drug was determined based on the highest dilution of each culture which could grow in the presence of the inhibitor as described by Sanglard et al. .  Western immunoblotting. | Crude protein extracts were prepared from C. dubliniensis isolates, resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and subjected to Western immunoblot analysis with anti-Cdr1p polyclonal sera (a gift from D. Sanglard) as described by Moran et al. . Antibody-protein complexes were detected with the SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce, Rockford, Ill.). Molecular sizes of protein bands were estimated by using the Bio-Rad broad-range SDS-PAGE standards (Bio-Rad) and the GelWorks one-dimensional gel analysis software package (UVP, Irvine, Calif.).  Site-directed mutagenesis. | Site-directed mutagenesis was carried out by using the GeneEditor system (Promega). Alleles of CdCDR1 for mutagenization were subcloned into the plasmid vector pGEM-11Z(f+). Point mutations were introduced by hybridization with the 5'-phosphorylated mutagenic oligonucleotide 5'-GCTTACCAATATTATAATTC, which contained a single G to T substitution (underlined), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Mutant alleles were sequenced on both strands in order to confirm the introduction of the desired mutation.  Isolation of total RNA from C. dubliniensis and Northern blot analysis. | Total RNA was isolated from C. dubliniensis isolates grown to the mid-exponential phase (optical density at 600 nm, 0.6) in YEPD broth at 37C as described by Moran et al. . RNA was fractionated on 1.2% (wt/vol) agarose gels containing 6% (vol/vol) formaldehyde and transferred to nylon membranes (Osmonics, Westborough, Mass.) by capillary transfer. RNA was hybridized at 42C with DNA probes homologous to CdCDR1, CdMDR1, and CdTEF3 labeled with [alpha-32P]dATP (6,000 Ci/mmol, 220 TBq/mmol; NEN Life Sciences, Boston, Mass.) by random primer labeling as described by Moran et al. . A CdCDR1-specific probe was constructed by PCR amplification of the 5' region of the CdCDR1 gene (nucleotides +1 to +421) with the primer pair 1F-7R . Similarly, a 418-bp CdCDR2-specific probe (nucleotides +1 to +418) was amplified from C. dubliniensis genomic DNA by using the primer pair 8F-7R . A CdTEF3-specific probe was created by amplification of an internal fragment of the CdTEF3 gene with the primer pair TEF3F-TEF3R . Signals from Northern blot autoradiograms were quantified by scanning densitometry and normalized for loading against the CdTEF3 expression signal with the Gelworks one-dimensional software package (UVP).  Targeted disruption of the CdCDR1 gene. | Targeted disruption of the CdCDR1 gene in C. dubliniensis CD57R was carried out by using the MPAR-flipper technique . Two different deletion constructs were made to inactivate both alleles of the CdCDR1 gene. To create the first construct, the entire CdCDR1 ORF was cloned in the XbaI site of pUC19. A deletion was created in this clone by inverse PCR with the primer pair 5F-5R (Table ; Fig. ). This allowed amplification of the 5' and 3' ends of the CdCDR1 ORF and the entire plasmid vector . These primers contained SacII and XhoI restriction endonuclease recognition sequences that enabled the insertion of the SacII/XhoI fragment of pSFI1 (containing the site-specific recombinase FLP and the MPA resistance gene) , thereby replacing the central region of the CdCDR1 ORF to create plasmid pCDRDelta1. To create the second construct, the internal AccI/BamHI fragment of CdCDR1 was cloned into pUC19 and subjected to inverse PCR with the primer pair 6F-6R (Table ; Fig. ). This product was also ligated with the SacII/XhoI fragment from pSFI1 to create the plasmid pCDRDelta2. C. dubliniensis was sequentially transformed by using approximately 1 mug of the linear SacI/SphI fragments from plasmids pCDRDelta1 and pCDRDelta2 by electroporation as described by Staib et al. . MPA-resistant transformants were selected on minimal medium agar plates containing 10, 15, or 20 mug of MPA per ml.  Isolation of genomic DNA and Southern blotting. | Genomic DNA from C. dubliniensis isolates and derivatives for use in PCR and Southern blotting experiments was isolated by using the method of Sullivan et al. . For Southern blotting, 10 mug of genomic DNA was digested with the appropriate restriction endonuclease and separated on 0.8% (wt/vol) agarose gels. DNA was transferred to nylon membranes (Osmonics) by capillary transfer overnight. Hybridization was carried out under high-stringency conditions by standard techniques with DNA probes labeled with alpha-32P by random primer labeling .  FIG. 1. | Restriction map of CdCDR1 (A) and CdCDR2 (B) encoding DNA from C. dubliniensis Restriction map of CdCDR1 (A) and CdCDR2 (B) encoding DNA from C. dubliniensis CD36. The black rectangular boxes represent C. dubliniensis genomic DNA which was amplified by PCR from genomic DNA (see Materials and Methods). The large arrows show the positions and directions of transcription of the CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 ORFs. The asterisk in the CdCDR1 ORF shows the position of the polymorphic codon 756. The approximate positions of the CdCDR1- and CdCDR2-specific PCR primers shown in Table  are indicated by small arrows. Primer pairs 5F-5R and 6F-6R shown at the bottom of panel A were used in the inverse PCR experiments performed to disrupt the CdCDR1 gene. Restriction endonuclease cleavage sites: A, AccI; B, BamHI; E, EcoRI; P, PvuII. FIG. 3. | Susceptibility of S. cerevisiae Susceptibility of S. cerevisiae YKKB-13 (pdr5) transformants harboring cloned CDR1 genes to antifungal drugs and metabolic inhibitors. (A) CDR1 alleles from C. albicans and C. dubliniensis isolates were amplified by PCR, cloned into the GAL1 expression vector pYES and transformed into the S. cerevisiae strain YKKB-13. The transformants harbored the pYES plasmid (Vector), cloned CDR1 from C. albicans CA132A (Y132A), and cloned CdCDR1 genes from the C. dubliniensis isolates CD36 (YCD36), CD57 (YCD57), and CD51-II (YCD51-II). A suspension (2 x 107 CFU/ml) of each transformant was serially diluted, and 5 mul of each dilution was spotted onto minimal agar medium plates containing fixed concentrations of the antifungal drug or metabolic inhibitor indicated. (B) Fluconazole susceptibility of YKKB-13 transformants harboring the cloned C. albicans CA132A CDR1 gene (Y132A), the CD36 CdCDR1 gene (YCD36), and the mutated CD36 CdCDR1 gene (YMCD36) in which the premature stop codon has been reassigned. TABLE 1 | Candida strains and derivatives used in this study TABLE 2 | Oligonucleotide primers used in PCRs
Isolation and sequence analysis of CdCDR1. | In order to isolate the C. dubliniensis homologue of the C. albicans CDR1 gene, a 6,848-bp region of C. dubliniensis chromosomal DNA was PCR amplified by using a high-fidelity polymerase mixture from genomic DNA isolated from the C. dubliniensis type strain CD36 (CBS 7987). Initially, the primer pair 1F-1R (Table ; Fig. ), which was designed to amplify the entire C. albicans CDR1 ORF, was used to amplify a 4,506-bp region of C. dubliniensis genomic DNA corresponding to the putative C. dubliniensis CDR1 homologue. The nucleotide sequences 5' and 3' to this region were then amplified from C. dubliniensis CD36 genomic DNA by an inverse PCR method with the primer pairs 3F-3R and 4F-4R (Table ; Fig. ), respectively. Using this strategy, a 614-bp region upstream of the putative CdCDR1 ORF and a 1,728-bp downstream region were amplified from C. dubliniensis CD36 chromosomal DNA. The entire amplified chromosomal DNA region from strain CD36 was then sequenced on both strands. The putative CdCDR1 ORF amplified with the primer pair CDR1F-CDR1R was 4,506 bp in length and was 92% identical at the nucleotide sequence level to the C. albicans CDR1 ORF. The 614-bp 5'-flanking region of this sequence shared 46.6% identity at the nucleotide sequence level with the C. albicans CDR1 promoter and contains a putative TATA box at nucleotide position -126 (the first base of the ATG start codon was designated +1). In addition, the C. dubliniensis promoter sequence contains a motif at the nucleotide coordinates -371 to -350 (5'-CGGTTATCGGATATTTTTTTT) matching the drug response element (DRE) in C. albicans . The 3'-flanking region of the putative CdCDR1 ORF also contained sequences homologous to the C. albicans SAP3 gene encoding a member of the secreted aspartyl-proteinase family , which we have termed CdSAP3. This is the same gene order as observed in the C. albicans genome . However, comparison of the C. albicans and C. dubliniensis CDR1 ORFs revealed that the C. dubliniensis CD36 CdCDR1 gene contained a TAG translation stop codon at the nucleotide coordinates +2266 to +2268 (codon 756) which corresponded to a single base difference (G to T) that converted the tyrosine (Y756)-encoding TAT codon found in the C. albicans CDR1 gene to a TAG translation stop signal . The predicted polypeptide encoded by this shorter ORF was 755 amino acids in length and had a predicted molecular mass of 85 kDa; the C. albicans protein is 1,501 amino acids in length and has a predicted molecular mass of 168 kDa. The truncated CdCdr1p was 96.7% identical to the corresponding amino acid sequences of CaCdr1p. In order to confirm that this substitution was not a PCR artifact, this region was sequenced in six clones generated in six separate PCR amplifications and an identical nucleotide sequence was found in each clone. These data strongly suggested that the substitution was present in both alleles of CdCDR1.  Identification of polymorphic alleles of CdCDR1. | In order to determine whether other strains of C. dubliniensis harbored the TAG nonsense codon, the region of the CdCDR1 ORF containing codon 756 was sequenced in C. dubliniensis isolates CM1, CM2, CD57, CD51-II, and CD47-IIb . In order to achieve this, a 490-bp region of the CdCDR1 ORF was amplified by PCR with the primer pair 2F-2R (Table ; Fig. ). This amplified product encompassed the nucleotide region +2071 to +2557 of the CdCDR1 ORF, including the TAG codon at the nucleotide coordinates +2266 to +2268 in C. dubliniensis strain CD36. Nucleotide sequence analysis of this region demonstrated that C. dubliniensis isolates CD51-II and CD47-IIb harbor a nonsense mutation identical to that found in the CdCDR1 ORF of isolate CD36. However, isolates CD57, CM1, and CM2 contained a tyrosine codon identical to that found in the C. albicans CDR1 ORF. The entire nucleotide sequence of the CdCDR1 gene from C. dubliniensis CD57 was determined in order to compare the sequence of a gene without the nonsense mutation with that from strain CD36. The nucleotide sequence of the C. dubliniensis CD57 CdCDR1 ORF was 99.7% identical (containing 9 base differences) to the CdCDR1 ORF from strain CD36. The predicted amino acid sequence of the CD57 CdCdr1p contained three amino acid substitutions (H60R, V173M, and S1264L) compared to the CD36 sequence. However, the predicted CdCDR1 ORF from strain CD57 was not interrupted by a premature stop codon at nucleotide positions +2266 to +2268 and was identical in size (4,506 bp) to the homologous C. albicans CDR1 gene . The nucleotide sequence of the CdCDR1 ORF from strain CD57 was 92% identical to the corresponding sequence of the C. albicans CDR1 gene. The CD57 CdCDR1 gene encodes a predicted polypeptide of 169.6 kDa that is 96.5% identical at the amino acid sequence level to the corresponding C. albicans sequence. This highly homologous sequence contained the typical features described in C. albicans Cdr1p, namely the conserved Walker A and Walker B motifs and an ATP binding motif in the N-terminal hydrophilic domain . The tyrosine-encoding TAT at codon position 756 in isolates CM1, CM2, and CD57 was found to be located within the recognition sequence for the restriction endonuclease SspI (5'-AATATT). This SspI recognition sequence was absent in alleles from CD36, CD51-II, and CD47-IIb containing the TAG stop codon (5'-AATAGT). PCR products amplified from isolates CM1, CM2, and CD57 with the primer pair 2F-2R could be digested with the restriction endonuclease SspI to yield two distinct fragments of 200 and 290 bp, respectively, in agarose gels. However, SspI digestion of the amplified product from isolates CD36, CD51-II, and CD47-IIb, which contained the TAG nonsense codon, yielded a single band of approximately 500 bp in agarose gels, indicating that the SspI recognition sequence was absent. We utilized this restriction fragment length polymorphism as the basis of a screening assay to analyze a larger group of C. dubliniensis isolates for the presence or absence of the nonsense mutation. A group of 40 C. dubliniensis isolates (all isolates in Table , excluding derivatives of CD36, CD57, and CD51-II), including representative isolates from the four C. dubliniensis genotypes recently described by Gee et al. , were analyzed for the presence of the TAT codon by SspI digestion of PCR products generated from these isolates with the primer pair 2F-2R . This analysis revealed that all of the isolates tested (n = 16) belonging to C. dubliniensis genotypes 2, 3, and 4 harbored CdCDR1 alleles that contained the TAT tyrosine codon, as SspI digestion of the 2F-2R-amplified region yielded two fragments in agarose gels . However, analysis of 24 genotype 1 C. dubliniensis isolates revealed that 14 (58%) harbored CdCDR1 alleles that could not be digested by SspI at this region. DNA sequence analysis of the 2F-2R-amplified region from these 14 isolates revealed the presence of a TAG stop codon that disrupted the SspI recognition sequence . These data confirm that the premature stop codon is present in both alleles of CdCDR1 in these isolates. Two of these isolates were found to harbor CdCDR1 alleles containing both the TAT and TAG codon sequences, indicating heterozygosity at this locus. In total, 35% (14 of 40) of the C. dubliniensis isolates tested were found to contain CdCDR1 alleles containing the TAG stop codon.  Isolation and sequence analysis of CdCDR2. | In order to isolate the C. dubliniensis homologue of CDR2, the primer pair 8F-8R was designed based on the nucleotide sequence of the C. albicans CDR2 gene . This primer pair was used to amplify the complete C. dubliniensis CdCDR2 gene from the genomic DNA of strain CD36. The amplified CdCDR2 ORF was 4,503 bp in length, which is 3 bp longer than the C. albicans CDR2 ORF due to the presence of an additional codon. The C. dubliniensis CdCDR2 gene shared 91% identity with the C. albicans CDR2 ORF at the nucleotide sequence level. This ORF was preceded at the 5' end by a TATA box at position -99 (the first base of the ATG start codon was designated +1). Like CdCDR1, the C. dubliniensis CdCDR2 gene was preceded by a DRE motif at nucleotide coordinates -210 to -189. The C. dubliniensis CdCDR2 ORF encodes a protein with a predicted molecular mass of 168.9 kDa that is 94.4% identical at the amino acid sequence level to the corresponding C. albicans protein. This sequence contained identical Walker A and Walker B motifs and an identical ATP binding motif to that described by Sanglard et al. in the C. albicans Cdr2p .  Western immunoblot analysis of CdCdr1p. | Crude protein extracts of C. dubliniensis were analyzed by Western immunoblotting with polyclonal sera raised against the N-terminal region of the C. albicans Cdr1p. In protein extracts from C. albicans CA132A and C. dubliniensis isolates CD41, CD57, CD72, CM1, and CM2 , a protein of approximately 170 kDa was detected, matching the predicted size of C. albicans Cdr1p and the protein encoded by the full-length CdCDR1 ORF . However, in protein extracts from C. dubliniensis isolates CD36, CD51-II, CD47-IIb, CO4, and P30, whose CdCDR1 ORFs were found by sequence analysis to contain a TAG translational stop signal at codon 756, anti-Cdr1p sera reacted with a smaller polypeptide of 85 kDa . This smaller protein is identical in size to the truncated protein predicted from the CdCDR1 nucleotide sequence obtained from C. dubliniensis strain CD36.  Functional analysis of the CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 genes. | The CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 ORFs were amplified from genomic DNA recovered from C. dubliniensis isolates CD36, CD57, CD51-II, CD47-IIb, CM1, and CM2 and C. albicans strain CA132A . Amplicons were cloned in the S. cerevisiae GAL1 expression vector pYES  and were transformed into the azole-susceptible Deltapdr5 S. cerevisiae strain YKKB-13 . Transformants were cultured on minimal agar medium containing 2% (wt/vol) galactose as the sole carbon source in order to induce expression of the cloned CDR genes. Northern blot analysis of total RNA from galactose-grown transformants revealed high levels of expression of the mRNAs for CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 in the respective transformants (data not shown). Transformants were tested for susceptibility to azole antifungal drugs and metabolic inhibitors known to be substrates for C. albicans Cdr1p and Cdr2p  . Cloned CDR1 amplicons from C. albicans CA132A and from the C. dubliniensis isolates CM1, CM2, and CD57 were found to confer resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole and to the metabolic inhibitors rhodamine 6G, cycloheximide, brefeldin A, crystal violet, and cerulenin in S. cerevisiae YKKB-13 (Table ; Fig. ). However, CdCDR1 amplicons from C. dubliniensis isolates CD36, CD51-II, and CD47-IIb, which encoded the truncated CdCdr1p, did not confer resistance to any of these compounds in S. cerevisiae YKKB-13 , despite the fact that high levels of CdCDR1 mRNA could be detected in these transformants by Northern analysis (data not shown). For each of these isolates, at least six separate CdCDR1-encoding amplicons cloned from separate PCRs were analyzed and identical phenotypes were obtained from each clone. In order to unequivocally determine if the premature translational stop signal at codon 756 of the CdCDR1 gene was responsible for the loss of function of the heterologously expressed protein in S. cerevisiae, we carried out site-directed mutagenesis to restore the tyrosine-encoding TAT codon at this position in the cloned C. dubliniensis CD36 CdCDR1 gene. Reassignment of this codon fully restored the ability of the expressed protein to impart a drug resistance phenotype in S. cerevisiae YKKB-13 compared to that of the truncated C. dubliniensis CdCdr1p . The susceptibility of the CdCDR2-harboring transformants to fluconazole and itraconazole was also determined. When compared to S. cerevisiae harboring the plasmid vector alone (fluconazole MIC, 0.5 mug/ml; itraconazole MIC, <0.03 mug/ml), transformants harboring the C. albicans CDR2 gene or the C. dubliniensis CdCDR2 gene were resistant to fluconazole (MIC, 32 to 64 mug/ml) and itraconazole (MIC, 0.5 to 1 mug/ml).  Analysis of CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 mRNA expression levels in C. dubliniensis. | Total RNA was isolated from C. dubliniensis isolates and in vitro-generated derivatives with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole in order to ascertain the expression levels of CdCDR1 and CdCDR2 mRNA in these organisms . As reported by Moran et al. , all clinical isolates and in vitro-generated derivatives of C. dubliniensis with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole displayed high levels of CdMDR1 mRNA compared to matched fluconazole-susceptible isolates . CdMDR1 hybridization signals in the resistant organisms CM2, CD57R, and CD51-II were 50- to 100-fold higher than those observed in matched fluconazole-susceptible isolates. Hybridization of these RNAs with a probe specific for the CdCDR1 gene (homologous to the region from +1 to +421 of the CdCDR1 ORF) revealed that several of these isolates and derivatives with reduced susceptibility to fluconazole also displayed comparatively minor increases in levels of CdCDR1 mRNA expression relative to matched fluconazole-susceptible isolates . The oral clinical isolate CM2 (fluconazole MIC, 32 mug/ml) displayed a twofold-higher level of CdCDR1 mRNA compared to the matched fluconazole-susceptible isolate CM1 (fluconazole MIC, 0.5 mug/ml) recovered from the same patient. Isolates CM1 and CM2 both express the full-length CdCdr1p . Also, the in vitro-generated derivative CD57R (fluconazole MIC, 32 mug/ml), which also expresses the full-length CdCdr1p, displayed a ninefold-higher level of CdCDR1 mRNA than the fluconazole-susceptible parental isolate CD57. Interestingly, the oral clinical isolate CD47-IIb (fluconazole MIC, 16 mug/ml), which was found to express the nonfunctional truncated CdCdr1p, expressed a twofold-higher level of CdCDR1 mRNA than the matched clinical isolate CD47-I (fluconazole MIC, 8 mug/ml). However, in vitro-generated derivatives of the fluconazole-susceptible C. dubliniensis isolates CD51-II and CD36 (fluconazole MIC, 0.25 mug/ml), which displayed reduced susceptibility to fluconazole (fluconazole MICs were 32 to 64 mug/ml for CD51-IIR, CD36R1, and CD36R2), displayed levels of CdCDR1 mRNA that were similar to or reduced in comparison to their respective fluconazole-susceptible parental isolates . Both CD36 and CD51-II were shown to express the truncated 85-kDa CdCdr1p . Total RNA from these isolates and derivatives was also hybridized with sequences specific for CdCDR2 (homologous to the region from +1 to +418 of the CdCDR2 ORF). However, expression of CdCDR2 mRNA was not detected in any of the isolates or derivatives tested.  Targeted disruption of CdCDR1. | In order to ascertain the role of the CdCDR1 gene in determining susceptibility to azole antifungal drugs in C. dubliniensis, we disrupted both copies of the CdCDR1 gene in a C. dubliniensis strain by using the MPAR-flipper technique described by Wirsching et al. . These experiments were carried out in an in vitro-generated derivative of the clinical isolate CD57 (fluconazole MIC, 0.5 mug/ml), termed CD57R, which exhibits reduced susceptibility to fluconazole (fluconazole MIC, 32 mug/ml). CD57R was originally generated by successive subculture of the fluconazole-susceptible isolate CD57 on fluconazole-containing agar medium . CD57R expresses the full-length CdCdr1p and showed a ninefold increase in CdCDR1 mRNA expression levels relative to a matched fluconazole-susceptible isolate (CD57)  and also exhibits increased CdCdr1