N-Alkyl Urea Hydroxamic Acids as a New Class of Peptide Deformylase Inhibitors with Antibacterial Activity
Peptide deformylase (PDF) is a prokaryotic metalloenzyme that is essential for bacterial growth and is a new target for the development of antibacterial agents. All previously reported PDF inhibitors with sufficient antibacterial activity share the structural feature of a 2-substituted alkanoyl at the P1' site. Using a combination of iterative parallel synthesis and traditional medicinal chemistry, we have identified a new class of PDF inhibitors with N-alkyl urea at the P1' site. Compounds with MICs of <=4 mug/ml against gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens, including Staphylococcusaureus, Streptococcuspneumoniae, and Haemophilusinfluenzae, have been identified. The concentrations needed to inhibit 50% of enzyme activity (IC50s) for Escherichiacoli Ni-PDF were <=0.1 muM, demonstrating the specificity of the inhibitors. In addition, these compounds were very selective for PDF, with IC50s of consistently >200 muM for matrilysin and other mammalian metalloproteases. Structure-activity relationship analysis identified preferred substitutions resulting in improved potency and decreased cytotoxity. One of the compounds (VRC4307) was cocrystallized with PDF, and the enzyme-inhibitor structure was determined at a resolution of 1.7 A. This structural information indicated that the urea compounds adopt a binding position similar to that previously determined for succinate hydroxamates. Two compounds, VRC4232 and VRC4307, displayed in vivo efficacy in a mouse protection assay, with 50% protective doses of 30.8 and 17.9 mg/kg of body weight, respectively. These N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids provide a starting point for identifying new PDF inhibitors that can serve as antimicrobial agents.

A largely empirical search for new antibiotics, carried out since the 1940s, has led to an impressive armamentarium of clinically useful antibacterial drugs. However, the actual number of targets interfered with by these agents is very limited. Cross-resistance for antibiotics, resulting from a sharing of the same target, plays an important role in the worsening problem of resistance. It is not surprising that antibacterial drug discovery efforts are now focusing on identifying molecules that block different targets and thus can inhibit the growth of resistant bacteria. Analysis of microbial genomes has revealed an abundance of novel and potentially useful targets , but little has so far resulted from this much heralded effort. On the other hand, many bacterial enzymes that have been well characterized hold promise for the discovery of new antibacterial drugs. One such target that has recently received a great deal of attention is peptide deformylase (PDF; EC 3.5.1.31). Protein synthesis has proven to be a rich source of targets for antibacterial drugs . Many of the known antibiotics target one or more steps of this complex process, including the aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines, and oxazolidinones. Although the protein-synthesizing machineries of bacterial and mammalian cells exhibit overall similarity, there are sufficient differences to allow for selective blocking of the process in bacteria. One significant difference is the transformylation and subsequent deformylation of the initiating methionine in bacterial translation . Unlike cytosolic protein synthesis in mammalian cells, protein synthesis in bacteria is initiated with N-formylmethionine , which is generated by enzymatic transformylation of methionyl-tRNA. In prokaryotes, the N-formylmethionine of the nascent protein is removed by the sequential action of PDF and a methionine aminopeptidase to afford the mature protein . This bacterium-specific requirement for PDF in protein synthesis provides a rational basis for selectivity, making it an attractive drug discovery target. The possible use of PDF as an antimicrobial target was recently reviewed elsewhere . PDF activity was first reported by Adams in 1968 . However, further attempts to purify the enzyme from cell lysates failed because the activity was not stable. The enzyme was not characterized further until the early 1990s, when the deformylase gene, def, was cloned  and PDF was subsequently overexpressed in Escherichiacoli . Bacterial PDF belongs to a new class of metallohydrolases that utilize an Fe2+ ion as the catalytic metal ion . The ferrous ion in PDF is very unstable and can be quickly and irreversibly oxidized to the ferric ion, resulting in an inactive enzyme . Interestingly, the ferrous ion can be replaced with a nickel ion in vitro, resulting in much greater enzyme stability with little loss of enzyme activity . The three-dimensional structures of various PDF molecules, including structures of enzyme-inhibitor complexes, have been solved and published . Although PDF is a ferrous aminopeptidase with a primary sequence very different from those of other metalloproteases, it has been noted that the environment surrounding the catalytic metal ion of PDF appears to be very similar to the active sites of thermolysin and the matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) . The catalytic metal ion of PDF is tetrahedrally coordinated with two histidines from the conserved zinc hydrolase sequence, HEXXH, and a conserved cysteine from an EGCLS motif. A water molecule that presumably hydrolyzes the amide bond occupies the fourth position in the tetrahedron. The fact that PDF is a metalloprotease makes the enzyme a more attractive target for drug discovery. Metalloproteases are among the best studied of the enzyme classes , and there are excellent precedents for the mechanism-based design of their inhibitors. In the last few years, several classes of PDF inhibitors have been reported (, -, , , , , , ). While all of these compounds inhibit PDF activity, most of them do not have antibacterial activity, presumably due to weak potency against PDF and/or an inability to penetrate the bacterial cell. It is interesting that among these compounds, those for which the concentrations needed to inhibit 50% of enzyme activity (IC50s) (or Kis) were greater than 1 muM had no antibacterial activity. Based on mechanistic and structural information, together with an understanding of the general principles of inhibiting metalloproteases, a generic PDF inhibitor structure   was proposed. In this structure, X represents a chelating pharmacophore that will be the major component to provide binding energy; the n-butyl group mimics the methionine side chain; and P2' and P3' are regions of the inhibitor that can provide additional binding energy, selectivity, and favorable pharmacokinetic properties. Recently, actinonin, a naturally occurring antibiotic that was first isolated in 1962 from an actinomycete , was shown to be a PDF inhibitor . In this study, we report that N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids, which also fit this generic structure, represent a new class of PDF inhibitors. The structural characterization and biological evaluation of this class of inhibitors are presented here. FIG. 1. | Generic PDF inhibitor structure derived from the transition state of the deformylation reaction . Generic PDF inhibitor structure derived from the transition state of the deformylation reaction .
Materials. | Actinonin, formate dehydrogenase (FDH), catalase, and NAD+ were obtained from Sigma; E. coli Ni-PDF and Streptococcuspneumoniae Zn-PDF were overproduced and purified as previously described . N-formylmethionine-alanine-serine (fMAS) and thio ester peptide Ac-ProLeuGly-S-LeuLeuGly-OC2H5 were obtained from Bachem. Matrilysin (MMP-7) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) were obtained from Calbiochem. Hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin was purchased from Aldrich. All other chemicals were of the highest commercial grade.  Preparation of N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids. | The method of preparation of the urea compounds was recently reported (J. Lewis, J. Jacobs, C. Wu, C. Hackbarth, W. Wang, S. Lopez, R. White, J. Trias, Z. Yuan, and D. Patel, Abstr. 41st Intersci. Conf. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., abstr. 358, 2001) and will be published elsewhere. Briefly, the urea hydroxamic acids (compound 4) were prepared in eight steps from commercially available amino acid precursors as outlined in Fig. . The synthetic sequence used Fukuyama-Mitsunobu chemistry followed by thiolytic deprotection to provide N-mono-alkyl-glycine methyl esters (compound 1). Acylation of N-alkyl amino esters with excess phosgene under aqueous reaction conditions provided N-alkyl-N-chlorocarbamoyl-glycine methyl esters (compound 2), which were subsequently acylated with the N-alkyl-N-chlorocarbamoyl-glycine methyl esters in pyridine to produce tetrasubstituted ureas (compound 3). Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) deprotection followed by coupling of the R2 amine with PyBop peptide coupling reagent and treatment with hydroxylamine provided the final product, urea hydroxamic acid PDF inhibitors (compound 4).  Enzyme assays. | All absorption measurements were obtained with a SpectraMax plate reader (Molecular Devices). Deformylase activity was assayed by a PDF-FDH coupled assay as previously described . Briefly, the assay was carried out at room temperature with 5 nM E. coli Ni-PDF or 10 nM S. pneumoniae Zn-PDF  in a buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 10 mM NaCl, and 0.2 mg of bovine serum albumin/ml in half-area 96-well microtiter plates (Corning). The reaction was initiated by the addition of a reaction mixture of 0.5 U of FDH/ml, 1 mM NAD+, and 4 mM fMAS at the desired concentration. To determine the IC50s of the desired compounds, PDF was preincubated for 10 min with various concentrations of test compounds prior to the addition of the reaction mixture. The initial reaction velocity was measured as the initial rate of increase in the absorption at 340 nm. Matrilysin (MMP-7) activity was assayed as reported previously  by using a thio ester peptide as a substrate, with some modifications. Briefly, 0.12 mug of MMP-7/ml was preincubated at room temperature for 10 min with test compounds at various concentrations in a buffer containing 50 mM Tricine (pH 7.5), 0.2 M NaCl, 10 mM CaCl2, and 0.05% Brij. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 0.05 mM thio ester peptide substrate (Ac-ProLeuGly-S-LeuLeuGly-OC2H5) and 0.1 mM 5,5'-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid). Reaction progress was monitored by recording the increase in the absorption at 405 nm. ACE activity was determined with a 96-well format according to the procedure reported by Maclean et al. . The hydrolysis product of the enzyme reaction was detected by derivatization with o-phthaldialdehyde reagent (Pierce) by following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 0.03 U of ACE/ml was incubated with test compounds at different concentrations at room temperature for 10 min in a buffer consisting of 25 mM HEPES (pH 8.2) and 0.3 M NaCl. The reaction was initiated when 2 mM substrate (hippuryl-HisLeu) was added to the mixture. The enzyme reaction was carried out at 35C for 1 h. An equal volume of o-phthaldialdehyde reagent was added, and the reaction signal was detected by recording the change in fluorescence at excitation and emission wavelengths of 360 and 465 nm, respectively. The IC50 was calculated with the following equation:  In this equation, yo is enzyme activity in the absence of inhibitor, and [In] is the inhibitor concentration. All data fitting was carried out by using nonlinear least-squares regression with the commercial software package DeltaGraph 4.0 (Deltapoint, Inc).  Cytotoxicity assays. | The cytotoxicities of the test compounds were assessed by using human K562 (ATCC CCL-243) and murine P388D1 (ATCC CCL-46) leukemia cell lines. The human cell line K562 was maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco BRL) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. P388D1 cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum (Gibco BRL). The assays were conducted with 96-well microtiter plates (Corning), and test compounds were serially diluted in 10% dimethyl sulfoxide. A volume of 10 mul of each dilution was added to wells 1 to 11 in each row; well 12, used as a control, contained 10 mul of 10% dimethyl sulfoxide solution without drug; and well 12H contained 0.25 mug of puromycin/ml as a no-growth control. Ninety microliters of log-phase cells (5.5 x 104 cells/ml) was suspended in the appropriate assay medium and added to each well. The cells were exposed to the drug for 3 days at 37C in the presence of 5% CO2. On day 4, an indicator solution containing 1 mg of XTT/ml and 7.7 mug of phenazine methosulfate (Sigma)/ml in phosphate-buffered saline was added to each well, and the suspension was reincubated for 4 h under the same conditions. The XTT cleavage product was detected by recording the change in the absorption at 450 nm, and cell growth as a percentage of that in the corresponding control well was used to calculate the IC50 with equation 1.  Susceptibility studies and killing curves. | Bacteria used in these studies were stored at -80C and grown at 35C in accordance with NCCLS recommendations . For susceptibility tests, MICs were determined by the broth microdilution method in accordance with NCCLS guidelines  but with the following modification. Because of the high frequency of resistance previously reported with other PDF inhibitors , a modified bacterial inoculum size of 0.5 x 105 to 1.0 x 105 CFU/ml was used to determine the relative activities of the compounds. The organisms used are all part of the Versicor strain collection . The MIC was defined as the lowest concentration that yielded no visible growth after 24 h of incubation at 35C; end points were obtained by measuring the optical density at 600 nm (OD600). Minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs) were determined for Haemophilusinfluenzae (ATCC 31517; VHIN1004) and S. pneumoniae (ATCC 49219; VSPN1001) . The MBC was defined as the lowest concentration of antibiotic that resulted in a >=3-log10 decrease in the bacterial titer. Time-kill curves were determined by using log-phase cultures of H. influenzae (ATCC 31517), S. pneumoniae (ATCC 49219), and Staphylococcusaureus (ATCC 25923; VSAU1003). The bacteria were exposed to 5 or 10 times the MIC of each compound tested. Cultures were incubated at 35C, and titers were quantitatively determined at 0, 2, 6, 8, and 24 h of incubation. Results were expressed as log10 CFU per milliliter versus time.  Expression and purification of E. coli PDF used for crystallographic studies. | The E. colidef gene was cloned for overexpression in E. coli BL21(DE3)/pLysS as described previously . Fermentation was performed by using a Bioflo 2000 fermentor (New Brunswick Scientific) with an on-demand fed-batch strategy and minimal medium. A 4-liter fermentation was maintained at 37C until the culture reached an OD600 of similar8.9. The temperature was then lowered to 18C, and the culture was induced overnight with isopropyl-beta-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG) at a final concentration of 0.4 mM. The bacterial cells (final OD600, similar40) were harvested by centrifugation and yielded similar240 g of paste (wet weight). The cells were frozen as pellets and stored at -80C. All purification steps were performed at 4C unless noted otherwise. Aliquots of cells (similar50 g) were thawed briefly at 37C and resuspended in 250 ml of lysis buffer (20 mM morpholineethanesulfonic acid [MES]-KOH [pH 6.5], 100 mM KCl, 5 mM NiSO4, 5 mM MgSO4, 10 mug of catalase/ml, 100 muM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10.0 mug of DNase I/ml, five tablets of complete protease inhibitor cocktail without EDTA [Boehringer Mannheim]). The cells were lysed with four freeze-thaw cycles and then sonicated (four 10-s bursts, full power) with a Virsonic 60 apparatus (Virtus) equipped with a titanium horn. The pellets were collected at 35,000 x g and washed by resuspension in 120 ml of lysis buffer. The supernatants were combined and clarified by centrifugation at 100,000 x g for 30 min. DNA was removed by centrifugation at 35,000 x g following a 15-min treatment with 0.1% polyethyleneimine (final concentration). The supernatant was buffer exchanged with diafiltration against a 5-kDa-cutoff membrane in 20 mM morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS)-KOH (pH 7.7)-50 mM KCl-1 mM NiSO4 and filtered through a 0.2-mum-pore-size filter. The sample was then loaded at a flow rate of 30 ml/min onto a POROS 20HQ (perfusion chromatography medium; PE Biosystems) column (2 by 16 cm) equilibrated with 20 mM MOPS-KOH (pH 7.7)-1 mM NiSO4 at room temperature. A linear salt gradient, 0 to 300 mM KCl in 20 column volumes, was used to elute bound proteins, and the fractions were immediately placed at 4C. Fractions containing Ni-PDF were identified by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis, pooled, and further purified by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 HiLoad (16/60) column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equilibrated with 20 mM MOPS-KOH (pH 7.7)-100 mM KCl at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Proteins were pooled and concentrated to similar5 to 10 mg/ml. After the addition of glycerol to 10% and 1 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) hydrochloride, the enzyme was stored at -80C. The protein concentration was determined with Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad) and bovine serum albumin as a standard. This highly purified Ni-PDF was used directly for crystallization.  Crystallization and structure determination. | An enzyme-inhibitor complex was formed by incubation of a twofold molar excess of PDF inhibitor VRC4307 with 1.5 mg of PDF/ml in binding buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature. The complex was buffer exchanged four times in binding buffer with 50 muM compound VRC4307 by using a Millipore concentrator (5,000-molecular-weight cutoff) and finally concentrated to 36 mg/ml. Crystals were grown by the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method by mixing equal volumes of protein solution and well buffer [100 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 2.0 M (NH4)2SO4] at 17C. Crystals were cryoprotected at room temperature by a 15-min, 10-step transfer to cryobuffer solution [100 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 2.4 M (NH4)2SO4, 25% glycerol] with 5 muM compound VRC4307 and immediately flash-frozen in a 100 K nitrogen gas cold stream (model 700 apparatus; Oxford Cryosystems) for data collection. Diffraction data were collected by using an R-AXIS-IIc image-plate system (Molecular Structures Corp. [MSC]) with Osmic Confocal Max-Flux optics (Blue-3 configuration; Rigaku/MSC) and an RU-2HR generator (MSC) operating at 100 mA and 50 kV. A complete data set was collected from a single crystal (0.2 by 0.18 by 0.06 mm) maintained at 100 K. The images were indexed, and integration was performed by using Denzo/Scalepack . The structure of the enzyme or enzyme complex was determined by molecular replacement with AMoRe  as implemented in the CCP4  package with a structure of E. coli PDF (e.g., 1ICJ)  as a search model. The structure was refined with the CNX 2000  package (Accelrys Inc.).  Isolation of resistant mutants of H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae. | Spontaneous resistant mutants were selected as previously described . Briefly, 1010 CFU of H. influenzae (ATCC 31517) were plated on chocolate agar plates containing 30 mug of antibiotic/ml. In a second experiment, approximately 1010 CFU of log-phase S. pneumoniae (ATCC 49219) were spread on tryptic soy agar (TSA)-5% sheep blood agar plates containing 30 mug of test compound/ml. The plates were incubated for 48 h at 35C in a 10% CO2 atmosphere. Colonies were picked and transferred to drug-free plates; stable mutants that survived this passage were subjected to further characterization.  Molecular techniques and sequence analysis. | Primary sequences for the def and fmt homologs of H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae were obtained from public sequence databases and previously published work . The def-fmt operon and flanking DNA (230 bp upstream; 60 bp downstream) from wild-type H. influenzae VHIN1004 and a single PDF inhibitor-resistant derivative were amplified by PCR with respective upstream and downstream primers oPV743 (5'-CGCCAGGTTACCAAATACTTATCTAAG-3') and oPV378 (5'-TTTTCCGCTATAAATTTACCG-3') for def and oPV177 (5'-GCCAGCGCATTAAAGAAAAGTTG-3') and oPV179 (5'-CGAAAGTGCGGTCATTTTTACTG-3') for fmt. The defA, defB, and fmt genes and flanking DNAs (approximately 120, 350, and 60 bp upstream, respectively; 60 bp downstream for all three) from wild-type S. pneumoniae ATCC 49619 and two PDF inhibitor-resistant derivatives were amplified by PCR with the respective upstream and downstream primers oPV369 (5'-CGTGGCTTGGAAGTAACT-3') and oPV370 (5'-GATATACCAGGTCGTTGC-3') for defA, oPV385 (5'-TCCCTTATTGCTCCACTTG-3') and oPV368 (5'-TATCATTTGTTTTCATGCCTC-3') for defB, and oPV383 (5'-CCACAACCTCTATCATTACCAG-3') and oPV384 (5'-ACCGTTCCATAGACCAGC-3') for fmt. All PCR products were purified with QiaQuick DNA purification columns (Qiagen), and DNA sequences were determined by the dideoxy chain termination method (Sequetech). In all instances, mutations were confirmed by analysis of a second independent PCR product.  Pharmacokinetic studies. | CD-1 female outbred mice (Charles River Laboratories) were used for pharmacokinetic analyses of selected PDF inhibitors. The compounds were formulated in 20% cyclodextrin (Aldrich) and filter sterilized. After 1 week of acclimation, mice (20 to 25 g each) were dosed either intravenously (i.v.) or orally (p.o.) with antibiotic; at 0.083, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 h after dosing, blood samples were collected from anesthetized mice via cardiac puncture. Groups of four mice were used for each time point. The blood was allowed to clot, and the serum samples were stored immediately at -80C. Serum was extracted with a mixture of acetonitrile, ethanol, and acetic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography with triple quadropole mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) MS (Phenomenex LUNA-C8, 50 by 2 mm, 3 mum, HP1100, Micromass Quattro LC) with an internal standard. The pharmacokinetic parameters, including Tmax (time to maximum concentration), Cmax (maximum concentration measured), t1/2 (terminal half-life), and AUC (area under the curve), were calculated. The p.o. bioavailability was calculated as the ratio of the AUC for p.o. administration to the AUC for i.v. administration.  Metabolic stability in liver microsomes. | Preparations of hepatic microsomes from male CD-1 mice, male Sprague-Dawley rats, and human donors were obtained from Xenotech LLC. To assess their metabolic stability, test compounds (1 muM) in phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 7.4) were incubated at 37C with liver microsomal proteins (0.2 mg/ml) supplemented with NADPH (1 mM), UDP-glucuronic acid (4 mM), and alamethecin (60 mug/mg of protein) for 0, 10, 20, and 30 min. Aliquots were removed at various times, and the reaction was terminated by the addition of acetonitrile. Loss of the parent compound was monitored by LC-MS/MS (PE-SCIEX API3000; triple quadrupole) with reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography separation (Phenomenex LUNA-C18, 2.1 by 30 mm, 3 mum). The viability and activity of the microsomal preparations were separately verified by using a positive metabolic control. Intrinsic clearance was calculated from the slope of the curve of log10 linear concentration versus incubation time.  Metabolite identification. | Mouse serum samples from the pharmacokinetic studies described above were extracted with acetonitrile and analyzed by LC-MS/ MS to identify additional metabolites in the serum. In a separate experiment, test compounds (10 muM) were incubated with mouse, rat, and human liver microsomes as described above at 37 C for 20 min, and the resulting samples were extracted before being analyzed for metabolites.  Protection from infection in the mouse septicemia model (S. aureus strain Smith). | A standard peritonitis model of infection was used as an initial screen to determine the relative efficacies of the PDF inhibitors (MDS Pharma Services, Bothell, Wash.). Briefly, outbred ICR-derived mice (20 to 25 g each) were inoculated intraperitoneally with a 90 to 100% lethal dose (9.0 x 105 CFU/mouse) of S. aureus strain Smith (ATCC 19636) in 0.5 ml of brain heart infusion broth containing 5% mucin. Compounds were dissolved in 20% cyclodextrin and administered subcutaneously (s.c.) and/or p.o. at 1 and 5 h after infection. Vancomycin was included as a control antibiotic, and animals in this antibiotic regimen were dosed s.c. Groups of five mice were used for each dose level. Mice were monitored daily for 6 days, and cumulative mortality was used to determine the 50% effective dose (ED50) by nonlinear regression with Graph-Pad Prism (Graph Pad Software).  FIG. 2. | Synthesis of N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids. Synthesis of N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids. The letters in the scheme represent the following solvents: a, NsCl, aqueous NaHCO3, DCM; b, R1OH, DIAD, PPh3; c, PhSH, TBDE-PS, DMF; d, COCl2, aqueous NaHCO3, Et2O; e, l-Pro-OtBu, pyridine, DCM; f, TFA, DCM; g, R2NH2, PyBop, DIEA, DMF; and h, aqueous NH2OH, dioxane.
Previously, the alkyl succinate hydroxamic acid VRC3324, (2R)-butyl-N4-hydroxy-N1-[2-methyl-(1S)-(naphthalen-2-ylcarbamoyl)-propyl]-succinamide, was identified as a potent PDF inhibitor with excellent antibacterial activity (C. Hackbarth, S. Lopez, M. Gomez, W. Wang, J. Jacobs, R. Jain, Z.-J. Ni, J. Trias, D. Chen, G. Withers, K. Clark, J. Koehn, B. Weidmann, D. Patel, and Z. Yuan, Abstr. 40th Intersci. Conf. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., abstr. 2173, 2000). Similar compounds of this chemical class exhibit broad-spectrum antibacterial activity and in vivo activity in a mouse septicemia model (D. Chen, C. Hackbarth, Z.-J. Ni, W. Wang, C. Wu, D. Young, R. White, J. Trias, D. Patel, and Z. Yuan, Abstr. 40th Intersci. Conf. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., abstr. 2175, 2000). In our efforts to discover new pharmacophores that would improve the biological properties of this class of inhibitors, N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids were identified. VRC3852  represents an early lead in this new class of PDF inhibitors (Lewis et al., 41st ICAAC). Analogs of VRC3852, prepared in both library format and as individual compounds, were screened to identify those with optimized activity and structure. In vitro activity tests. | From more than 200 analogs tested, 21 compounds  were purified by high-pressure liquid chromatography and subjected to additional biological characterization. All of these compounds were tested for the inhibition of deformylase activity with the E. coli and S. pneumonia enzymes overproduced and purified from E. coli. In addition, whole-cell activity was assessed with broth microdilution MICs against a panel of 26 organisms, including both gram-positive and -negative bacteria and Candidaalbicans. Twenty of these 21 compounds have IC50s of <=100 nM for E. coli deformylase. Eighteen of these 20 compounds also have excellent activity (IC50s, <=75 nM) against S. pneumoniae PDF. These IC50s corresponded to improved activity against S. pneumoniae. In fact, the two compounds with poor IC50s for the S. pneumoniae enzyme, VRC4347 and VRC4390, also lacked whole-cell activity against this organism, providing further evidence that this class of compounds targets deformylase for the inhibition of bacterial growth. Compared with the MICs of the initial lead in this series, VRC3852, the MICs against the three gram-positive pathogens tested (S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, and Enterococcusfaecium) improved for the majority of the compounds listed. One of the compounds that had poor gram-positive activity, VRC4390, nonetheless maintained its activity against H. influenzae. On the other hand, VRC4234 and VRC4305 were more active against S. aureus and S. pneumoniae but less potent against the gram-negative pathogen H. influenzae. Apparently, these compounds readily undergo efflux in E. coli, since none was active against wild-type E. coli but all possessed low MICs against an E. coliacr mutant which lacks the Acr efflux pump . None of these compounds was active against C. albicans. To determine whether this class of compounds inhibited bacterial growth through the inhibition of deformylase, each of the compounds was tested for its ability to inhibit the growth of an actinonin-resistant S. aureus strain, VSAU6011. This strain harbors a loss-of-function mutation in the formyltransferase-encoding gene, bypassing the need for deformylase activity and permitting growth even when PDF activity is inhibited . S. aureus VSAU6011 was highly resistant to all of the compounds tested, demonstrating that N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids, like alkyl succinates , inhibit bacterial growth through the inhibition of deformylase. These compounds were also tested for their potential cytotoxicity and inhibition of matrilysin, a member of the mammalian MMP superfamily which closely resembles PDF . Matrilysin activity was not inhibited in the presence of up to and in most instances exceeding 100 muM PDF inhibitor. In addition, the IC50s of VRC4232 and VRC4307 against human ACE, another metalloprotease, were higher than 100 muM. Thus, these N-alkyl urea hydroxamic acids are over 1,000 times more potent against bacterial deformylase than the eukaryotic metalloenzymes tested. When these compounds were tested against two different mammalian cell lines, the IC50s, determined after 72 h of continuous exposure, were at least 10-fold higher than the MICs for the major bacterial pathogens in the screening panel. A closer examination of the structure-activity relationships of these compounds (see Discussion) suggested that the cytotoxicity of these compounds generally correlated with their hydrophobicity. Given their overall in vitro profiles, VRC4232 and VRC4307 were selected as new leads for additional in vitro and in vivo characterizations.  X-ray analysis of binding interactions. | Key parameters and summary statistics for the refined PDF model are provided in Table . After independent rigid-body refinement of the three PDF proteins in the asymmetric unit, the electron density for the three inhibitors was clearly seen in each of the active sites. Several rounds of iterative model building (including the addition of water molecules and correcting loops involved in crystal contacts) with the program O  and refinement were conducted before the three inhibitor molecules were added to the model. In complex A, the inhibitor could be positioned unambiguously in the electron density. For complexes B and C, there was a weak, broken electron density for the 4,5-dimethylthiazole ring of the inhibitor. Rfree was monitored while additional water molecules were added. The final model contained three PDF-compound VRC4307 complexes as well as 435 water, 3 sulfate, and 5 glycerol molecules, resulting in an R factor of 18.6% (Rfree = 21.6%) in the resolution range of 30.0 to 1.8 A. The structure of E. coli PDF has already been extensively characterized and will not be elaborated on further here . When the PDF structure with bound VRC4307 is examined, the hydroxamic acid is observed to coordinate the active-site Ni2+, as expected; the cyclopentyl ring system of VRC4307 lies in the S1' pocket of the enzyme . The carbonyl oxygen of the proline group of VRC4307 forms a hydrogen bond with the backbone nitrogen of Ile44, maintaining the peptidic interaction observed for the PDF structure with the bound product MAS . Details of the metal coordination, hydrogen bonding, and Van der Waals interactions are shown in Fig. . The electron density for most of the compound is clear and unambiguous. The electron density for the amide-dimethylthiazole (Fig. , green atoms) portion of the inhibitor is weak and broken. Apparently, the inhibitor is able to adopt multiple conformations when bound; this hypothesis is illustrated by superimposition of the three complexes . Surprisingly, the peptidic interaction with the backbone carbonyl of Glu42 is seen in only one of the three complexes . The hydroxamic acid-metal coordination in the PDF-VRC4307 complex maintains a tetrahedral configuration . Although the overall arrangement of the ligand atoms approximates a distorted trigonal bipyrimidal geometry, the carbonyl oxygen of the inhibitor is more distant from the metal than is typically observed in metal-ligand complexes. In all three complexes, the Ni2+ distances are reasonable for the N and O atoms (2.0 to 2.1 A) and for the S atoms (2.3 A); however, the carbonyl O atom of VRC4307 is 2.7 to 3.0 A from the metal. This suboptimal interaction may be offset, in part, by an ideal hydrogen bonding interaction distance between the c