Loss of Nuclear Gene Expression during the Phytochrome A-Mediated Far-Red Block of Greening Response
We have examined the expression of the HEMA1 gene, which encodes the key chlorophyll synthesis enzyme glutamyl-tRNA reductase, during the phytochrome A-mediated far-red light (FR) block of greening response in Arabidopsis. Our results demonstrate that the FR block of greening comprises two separate responses: a white light (WL) intensity-independent response that requires 3 d of FR and is associated with a loss of expression of the nuclear genes HEMA1 and Lhcb following the transfer to WL (transcriptionally coupled response) and a WL intensity-dependent response that is induced by 1 d of FR and is transcriptionally uncoupled. Both responses required phytochrome A. The transcriptionally uncoupled response correlated with a deregulation of tetrapyrrole synthesis and potential photooxidative damage and was inhibited by cytokinin. The transcriptionally coupled FR response was additive with the loss of expression following Norflurazon-induced photobleaching and was absent in the presence of sucrose or after lower fluence rate (1 mumol m-2 s-1) FR treatments. Both pathways leading to the loss of nuclear gene expression were inhibited by overexpression of NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase, indicating a role for plastid signaling in the FR-mediated pathway. The significance of identifying a distinct phytochrome A-mediated plastid signaling pathway is discussed.

The coordinated synthesis of chlorophylls and chlorophyll-binding proteins is critically important during emergence of the etiolated seedling into light, and is essential for the normal development of functional chloroplasts. The key regulatory step in chlorophyll synthesis is the formation of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), which is rate limiting for the tetrapyrrole pathway . As a consequence, inhibition of ALA synthesis through inhibitors or anti-sense approaches  has a dramatic effect on chloroplast development, resulting in plants that are highly susceptible to photobleaching. In a converse manner, excess ALA also affects chloroplast development  and leads to an overaccumulation of porphyrins, which can lead to severe photooxidative damage . Uncoupling tetrapyrrole synthesis from chloroplast development may also be achieved by irradiating etiolated seedlings with far-red (FR) light . Growth of Arabidopsis seedlings under continuous FR (FRc) can induce partial photomorphogenesis with reduced hypocotyl elongation growth and cotyledon expansion. These responses are characteristic of the FR-high-irradiance response (FR-HIR; ), which is a specific function of phytochrome A . FRc irradiation can also activate many of the processes required for chloroplast development. These include the induction of nuclear genes encoding chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins and other photosynthetic proteins  and the transcription of chloroplast genes and replication of plastid DNA . However, because photoconversion of protochlorophyllide (Pchlide) to chlorophyllide (Chlide) by the enzyme NADPH:Pchlide oxidoreductase (POR) is inefficient under FR wavelengths, chlorophyll synthesis is severely limited under these conditions. Thus, phytochrome A-mediated induction of selected facets of plastid development may occur in the absence of conditions that allow the synthesis of corresponding levels of chlorophyll. It has previously been shown that seedlings of Arabidopsis and tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) grown under prolonged FR not only fail to accumulate chlorophyll, but also are unable to green when subsequently transferred to white light (WL; ; ). This phenomenon, known as the FR block of greening response, has been characterized at the molecular level as a depletion of PORA (and partially of PORB) and the concomitant loss of the ordered membrane system of the prolamellar body . Each of these effects displays characteristics of an FR-HIR and is dependent on phytochrome A activity . Further evidence that the loss of POR is crucial to the FR block of greening comes from a transgenic approach in which overexpression of PORA was able to maintain WL-mediated greening in FR-pretreated seedlings . It is likely that PORA has two important roles in maintaining chlorophyll synthesis in WL. Not only is it required for light-dependent chlorophyll synthesis, but it has a role in buffering against photooxidative damage that occurs during the illumination of etiolated, Pchlide-containing tissues . This second role has been largely supported by subsequent studies with PORA- and PORB-overexpressing lines . However, it is interesting that POR overexpression could not fully counteract the FR block, and FR-pretreated transgenic seedlings still contained approximately two-thirds of the chlorophyll levels of dark-treated controls . This suggests that although the level of POR is a critical determinant of this response, other FR-mediated processes may also be important. Prolonged FR irradiation has been shown to cause the formation of aberrant plastids in developing cotyledons, and the irreversible nature of the FR block of greening response has been attributed to the ensuing degradation of plastid components suggested by the formation of vesicles in the stroma . One possibility is that this FR-mediated effect on plastid integrity leads to the loss of a plastid signal required for normal expression of photosynthetically related genes. Such a signal has been previously identified through the action of photobleaching herbicides  and is required for the expression of numerous photosynthetically related nuclear genes , including Lhcb in Arabidopsis . This signal is also closely involved with phytochrome signaling pathways  and can be thought of as gating phytochrome responses  in a similar way to that proposed for circadian control of light-induced gene expression . We have examined the hypothesis that plastid signaling is involved in the FR block of greening response by analyzing the expression profile of HEMA1. This gene, which encodes glutamyl-tRNA reductase, the first committed enzyme of tetrapyrrole synthesis, is strongly expressed in photosynthetic tissues and is regulated by light, including an FR-HIR, and a plastid signal . However, the light-regulated expression pattern of HEMA1 is not identical to other light-regulated genes, as HEMA1 does not exhibit a very low-fluence response  and utilizes light signaling pathways that partly diverge from those for light regulation of Lhcb (A.C. McCormac and M.J. Terry, unpublished data). Given the importance of tetrapyrroles in the FR block of greening response and the increasingly significant relationship between tetrapyrroles and plastid signaling , the expression of HEMA1 under these conditions is likely to be highly informative for our understanding of plastid development.
The FR Block of Greening Response Is Associated with an Inhibition of Promoter Responsiveness to WL | Figure A shows that, as seen previously , 3 d of FRc (10 mumol m-2 s-1) irradiation of etiolated seedlings fully inhibited their ability to green under subsequent WL, whereas dark-grown seedlings at the same developmental age could green normally. This effect was independent of WL intensity (Fig. A; ) and was also found to be associated with a loss of HEMA1 and Lhcb expression (3 d FRc; Fig. B). Seedlings that had received a pretreatment of just 1 d of FRc suffered only a small, but consistently observed, loss of greening capacity that was enhanced by high-intensity WL (Fig. A). These seedlings were still able to accumulate high levels of HEMA1 and Lhcb mRNA (1 d FRc; Fig. B). Under these conditions, FRc stimulated subsequent WL induction of HEMA1 expression by up to 2-fold compared with seedlings transferred directly from darkness to WL (Fig. B). This stimulation was most evident under low-intensity (8 mumol m-2 s-1) WL, but was absent under high-intensity (250 mumol m-2 s-1) WL (data not shown). These results were confirmed using transgenic Arabidopsis seedlings expressing a HEMA1 promoter:gusA construct (Fig. C). Furthermore, the 1-d FRc-mediated stimulation of WL-induced HEMA1 expression and the 3-d FRc-mediated inhibition of HEMA1 expression following transfer to WL were absent in a phyA genetic background, indicating that these are both phytochrome A-mediated responses (Fig. C). Therefore, the FR block of greening response is characterized not only as a progressive loss of greening ability, but also by a marked change in the transcriptional response to WL.  Figure 1 | FRc preirradiation leads to a reduction in greening and nuclear gene expression following transfer to WL. FRc preirradiation leads to a reduction in greening and nuclear gene expression following transfer to WL. A, Greening of cotyledons under different WL fluence rates after growth in the dark or FRc. Seedlings were germinated without Suc in the dark for 2 d. They were subsequently grown for a further period (as indicated) under FRc (white symbols) or were maintained in the dark (black symbols) for the equivalent period. Seedlings were then transferred to a WL source of 250 mumol m-2 s-1 (circles) or 8 mumol m-2 s-1 (triangles). B, HEMA1 and Lhcb mRNA accumulation under WL (130 mumol m-2 s-1) following a 1- or 3-d FRc pretreatment. Seedlings were grown without Suc. The RNA gel blot was sequentially hybridized with probes for HEMA1, Lhcb, and 18S transcripts. C, Effect of an FR pretreatment on the subsequent response to WL of a HEMA1 promoter:beta-glucuronidase A (gusA) transgene. Transgenic WT or phyA Arabidopsis seedlings were germinated for 1 d in the dark followed by a 1- or 3-d FRc treatment (or equivalent darkness). Seedlings were then transferred to WL (8 mumol m-2 s-1) for 3 d prior to measurement of GUS activity. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3).  The FR Block of Greening Response Develops without Inhibition of HEMA1 Transcription in the Presence of Suc | A full FR block of greening response was avoided if seedlings were grown on a medium supplemented with 3% (w/v) Suc (Fig. A; ). However, even in the presence of Suc, FR pretreatments still elicited a partial impairment of the greening response as compared with that in dark-grown seedlings (Fig. A). This partial block of greening was not seen following FR irradiation of phyA lines (data not shown). In contrast to the FR block of greening response in the absence of Suc (Fig. A), the partial FR block in wild-type (WT) lines was shown to be dependent on WL intensity (Fig. A). In addition, for seedlings grown on 3% (w/v) Suc, an FR pretreatment produced no discernible inhibition of HEMA1 or Lhcb transcript accumulation following transfer to 130 mumol m-2 s-1 WL (Fig. B), even with a 75% inhibition of greening capacity. The accumulation of GUS activity driven by the HEMA1 promoter also showed a normal response to WL following a 3-d FRc preirradiation and was even elevated compared with the response of dark-grown seedlings in low-intensity WL (data not shown). Thus, under these conditions, the effect of an FR preirradiation was to separate HEMA1 expression from chlorophyll accumulation.  Figure 2 | Suc inhibits the loss of nuclear gene expression in FRc-grown seedlings transferred to WL. Suc inhibits the loss of nuclear gene expression in FRc-grown seedlings transferred to WL. A, Greening of cotyledons under different WL fluence rates after growth in darkness or FRc. Seedlings were germinated on 3% (w/v) Suc in the dark for 2 d. They were subsequently grown for a further period (as indicated) under FRc (white symbols) or were maintained in darkness (black symbols) for the equivalent period. Seedlings were then transferred to a WL source of 250 mumol m-2 s-1 (circles) or 8 mumol m-2 s-1 (triangles). B, HEMA1 and Lhcb mRNA accumulation under WL (130 mumol m-2 s-1) following a 1- or 3-d FRc pretreatment. Seedlings were grown on 3% (w/v) Suc. The RNA gel blot was sequentially hybridized with probes for HEMA1, Lhcb, and 18S transcripts. The response characteristics on Suc are similar to those seen in the absence of Suc, but following a short period (1 d) of FR irradiation (Fig. , A and B) and they enable us to define two separate responses leading to an FR block of greening. The first response requires only 1 d of FRc and results in a WL intensity-dependent, incomplete loss of greening ability that is not associated with a loss of HEMA1 and Lhcb expression. We subsequently refer to this as the transcriptionally uncoupled response. The second response requires a longer period of FRc (3 d), is independent of WL intensity, and leads to a complete loss of greening ability (<10%) and the inhibition of HEMA1 and Lhcb expression. This WL intensity-independent response is specifically inhibited by Suc and is now referred to as the transcriptionally coupled response.  Different Transcriptional Responses under FRc Define the Two FR Block of Greening Responses under WL | To further define the characteristics of the two response pathways leading to the FR block of greening, we examined the expression of HEMA1 during FRc. Figure A shows a time course of HEMA1 and Lhcb expression for a 4-d period of FR irradiation. A peak in HEMA1 and Lhcb mRNA levels occurred at around 1 d from the start of the FR treatment and declined thereafter, returning almost to dark levels by d 4 (Fig. , A and B). This type of short-lived expression profile is comparable with that reported previously for a wide range of plastid-associated nuclear genes under FRc , but is in contrast to the sustained transcriptional response seen under Rc (Fig. C). The post-peak phase of FR-mediated HEMA1 expression (i.e. >=72 h FRc; Fig. A) temporally coincides with the inability to reinitiate transcription when exposed to WL (3 d FRc; Fig. B). Because Suc can prevent the loss of HEMA1 expression in WL after a prolonged FRc treatment (Fig. B), we tested whether it could also block the loss of FR-induced HEMA1 expression. Figure D shows that the loss of HEMA1 expression under FRc was prevented by the presence of 3% (w/v) Suc with maximal expression levels (detected after 3 d of FRc) remaining for >=7d. However, the presence of 3% (w/v) Suc also substantially reduced the accumulation of HEMA1 (and Lhcb; data not shown) mRNA seen within the first 24 h of FRc (Fig. , compare A and D). This is consistent with previous reports of the effect of Suc on phytochrome A signaling .  Figure 3 | The response of the HEMA1 promoter to light is subject to developmental aging, FR fluence rate, and Suc. The response of the HEMA1 promoter to light is subject to developmental aging, FR fluence rate, and Suc. A, Transcript levels of HEMA1 and Lhcb under prolonged (16 --96 h) FR irradiation. Seedlings were grown without Suc and were germinated for 2 d in the dark before transfer (at time = 0) to FRc. B, Densitometry scans of band intensities as shown in (A). C, HEMA1 transcript levels under prolonged (24 --96 h) R irradiation. Seedlings were grown without Suc and were germinated for 2 d in the dark before transfer (at time = 0) to Rc. D, HEMA1 mRNA levels in seedlings grown under prolonged (1 --9 d) FR irradiation in the presence of 3% (w/v) Suc. Seedlings were germinated for 3 d in the dark prior to transfer (at t = 0) to FRc. E, HEMA1 mRNA levels in seedlings grown under 1 or 10 mumol m-2 s-1 FRc. F, HEMA1 mRNA levels under WL in seedlings grown previously for 3 d in the dark or under 1 or 10 mumol m-2 s-1 FRc. G, Effect of aging on the subsequent response of a HEMA1 promoter:gusA construct to WL. Seedlings were grown with or without 3% (w/v) Suc in the dark and were subsequently transferred to WL for 3 d prior to measurement of GUS activity. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 5). Phytochrome A-mediated FR responses are also typically affected by the rate of FR delivery . Therefore, we examined this relationship for the transcriptional response to FR and the FR block of greening response by comparing the effect of irradiating seedlings (grown without Suc) with FRc at 1 mumol m-2 s-1 (Fig. E) instead of 10 mumol m-2 s-1 (Fig. , A and E). Under the lower fluence rate, the levels of HEMA1 mRNA showed the same pattern of transient up-regulation, but the rate of transcriptional increase and magnitude of the peak were reduced (Fig. E). A 3-d pretreatment under 1 mumol m-2 s-1 FRc failed to induce the FR-mediated block of the WL transcriptional response (Fig. F). Instead, the FR-irradiated seedlings displayed the characteristics of the transcriptionally uncoupled FR block of greening, showing strong nuclear transcription (Fig. F) and a WL intensity-dependent loss of greening (data not shown). In each case, phyA mutants demonstrated that there was an absolute requirement for phytochrome A for the response to FR (data not shown). To test whether the decline in mRNA accumulation under FRc (Fig. B; 24 --96 h) could be explained as a general loss of light responsiveness rather than the specific loss of phytochrome A-mediated signaling, we examined the effect of prolonging the period in darkness on the ability of seedlings to induce HEMA1 in response to WL. There was a progressive loss of HEMA1 light responsiveness to WL (Fig. G) and also FR (data not shown). This effect was also seen in phyA mutants, which demonstrates that this is a time-dependent, but phytochrome A-independent, response (data not shown). In addition, a time-dependent depletion of greening in dark-grown seedlings was seen in the absence of Suc (Fig. A). When 3% (w/v) Suc was included in the growth medium, the time-dependent loss of promoter responsiveness to WL (Fig. G) and FR (data not shown) was prevented, suggesting that starvation may be a key factor in this process. Thus, it appears that in darkness or FR light (in the absence of exogenous sugars), nuclear genes progress into a nonresponsive state. By contrast, under R (Fig. C) or WL, the transcriptional response escapes this process.  Figure 4 | Relationship between HEMA1 expression, ALA synthesis, and greening ability in FRc-grown seedlings. Relationship between HEMA1 expression, ALA synthesis, and greening ability in FRc-grown seedlings. A, ALA synthesis rates in seedlings of WT and the phyA mutant grown in the dark (black columns) or under 1 d of FRc (hatched columns), with or without 3% (w/v) Suc (as indicated). The inset graph shows the corresponding levels of Pchlide accumulated in the FR-irradiated WT and phyA seedlings. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3). B, Relationship between relative HEMA1 mRNA levels (as measured by densitometry scans of RNA gel blots) and corresponding rates of ALA synthesis in WT and phyA (inset) seedlings. Seedlings were allowed to germinate in the presence of 3% (w/v) Suc for 2 d in the dark and were transferred to FRc or maintained in the dark for an additional period of 1 or 3 d. Each datum point shows the individual value under either irradiation condition for these two incubation times for the Landsberg erecta (Ler) and Colombia (Col) backgrounds. C, Relationship between greening capacity measured after transfer to WL and ALA synthesis rates prior to transfer in dark- and FRc-grown WT  and phyA (circle) seedlings. Seedlings were grown as for B. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3). These results demonstrate that a transcriptionally coupled block of greening response can proceed in the absence of light, although more slowly than under high-intensity FRc (see also Fig. A) and therefore appears to have no absolute requirement for phytochrome A. In contrast, the transcriptionally uncoupled effect on greening has a strict requirement for phytochrome A at the seedling stage (see also Fig. A). In addition, the two FR block of greening responses, as observed in WL, can be further distinguished by the different patterns of transcriptional response during the preceding period of FR irradiation. Thus, for FR irradiation to accelerate the development of the transcriptionally coupled block of greening response, a maximal FR-HIR must be achieved. By contrast, a submaximal FR-HIR can trigger the transcriptionally uncoupled block of greening.  The Transcriptionally Uncoupled Response Is Associated with an Increase in ALA Synthesis | The FR block of greening has previously been ascribed, at least in part, to the photoexcitation of excess Pchlide in the absence of adequate POR buffering , and we hypothesized that the WL-dependent, transcriptionally uncoupled response was likely to be related to these processes. ALA synthesis is the rate-limiting step in Pchlide accumulation , and GluTR activity and HEMA1 expression are believed to be key determinants of this activity (see ). Because FRc resulted in an increase in HEMA1 expression (Fig. , A and B), we tested whether HEMA1 induction could also contribute to the transcriptionally uncoupled response by increasing ALA synthesis and, therefore, the pool of photosensitive Pchlide. Figure  shows that irradiation with FRc significantly elevated ALA synthesis in WT seedlings (Fig. A) and this was correlated (r = 0.82) with HEMA1 mRNA levels under a range of different conditions (Fig. B). On 3% (w/v) Suc, the FRc induction of ALA synthesis was also seen, consistent with the observation previously  that although Suc inhibits the transcriptionally coupled response, the transcriptionally uncoupled response is retained. In phyA seedlings, the FR-mediated increase in ALA synthesis was significantly reduced on 0% and 3% (w/v) Suc (Fig. A). The greater increase in ALA synthesis in WT seedlings grown under FRc also correlated with a higher level of Pchlide in WT versus phyA seedlings in FRc (Fig. A, inset). In contrast to the WT response, phyA seedlings showed no correlation between ALA synthesis rates and HEMA1 mRNA levels (Fig. B, inset), indicating that the FR-mediated increase in ALA synthesis in phyA was not attributable to transcriptional regulation of HEMA1. This strongly suggests a role for posttranscriptional effects on GluTR expression and/or activity in regulating ALA synthesis under these conditions. We next investigated the relationship between ALA synthesis rates and subsequent greening capacity. Figure C shows this data for WT and phyA lines grown under conditions in which only the transcriptionally uncoupled response is occurring (i.e. 1 --3 d of FRc with Suc or 1 d of FRc without Suc). There is a significant (r = 0.88) inverse relationship between ALA synthesis rates and the ability to green following transfer to WL. This suggests that increased ALA synthesis contributes to the transcriptionally uncoupled response.  Loss of Nuclear Gene Expression following FRc- and Norflurazon (NF)-Induced Photobleaching Is Additive | The loss of nuclear gene expression in the transcriptionally coupled FR block of greening response is reminiscent of the loss of HEMA1 expression following plastid photobleaching . Therefore, we investigated the interaction between these two responses. Figure A shows that the carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitor NF inhibits HEMA1 expression under WL following growth in darkness on 0% or 3% (w/v) Suc. This response is the same in WT and phyA seedlings (Fig. , A and B). NF does not affect the HEMA1 response of etiolated seedlings while under FR (data not shown). However, when NF and a 3-d FR pretreatment were combined on 0% (w/v) Suc, the inhibitory effect on the subsequent WL responsiveness of the HEMA1 promoter exceeded that of either of the individual treatments (Fig. A). It should be noted that immediately prior to transfer to WL, the FR-irradiated seedlings in each case had higher levels of HEMA1 expression than dark controls and so had the potential to show a higher level of transcriptional inhibition under WL. However, direct observation of HEMA1 mRNA levels by northern blotting demonstrates that in the presence of NF, a substantial level of HEMA1 mRNA remains (data not shown). Therefore, the magnitude of the NF-mediated reduction of GUS activity was not limited following darkness, and only the combination of FR and NF produced the minimum promoter activity (Fig. A). The additive transcriptional effect of NF and an FR pretreatment was dependent on phytochrome A (Fig. B). In contrast, the transcriptionally uncoupled response, as seen in WT seedlings grown on 3% (w/v) Suc , did not enhance the NF-mediated inhibition of the HEMA1 WL response (Fig. A). Therefore, these results show that the loss of nuclear gene expression during the FRc-mediated transcriptionally coupled response and following NF-induced photobleaching is additive. This may result from two inputs into the same plastid signaling pathway or through two independent pathways.  Figure 5 | POR overexpression rescues the loss of HEMA1 expression in WL following growth in FRc or NF. POR overexpression rescues the loss of HEMA1 expression in WL following growth in FRc or NF. A, Effect of a combined FR preirradiation and NF treatment on the WL response of a HEMA1 promoter:gusA reporter gene. WT seedlings were grown with or without 3% (w/v) Suc for 3 d in FRc or darkness prior to transfer to WL (130 mumol m-2 s-1) for an additional 3 d. NF was included in the media at 5 mum and resulted in the cotyledons appearing completely white under all treatments. Values were normalized to the respective dark control levels (=100) within each experiment. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 5). B, HEMA1 promoter:gusA expression in phyA seedlings under the same conditions as shown in A. C, The effect of POR overexpression on HEMA1 expression. Seedlings of PORA- or PORB-overexpressors (PAO-3 and PBO-1) were germinated in the dark without Suc and were irradiated for 0 to 3 d under FRc. HEMA1 mRNA accumulation was measured following transfer to WL (130 mumol m-2 s-1). D, The effect of 5 mum NF on the accumulation of HEMA1 mRNA in WL-irradiated seedlings of WT and transgenic lines overexpressing PORA (PAO-3) or PORB (PBO-1). Seedlings were grown in the absence of Suc for 3 d in the dark prior to transfer to WL for an additional 3 d.  POR Overexpression Leads to a Maintenance of Nuclear Gene Expression following FRc- and NF-Induced Photobleaching | It has previously been shown that overexpression of POR can partially rescue the FR block of greening response, and this has been attributed to an inhibition of WL intensity-dependent photooxidative damage . We wanted to examine whether POR overexpression could also affect the transcriptionally coupled response and, therefore, we subjected transgenic Arabidopsis lines overexpressing PORA (PAO-3) or PORB (PBO-1; ) to conditions resulting in the loss of HEMA1 in WT seedlings (i.e. 2 --3 d of FRc on 0% [w/v] Suc). Upon transfer to WL, FR-treated PAO-3 and PBO-1 seedlings retained full expression of HEMA1 (Fig. C). Thus, POR overexpression inhibited the transcriptionally coupled FR block of greening response. The plastid localization of POR in the overexpressing lines  supports the idea that loss of HEMA1 expression following FRc is the consequence of a signal emanating from the plastid. We also tested the effect of POR overexpression on the loss of plastid signaling following NF treatment. The cotyledons of NF-treated seedlings of WT and both POR-overexpressing lines appeared totally white. However, as seen for the WL transcriptional response following FRc, the POR-overexpressing seedlings accumulated significant levels of HEMA1 mRNA (Fig. D), indicating that positive plastid signaling was still functional despite photobleaching of the cotyledons. Therefore, POR overexpression results in a phenotype that is apparently similar to that of the genomes uncoupled mutants in which nuclear gene expression is maintained in the absence of functional plastids . However, in this case, it is not yet known whether POR overexpression results in a reduced level of plastid damage or has a direct affect on plastid signaling.  The Transcriptionally Uncoupled But Not the Transcriptionally Coupled FR Block of Greening Response Is Inhibited by Cytokinin | We have described the FR block of greening as comprising two separate responses with respect to their different sensitivities to WL intensity and Suc and their effects on nuclear gene expression. Furthermore, there is a time-dependent transcription effect that is superimposed on these processes. Thus, the FR block of greening is a complex process encompassing a phytochrome A-dependent FR-HIR and phytochrome-independent effects. To try to isolate these components further, we investigated the effects of cytokinin treatment, as this hormone has previously been shown to influence greening capacity (e.g. ). WT and phyA seedlings grown for 5 d in the dark in the absence of Suc showed a time-dependent loss of light responsiveness (see Fig. ) and, therefore, showed a characteristically poor transcriptional response of the HEMA1 promoter to a WL treatment (Fig. A) and a partially reduced greening response (Fig. C). Application of the cytokinin 6-benzylaminopurine (BAP) inhibited both of these time-dependent processes (Fig. , A and C). In contrast, the inhibition of promoter responsiveness and cotyledon greening seen in WT seedlings subject to FRc (the transcriptionally coupled response) was not prevented by cytokinin (Fig. , A and C). Analysis of HEMA1 expression in darkness or FR light showed that cytokinin increased HEMA1 expression by an equal increment in both conditions (Fig. E) and, therefore, the FR response relative to darkness was unchanged.  Figure 6 | The effect of cytokinin on the FR block greening response and HEMA1 expression. The effect of cytokinin on the FR block greening response and HEMA1 expression. A and B, The effect of cytokinin on WL-mediated induction of HEMA1 expression. WT and phyA seedlings were germinated in the dark for 2 d, transferred to FRc (or maintained in the dark) for 3 d, and then transferred to WL for an additional 3 d prior to measurement of GUS activity. Seedlings were grown in the absence (A) or presence (B) of 3% (w/v) Suc, and data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3). C and D, The effect of cytokinin on greening following transfer to WL. Seedlings were grown as shown in A and B and greening was measured in the absence (C) or presence (D) of 3% (w/v) Suc. Data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3). E and F, The effect of cytokinin on HEMA1 expression in the dark and FRc. WT and phyA seedlings were germinated in the dark for 2 d and were transferred to FRc (or maintained in the dark) for 3 d prior to measurement of GUS activity. Seedlings were grown in the absence (E) or presence (F) of 3% (w/v) Suc, and data shown are the mean +- se (n = 3). When seedlings were grown on 3% (w/v) Suc, an FR pretreatment had little affect on the subsequent HEMA1 response to WL (Fig. B), as seen previously , and cytokinin did not further influence this (Fig. B). For seedlings grown in darkness on 3% (w/v) Suc, the greening capacity was very slightly reduced by the presence of cytokinin (Fig. D). However, cytokinin could almost completely prevent the transcriptionally uncoupled block of greening response following FR irradiation of WT seedlings (Fig. D). Again, cytokinin stimulated HEMA1 expression in dark-grown seedlings (Fig. F), but in contrast to the effect on 0% (w/v) Suc (Fig. E), cytokinin inhibited the FR-mediated increase in HEMA1 expression on 3% (w/v) Suc (Fig. F). These results demonstrate that exogenous cytokinin can rescue the transcriptionally uncoupled response as it develops in the presence of Suc, but that it does not block the transcriptionally coupled response. However, there is also an effect of cytokinin on the time-dependent, FR-independent inhibition of greening. Therefore, the response to cytokinin defines a developmental separation of the two FR block of greening responses and can also isolate the FR-mediated transcriptionally coupled response from FR-independent events.
Two Distinct Responses Leading to an FR Block of Greening | Here, we demonstrate that the FR block of greening comprises two distinct FR-dependent responses. As shown in Figure , the two responses can be distinguished by a number of different parameters. Following the onset of FRc irradiation, the first response detected (within 1 d of FRc) is a WL intensity-dependent incomplete loss of greening ability with a retention of WL induction of HEMA1 and Lhcb expression. We have shown that this response, which we have termed the transcriptionally uncoupled response, is prevented by the phyA mutation and by cytokinin treatment. In addition, it has previously been demonstrated that overexpression of POR can inhibit this response . Following longer periods of FRc irradiation (3 d of FRc), a WL intensity-independent response is also observed . This response is characteri