ADP-Ribosylation Factor (ARF) Interaction Is Not Sufficient for Yeast GGA Protein Function or Localization
Golgi-localized gamma-ear homology domain, ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF)-binding proteins (GGAs) facilitate distinct steps of post-Golgi traffic. Human and yeast GGA proteins are only similar25% identical, but all GGA proteins have four similar domains based on function and sequence homology. GGA proteins are most conserved in the region that interacts with ARF proteins. To analyze the role of ARF in GGA protein localization and function, we performed mutational analyses of both human and yeast GGAs. To our surprise, yeast and human GGAs differ in their requirement for ARF interaction. We describe a point mutation in both yeast and mammalian GGA proteins that eliminates binding to ARFs. In mammalian cells, this mutation disrupts the localization of human GGA proteins. Yeast Gga function was studied using an assay for carboxypeptidase Y missorting and synthetic temperature-sensitive lethality between GGAs and VPS27. Based on these assays, we conclude that non-Arf-binding yeast Gga mutants can function normally in membrane trafficking. Using green fluorescent protein-tagged Gga1p, we show that Arf interaction is not required for Gga localization to the Golgi. Truncation analysis of Gga1p and Gga2p suggests that the N-terminal VHS domain and C-terminal hinge and ear domains play significant roles in yeast Gga protein localization and function. Together, our data suggest that yeast Gga proteins function to assemble a protein complex at the late Golgi to initiate proper sorting and transport of specific cargo. Whereas mammalian GGAs must interact with ARF to localize to and function at the Golgi, interaction between yeast Ggas and Arf plays a minor role in Gga localization and function.

The Golgi-localized, gamma-ear homology domain, ARF-binding protein (GGA) family of proteins facilitates the sorting and transport of proteins out of the trans-Golgi network (for review, see ). GGA proteins interact directly with ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) proteins, a family of 21-kDa GTP-binding proteins that have been implicated as regulators of membrane traffic at many steps in the secretory, endocytic, and recycling pathways (,; ; ; ). GGA proteins interact with the activated, GTP-bound form of ARF, establishing them as effectors of ARF signaling . Three GGA genes have been described in mammalian cells: GGA1, GGA2, and GGA3. Alternative splicing of GGA3 results in a long form and a short form of the GGA3 protein. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has two GGA genes, GGA1 and GGA2. The expressed yeast proteins, Gga1p and Gga2p, share 50% amino acid identity. The human and yeast GGA proteins are similar25% identical. Although the sequence identity is low, the domain structure of GGA proteins is conserved between species. Four domains are apparent when the amino acid sequences of yeast and human GGA proteins are aligned (see Figure A). An N-terminal VHS domain (150 residues) resembles the VHS domain present in Vps27p, HRS, and STAM proteins . The 170-residue GAT domain is the most highly conserved (65% identity between human GGA proteins) and contains two predicted coiled-coil regions. The GAT domain  was so named for its sequence homology to a protein named Tom1 (GGA and Tom1). A "hinge" region of variable length contains one or more clathrin-binding domains but no other significant homology to each other or other known proteins. A C-terminal ear domain (120 amino acids; 40% identity between human GGA proteins) is homologous to the ear domain of gamma-adaptin.  Figure 1 | ARF-binding region of GGA proteins and effects of mutations. ARF-binding region of GGA proteins and effects of mutations. (A) Comparison of ARF-binding domains from yeast and human GGA proteins. GGA proteins have four domains, with the highest identity between yeast and human GGA proteins in the ARF-binding domain. Residues identical in at least three proteins are highlighted in red. Dashes indicate gaps in the alignment. The numbers indicate the first and last residues shown for each GGA protein. Asterisks indicate mutated residues. (B) Loss of ARF binding by two-hybrid analysis. Gal4AD fusions of wild-type and mutant GGA proteins were assayed for binding to Gal4BD fusions of activated ARF in the two-hybrid assay. Serial 10-fold dilutions of each strain were replica plated on SD plates lacking tryptophan and leucine (-trp-leu) and SD plates lacking histidine, tryptophan, and leucine with 25 mM 3AT. Growth on -trp-leu shows that all strains are viable. Interaction is positive when colonies grow on 3AT and turn blue in X-gal assays. Scores in the right-hand column are defined in MATERIALS AND METHODS. (C) Loss of Arf binding by using affinity chromatography. Increasing concentrations of Arf1pGDP or Arf1pGTPgammaS (as indicated) were incubated with GST fusion proteins immobilized on glutathione agarose beads: GST-Gga2p (lanes 1 --6), GST-Gga2pI207N (lanes 7 --12), and GST only (lanes 13 --14). Retained proteins were eluted and analyzed by Coomassie staining to visualize the GST fusion proteins (bottom) or by immunoblotting to detect Arf1p (top). Arf1p was retained by GST-Gga2p, but not by mutant GST-Gga2pI207N or GST only. Work in both mammalian cells and S. cerevisiae suggests that GGA proteins function in trafficking at the TGN. In yeast, deletion of either gene alone causes no (GGA1 deletion) or minor (GGA2 deletion) defects, whereas deletion of both genes disrupts distinct post-Golgi trafficking events . Several proteins that are transported between the TGN and early or late endosomes, including carboxypeptidase Y (CPY), carboxy peptidase S, Pep12p, and Kex2p, are at least partially missorted in cells lacking both GGA1 and GGA2. For example, similar40% of newly synthesized CPY is secreted in gga1gga2 cells . These data support a role for Gga proteins in a TGN-to-early endosome pathway, in a TGN-to-late endosome pathway, or both. The function of mammalian GGA proteins has been deduced based on the protein interactions of each domain. Mammalian GGA proteins interact directly with a defined subset of cargo that trafficks between the TGN and lysosomes. Sortilin, LRP3, and both the cation-independent and cation-dependent forms of mannose 6-phosphate receptor (M6PR) contain an acidic cluster-dileucine motif that interacts with the VHS domain of human GGA proteins . Many other transmembrane proteins that lack this motif do not interact with GGA proteins, suggesting that GGAs are specific for a subset of transported proteins. It is not known whether a similar motif (acidic cluster-dileucine) is recognized by yeast Gga proteins, or even whether cargo is sorted via direct interaction with Gga proteins in yeast. The hinge domain of mammalian  and yeast  GGA proteins interacts directly with clathrin in vitro. The ear domain strengthens this interaction, and the ear domains of certain GGA proteins also interact with clathrin on their own . These findings suggest that GGA proteins can recruit clathrin to sites of vesicle budding on the TGN. Overexpression in cultured cells of a GGA3 construct lacking the hinge and ear domains causes M6PR to accumulate in the TGN, supporting a role for GGA-dependent clathrin recruitment in the packaging of these cargo into vesicles . Thus, it is likely that both yeast and mammalian GGA proteins are monomeric clathrin adaptors that function at the TGN. The ear domain of human GGA proteins interacts with gamma-synergin , a Golgi-localized protein partner of gamma-adaptin that has an unknown function . Thus, the function of the GGA ear was accurately predicted by its homology to gamma-adaptin. However, gamma-synergin has no obvious homolog in yeast, and the ear domains of yeast and human GGA proteins are not well conserved; hence, the role of the ear domain in yeast remains unclear. In mammalian cells, endogenous GGA1, GGA2, and GGA3 localize predominantly to the trans-Golgi region . Three lines of evidence show that TGN localization of GGAs requires interaction between the GAT domain and activated ARF proteins. First, treatment with brefeldin A causes rapid translocation of GGA proteins to the cytosol in a time frame indistinguishable from that of ARF itself . Second, the interaction between the GAT domain and ARF is strong enough to direct a green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion of GAT onto the Golgi, even in the absence of the VHS, hinge, and ear domains . Third, and most convincingly, point mutations within the ARF-binding domain that abolish ARF interaction also cause loss of Golgi localization . Together, these data suggest that GTP-bound ARF recruits mammalian GGA proteins from the cytosol onto the late Golgi membrane by interacting with the GAT domain. The function of GGA proteins in mammalian cells is also intimately tied to activated ARF. First, expression of the constitutively active ARF1Q71L in mammalian cells causes dramatic expansion of the Golgi apparatus . Overexpression of GGA1 or GGA3 in these same cells prevents Golgi expansion . This alteration of ARF1 function indicates a functional interaction between ARF1 and GGAs in vivo. Second, as described above, mutations within the GAT domain of GGA3 disrupt its Golgi localization. These same mutations prevent GGA3 overexpression from displacing adaptor complexes or fragmenting the Golgi apparatus , which usually results from GGA overexpression in mammalian cells. Although these mutations in GGA3 might disrupt other interactions, current evidence supports the model that loss of ARF interaction disrupts GGA function in mammalian cells. Together, these data suggest that GGA proteins are ARF-dependent, monomeric clathrin adaptors that facilitate the sorting of specific cargo at the TGN into vesicles destined for endosomes. Much of the data comparing yeast and mammalian GGA function assumes that the mechanisms of GGA function are well conserved between these organisms. However, the mechanism of yeast GGA function has not been analyzed. In particular, it is not known whether Gga function or localization in yeast depends on its binding to Arf (via the GAT domain) or other proteins (via the VHS and/or hinge and ear domains). In this article, we show that yeast Gga1p and Gga2p do not require Arf for their localization or function, although in vivo binding to Arf is detectable. We propose that yeast Ggas are targeted to the Golgi membrane through interactions with Golgi-localized proteins other than Arf, which then stabilize the Gga --Arf interaction.
Materials | Unless otherwise specified, chemicals and reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ). Yeast and bacterial media reagents were purchased from Difco (Detroit, MI). Restriction and other enzymes were purchased from Promega (Madison, WI) or Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). TA cloning vector pGEMT-easy was purchased from Promega. Unique Site Elimination Mutagenesis kit was purchased from  (Palo Alto, CA).  Yeast Methods | Yeast were grown under standard conditions  at 30C unless otherwise noted. Transformations into yeast were performed using the LiOAc method, with herring sperm DNA as a carrier .  Yeast Strains | Yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table . Diploid strains YAB538 and YAB539 were generated by mating YAB531 (gga1::TRP1) and YAB532 (gga2::HIS3) . Tetrad dissections generated several gga1gga2 strains used for trafficking assays and generation of triple knockout strains (YAB538 T6a, YAB538 T2d, YAB539 T3d; ). Strain YAB650 (gga1gga2apm1) was generated by mating and tetrad dissections of YAB539 T3d and Piper1878. Strain YAB658 (gga1gga2apm3) was generated by mating and tetrad dissections of YAB538 T2d and Piper1022. Strain YAB667 (gga1gga2vps1) was generated by transforming plasmid pCKR3A, digested with SacI and XbaI, into strain YAB538 T6a and selecting for LEU auxotrophy. Strains YAB679 and YAB680 (gga1gga2vps27 in SEY6210 background) were generated by mating and tetrad dissections of ABC114 T6b and vps27 strain JUY68. Strain YAB677 (gga1gga2vps27 in S288C background) was generated by transforming plasmid pKJH2, digested with BamHI and PstI, into strain YAB538 T6a and selecting for LEU auxotrophy. Gene deletions were confirmed by Western blotting for Gga1p and Gga2p, and by phenotype for VPS27 (class E compartment), APM3 (ALP processing), and VPS1 (CPY secretion). Multiple isolates of gga1gga2apm1 were analyzed. All other strains were generated by transformation.  Plasmid Construction | Plasmids used in this study are listed in Table . Oligonucleotide primers used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification are listed in Table . All constructs generated by PCR amplification were verified by automated sequencing (Advanced Genetic Analysis Center, University of Minnesota).  Table 1 | Plasmids used in this study  Two-Hybrid Plasmids. | Gal4 binding domain (Gal4BD) fusions of yeast and human ARFs were generated from plasmid pBG4D (a kind gift from Rob Brazas, University of California, San Francisco, CA), as described previously . Gal4 activation domain (Gal4AD) fusions of yeast and human GGA proteins were generated from plasmid pACT2 (a kind gift from Steve Elledge, Baylor University, Waco, TX), as described previously . A single point mutation within the Arf-binding domain of yeast Gga1p was fortuitously identified after PCR amplification of the GGA1 VHS/GAT domain and subcloning into the two-hybrid vector pACT2, resulting in plasmid pAB362. This single-base substitution changed leucine at position 203 to a glutamine (L203Q). Homologous mutations in yeast Gga2p (I207N), human GGA1 (L182Q), and human GGA3 (L149Q) were generated by two-step PCR mutagenesis with oligos specified in Table . The PCR products were generated with BamHI and XhoI sites at the 5' and 3' ends of the open reading frames, respectively, and subcloned into vector pACT2 to generate Gal4AD fusion proteins of mutant Gga2p (pAB462), GGA1 (pAB418), and GGA3 (pAB503). Alanine substitutions in Gga2p (PEDL->AAAL and ANKL->AAAL) were generated using Unique Site Elimination mutagenesis  in plasmid pAB473 (see below). The open reading frames were then subcloned into pACT2 by using NcoI and XhoI, resulting in plasmids pAB580 and pAB581.  Yeast Expression Vectors. | Plasmids for expression of Gga1p (pAB470) and Gga2p pAB441) were described in . An NcoI site was generated at the start ATG of GGA2 in pAB441 by using two-step PCR to generate plasmid pAB471. The GGA2(NcoI) gene was then subcloned into vector pRS315 by using BamHI and XhoI to generate pAB473. Unique site elimination mutagenesis of pAB473 was used to generate PEDL->AAAL (pAB493) and ANKL->AAAL (pAB509). The mutated BamHI-XhoI fragments of pAB493 and pAB509 were then subcloned into pRS316 to generate pAB529 and pAB530, respectively. The mutated NcoI-XhoI fragments of pAB493 and pAB509 were also subcloned into pACT2, as described above. For expression of Gga1pL203Q, the mutated region from pAB362 was subcloned into pAB470, resulting in pAB469. For expression of Gga2pI207N, two-step PCR mutagenesis was used to generate the I207N mutation from plasmid pAB441. The PCR product was then subcloned into pRS316, resulting in pAB456. The amino terminal truncation of Gga2p(110 --585) was generated by PCR (oligos A053 and A038) followed by subcloning the NcoI-XhoI --digested products into pAB473. Then the NotI-XhoI cassette was subcloned into pRS316 to generate pAB555. The carboxy-terminal truncation of Gga2p(1 --326) was generated by PCR (oligos A037 and A049) and subcloned with BamHI and XhoI into pRS316, resulting in pAB468.  Hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged GGA Proteins. | Unique site elimination was used to generate an NheI site immediately preceding the stop codon of GGA1 and GGA2, resulting in plasmids pAB487 and pAB483. The XbaI fragment from pMR2654 (a kind gift from Mark Rose, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ) containing a triple HA repeat was inserted into the NheI-digested plasmids, resulting in plasmids pAB492 and pAB491. Orientation of the HA tag was determined by sequencing. Mutant alleles were generated by subcloning the mutated portion of the open reading frames into the HA-tagged plasmids, resulting in plasmids pAB579 (GGA1) and pAB578 (GGA2).  Glutathione S-Transferase (GST) Fusion Proteins. | All constructs were subcloned from pACT2 (described above) into pGEX5X-2 (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) by using BamHI and XhoI sites. The following constructs were used for these studies: GST-Gga1p1 --331 (pAB391), GST-Gga1p1 --331, L203Q (pAB476), GST-Gga2p1 --326 (pAB382), and GST-Gga2p1 --326, I207N (pAB472).  GFP Fusion Proteins. | Plasmids for expression of GFP-Gga1p (pCS135) and GFP-Gga2p (pCS136) were obtained from Chris Stefan and Scott Emr (University of California, San Diego, CA). Both are pRS426-based plasmids with the CPY promoter driving expression of the GFP open reading frame. A multiple cloning site follows GFP. Plasmid pAB505 for expression of GFP-Gga1pL203Q was generated by subcloning the KpnI-KpnI fragment of pAB469 into pCS135. Plasmid pAB504 for expression of GFP-Gga2pI207N was generated by PCR amplification of the open reading frame from pAB456 to incorporate an SalI site at the 5' end then subcloning the SalI-KpnI fragment into pCS136. The truncated forms of GFP-Gga1p were all generated by PCR amplification from either pCS135 or pAB505 then subcloned into pCS135 by using SalI-KpnI or KpnI-KpnI sites.  Mammalian Expression Vectors. | Plasmids for expression of human GGA proteins in normal rat kidney (NRK) cells were generated from pcDNA3 as described in . GGA1L182Q was generated by two-step PCR mutagenesis with mutant oligos A025 and A026 and flanking oligos 797 and A028 then subcloned into pcDNA3-HA with EcoRI and XbaI, resulting in pAB443. GGA3L149Q was generated by subcloning the mutated region of GGA3 (HindIII-XhoI) from pAB503 into vector pAB366 (pcDNA3-HA-GGA3; ), resulting in pAB506. Truncated GGA1DeltaVHS (pAB318) begins at residue 145, as described previously . GGA1DeltaVHS,L182Q (pAB582) was generated by subcloning the BamHI-XhoI fragment of pAB418 into pcDNA3. An ATG immediately following the BamHI site acts as the start ATG.   Two-Hybrid Assays | Filter assays for beta-galactosidase activity were performed as described previously  with 1 mg/ml X-gal as the substrate. Colony color was scored every hour for 3 h then allowed to develop overnight. Strong positives (+++) turned blue within 1 h, moderate positives (++) turned blue within 3 h, weak positives (+) turned blue overnight, and negatives (-) remained white throughout the development period. Assays for histidine auxotrophy were performed by replica plating yeast strains on SD-trp-leu plates and 3AT plates (SD plates lacking tryptophan, leucine, and histidine, and containing 25 mM 3-amino triazole) and scoring growth after 3 --4 d.  GST-Affinity Chromatography | Bacterially expressed Arf1pQ71L was purified as described previously . Bacterially expressed GST fusion proteins were purified on glutathione agarose beads as described previously . The beads were washed three times with TND (25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM dithiothreitol) and once with binding buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mug/ml bovine serum albumin, and 1% Triton); 30 mul of bead volume was used for each binding reaction. Bacterially expressed yeast Arf1pQ71L (6 muM) was incubated for 30 min at 30C in binding buffer with 10 muM guanosine-5'-O-(3-thio)triphosphate (GTPgammaS) or GDP. GST fusions were mixed with 100 mul of 0.6, 1.8, or 6 muM Arf1p for 30 min. The beads were then washed three times with 1 ml of binding buffer containing 10 muM nucleotide. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads with an equal volume of 2x Laemmli sample buffer and run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The final wash was also analyzed to ensure complete washing. Duplicate gels were either stained with Coomassie brilliant blue or developed by immunoblotting, by using a polyclonal rabbit antiserum (R23; ) to detect yeast Arf1p.  Antibodies and Immunoblotting | Immunoblotting was performed as described previously . Antibodies were used at the following dilutions, as indicated for each experiment: 12CA5 (to HA epitope; BabCo, Berkeley, CA), 1:10,000; R89675 (to Gga1p), 1:10,000; R89013 (to Gga2p), 1:10,000; R23 (to Arf1p, a gift from R. Kahn, Emory University, Atlanta, GA), 1:2000; 10A5-B5 (to yeast CPY; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), 1:5000; and anti-ALP (a gift from S. Nothwehr, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO), 1:5000. Bound antibodies were detected with horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary antibodies and enhanced chemiluminescence detection reagents (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). Films were scanned using a flatbed scanner and figures were prepared using Adobe PhotoShop 5.0 (Adobe Systems, Mountain View, CA). Affinity Purification of Antibodies to Gga1p and Gga2p. | For Gga1p, antibodies were adsorbed onto a nitrocellulose strip to which GST-Gga1p was transferred. After washing, bound antibodies were stripped with 0.2 M glycine, pH 2.8. For Gga2p, antibodies were mixed with GST-Gga2p bound to glutathione agarose, washed, and eluted with 0.2 M glycine. The efficacy of the affinity purification was analyzed by immunoblotting (our unpublished data).   Yeast Fractionation | Yeast cells (0.15 g) were suspended in 100 mul of fractionation buffer (0.4 M sucrose, 25 mM KPO4 pH 7.0, and 2 mM EDTA) and 5 mul of protease inhibitor cocktail for yeast (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were lysed by vortexing with glass beads for 2x 3 min, on ice between. Mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 x g to remove nuclei and unbroken cells; the supernatant from this step is the lysate. The lysate was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 min at 4C to generate supernatant (S100) and pellet (P100) fractions. Equal fractions of lysate, S100, and P100 were loaded on 12% acrylamide gels and immunoblotted as described above.  Secretion Assays | CPY Pulse-Chase Assay. | Processing and sorting of CPY was assayed as described previously  by using anti-CPY antisera (provided by Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR; or Elizabeth Jones, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA). Films were scanned on a flatbed scanner and processed using Adobe Photoshop 5.0 (Adobe Systems, Mountain View, CA).  CPY Colony Immunoblotting. | Serial dilutions of yeast cultures were replica plated on YPD plates and incubated at 30C for 12 --24 h. Nitrocellulose filters (0.45-mum BA85; Schleicher & Schuell, Keene, NH) were overlaid for an additional 12 h at 30C. Cells were thoroughly rinsed from the filters with distilled H2O. Immunoblotting with CPY monoclonal antibodies (1:1500; Molecular Probes) or Arf1p and alkaline phosphatase polyclonal antibodies (to control for cell lysis) was performed as described above.  Staining with FM 4-64. | Cultures were grown in YPD to an optical density of 0.5 --0.8. FM 4-64 (10 mM stock in dimethyl sulfoxide; Molecular Probes) was added to 500 nM; cells were incubated at 30C for 30 min. Cells were washed with water, resuspended in YPD lacking FM 4-64, and incubated an additional 30 min at 30C. Cells were concentrated 10-fold by brief centrifugation, mounted with AntiFade (Molecular Probes), and observed immediately. To assay for temperature sensitivity, strain YAB679 was shifted to 37C for 2 h before labeling. Labeling with FM 4-64 and chase incubations were performed at 37C. Cells were observed and photographed on a E600 microscope (Nikon, Melville, NY) equipped with a Spot II digital camera and MetaMorph 3.6 software (Universal Imaging, Downingtown, PA). Images were processed using Adobe Photoshop 5.0.   Indirect Immunofluorescence Microscopy | pcDNA3-based plasmids for expression of GGA1, GGA1L182Q, GGA3, and GGA3L149Q with an HA epitope tag at the amino terminus were transiently transfected into NRK cells by using FuGENE 6 (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN). The cells were analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence, as described previously  by using antibodies to GGA1 (R79709), the HA epitope (12CA5; BabCo), or mannosidase II (53FC3; Covance Research Products, Richmond, CA).  GFP Fluorescence Microscopy | For analysis of GFP-tagged proteins by fluorescence microscopy, mid-log cultures were diluted with 0.5 volumes of GFP KILL buffer (1 M Tris pH 8.0 and 5% sodium azide; ). Samples were mixed with an equal volume of AntiFade (Molecular Probes) and observed within 1 h. Cells were photographed as described for FM 4-64 staining.
Mutations in GAT Domain Eliminate Interaction with ARF | The Arf-binding domain of human and yeast GGA proteins was previously mapped by truncation analysis to a highly conserved region within the GAT domain . Several residues within this domain are conserved in all known GGA proteins (Figure A, highlighted residues). To disrupt binding to ARF without disrupting overall protein folding, selected point mutations within this region were generated and tested for binding to ARF by using the two-hybrid assay. To compare between species, homologous mutations were generated in both human and yeast GGA proteins. We changed leucine at position 203 of Gga1p to glutamine (Gga1pL203Q), isoleucine 207 of Gga2p to asparagine (Gga2pI207N), leucine 182 of GGA1 to glutamine (GGA1L182Q), and leucine 149 of GGA3 short form to glutamine (GGA3L149Q). Additional mutations in the GAT domain of Gga2p were also generated: residues 212 --214 were changed to alanines (referred to as Gga2pPEDL -> AAAL) and residues 219 and 220 were changed to alanines (referred to as Gga2pANKL -> AAAL). None of these mutations affect protein expression or stability, because similar levels of protein were detected by Western blotting in yeast strains that expressed wild-type or mutant forms of each protein as either Gal4AD fusions or untagged constructs (our unpublished data). These mutations are not predicted to disrupt the coiled-coils in the GAT domain, determined using the COILS program . Wild-type and mutant human GGA1 and GGA3 as Gal4AD fusions were tested for binding to ARF3Q71L as a C-terminal Gal4BD fusion. As described previously , wild-type GGA1 and GGA3 interact strongly with ARF3Q71L, shown herein by growth on medium lacking histidine and supplemented with 3-amino triazole (3AT; Figure B) and by blue color development in the beta-galactosidase assay (X-gal; Figure B). In contrast, GGA1L182Q and GGA3L149Q show no interaction by growth on 3AT plates or in the X-gal assay (Figure B). These results showed that our mutations abolished detectable binding of mammalian GGAs to ARF. We then tested wild-type and mutant yeast Gga1p and Gga2p as Gal4AD fusions for binding to Arf2pQ71L as a C-terminal Gal4BD fusion. Arf2pQ71L was used for these experiments because Arf1pQ71L is lethal in this construct . As expected , wild-type yeast Gga1p and Gga2p interact with Arf2p, shown herein by growth on 3AT plates and blue color development in the X-gal assay (Figure B). Our mutations effectively abolished this interaction. Gga1pL203Q and Gga2pI207N showed no detectable binding to Arf2p; strains grew much slower on 3AT plates and remained white in the X-gal assay, even after extended times. The overall folding of these mutant proteins was unperturbed, because these mutants remained active for binding to a novel Gga-binding protein (our unpublished data). To confirm that the loss of signal in our two-hybrid assays was due to loss of affinity for Arf, we analyzed the interaction between Arf1p and Gga2p or Gga2pI207N by affinity chromatography (Figure C). GST alone was used as a negative control. Bacterially expressed Arf1p was incubated with GTPgammaS or GDP then mixed with purified GST fusion proteins on glutathione agarose beads. Retained Arf1p was detected by immunoblotting (top). Equal amounts of GST-Gga2p, GST-Gga2pI207N, or GST were present in each reaction, as shown by Coomassie staining (bottom). Arf1pGTPgammaS, but not Arf1pGDP, bound to GST-Gga2p; the amount of Arf1p retained by Gga2p increased linearly with the concentration of Arf1p in the binding reaction. Identical experiments were performed with GST-Gga1p, but no binding was detected at these concentrations (our unpublished data). This suggests a lower affinity of Arf1 for Gga1p than for Gga2p. Because of the unique nucleotide-binding properties of Arf proteins , we do not know the actual concentration of GTP-bound Arf1p in these samples and we cannot determine a Kd value for the binding of Arf1p. However, we can detect as little as 3 ng of Arf1p by immunoblotting, which is 10-fold less than present in lane 4 (GST-Gga2p, 0.6 muM Arf1pGTPgammaS) and 100-fold less than lane 6 (GST-Gga2p, 6 muM Arf1pGTPgammaS) as determined by densitometry. Strikingly, we could not detect any binding of Arf1pGTPgammaS to GST-Gga2pI207N or GST alone, even with 6 muM Arf1p. This suggests that the I207N mutation reduced the binding to Arf1p by at least 99% in vitro. Based on the two-hybrid and in vitro binding experiments, we concluded that these conserved residues in the GAT domain are critical for interaction with GTP-bound ARF proteins.  ARF Interaction Is Required for Localization of Mammalian GGA Proteins | We next tested the mammalian GGA mutants for localization in vivo. Plasmids encoding HA-tagged wild-type or mutant GGA1 or GGA3 were transfected into normal NRK fibroblasts and localized by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) by using antibodies to GGA1  or the HA epitope (12CA5). The Golgi apparatus was double labeled using antibodies to mannosidase II (Figure , b, d, and f) or beta-COP (Figure h). Transfected wild-type GGA1 localized predominantly to the trans-Golgi region (Figure a), as expected. In contrast, GGA1L182Q was distributed throughout the cytosol, with no detectable Golgi staining (Figure c). The staining shown in Figure , a and c, used antibodies against GGA1 at a dilution that fails to detect endogenous protein, thus this staining detected only the transfected proteins. Similar results were seen with antibodies against the HA epitope (our unpublished data). At higher concentrations of GGA1 antibody, the endogenous GGA1 was detected at the Golgi region (our unpublished data), suggesting that the Golgi localization of endogenous GGA1 was not altered by overexpression of GGA1L182Q. Similarly, transfected wild-type GGA3 localized to the trans-Golgi region (Figure e), whereas GGA3L149Q was distributed throughout the cytosol (Figure g). Double labeling with antibodies to ARF (1D9; our unpublished data), mannosidase II (Figure d), or beta-COP (Figure h) showed that ARF localization and Golgi structure were unaffected by these mutant GGA proteins. These results suggest that GGA1L182Q and GGA3L149Q fail to interact with ARF in vivo as well as in vitro, and that interaction with ARF is required for normal GGA localization to the Golgi membrane in mammalian cells.  Figure 2 | Localization of wild-type and mutant human GGA proteins in NRK fibroblasts. Localization of wild-type and mutant human GGA proteins in NRK fibroblasts. Cells were double labeled by indirect immunofluorescence to visualize transfected GGA proteins (left) and Golgi markers mannosidase II or beta-COP (right). Wild-type GGA1 and GGA3 are localized to the Golgi region, whereas mutants GGA1L182Q and GGA3L149Q localized throughout the cytosol. These data are consistent with a recent report  that different mutations in the GAT domain of GGA3 disrupt ARF interaction and Golgi localization. Also consistent with previous work, we found that removal of the VHS or ear domains does not alter GGA localization in NRK cells (Figure ; and our unpublished data), suggesting an exclusive role for the GAT/Arf-binding domain in Golgi localization of mammalian GGA proteins. Our new results identify a distinct residue (L182 in GGA1, L149 in GGA3) in the GAT domain that is essential for interaction with ARF in vivo.  Mutant Yeast GGA Proteins Retain Golgi Localization | Based on the above-mentioned results for mutant human GGAs and the high conservation of the ARF-binding domain between human and yeast orthologs, we expected the homologous mutations in yeast Gga1p and Gga2p to disrupt their localization and function. Surprisingly, this was not the case. To investigate whether Ggas and Arf interact in vivo, we analyzed the localization of wild-type and mutant Gga proteins by fluorescence microscopy and subcellular fractionation. Antibodies specific to each Gga protein  were initially used for indirect immunofluorescence of yeast cells. Affinity-purified antibodies to Gga1p and Gga2p showed faint but distinct puncta through