Isolation and Characterization of a Novel Ribosome-Inactivating Protein from Root Cultures of Pokeweed and Its Mechanism of Secretion from Roots
Ribosome-inactivating proteins are N-glycosidases that remove a specific adenine from the sarcin/ricin loop of the large rRNA, thus arresting protein synthesis at the translocation step. In the present study, a novel type I ribosome-inactivating protein, termed PAP-H, was purified from Agrobacterium rhizogenes-transformed hairy roots of pokeweed (Phytolacca americana). The protein was purified by anion- and cation-exchange chromatography. PAP-H has a molecular mass of 29.5 kD as detected by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and its isoelectric point was determined to be 7.8. Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ribosomes incubated with PAP-H released the 360-nucleotide diagnostic fragment from the 26S rRNA upon aniline treatment, an indication of its ribosome-inactivating activity. Using immunofluorescence microscopy, PAP-H was found to be located in the cell walls of hairy roots and root border cells. PAP-H was determined to be constitutively secreted as part of the root exudates, with its secretion enhanced by a mechanism mediated by ethylene induction. Purified PAP-H did not show in vitro antifungal activity against soil-borne fungi. In contrast, root exudates containing PAP-H as well as additional chitinase, beta-1,3-glucanase, and protease activities did inhibit the growth of soil-borne fungi. We found that PAP-H depurinates fungal ribosomes in vitro and in vivo, suggesting an additive mechanism that enables PAP-H to penetrate fungal cells.

Ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) are widely distributed plant enzymes that inhibit protein synthesis by virtue of their N-glycosidic activity, selectively cleaving an adenine residue from a highly conserved and surface-exposed stem loop structure in the 28S rRNA . This cleavage prevents the binding of the EF-2/GTP complex, with the subsequent arrest of protein synthesis leading to autonomous cell death . RIPs are either enzymatically active single polypeptides (type I) or heterodimers (type II). A type II RIP consists of an A chain, functionally equivalent to a type I RIP, which is attached to a sugar-binding B chain (for review, see ; ; ). Besides RNA N-glycosidase activity, some RIPs have ribonuclease, DNase, DNA glycosylase, and apurinic/apyrimidic lyase activities . In addition, RIPs from Trichosanthes kirilowii cell cultures have been demonstrated to possess chitinase activity . Certain type I RIPs display a variety of antimicrobial activities, including antifungal, antibacterial , and broad-spectrum antiviral effects against different plant and animal viruses , including a human immunodeficiency virus . In addition, pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) antiviral protein (PAP) showed the inhibition of tumor cell growth , and the RIPs from Ricinus communis (ricin) and Saponaria officinalis (saporin) have been shown to possess insecticidal properties against Coleopteran species . Despite extensive enzymatic and antimicrobial characterization, the significance of RIPs for plant biology remains largely unknown. Pokeweed produces a suite of constitutive and induced RIPs in its leaves and seeds. For instance, PAP is a 29-kD constitutive RIP found in pokeweed leaves and localized in the cell wall matrix of leaf mesophyll cells . PAP II is a seasonal 30-kD RIP found in pokeweed leaves harvested in late summer , and PAP-S (29.8 kD) is expressed in seeds . Amino acid comparisons show 80% homology of PAP with PAP-S, and 33% homology of PAP with PAP II. Accordingly, PAP-S cross-reacts with PAP antibodies, but PAP II does not react with PAP antibodies . PAP is thought to play a defense role because it depurinates ribosomes from all organisms tested, and because its expression in transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum cv Samsan and Nicotiana benthamiana) plants leads to resistance against viral and fungal infection . However, a clear understanding of the role of PAP in pokeweed has not been achieved. To better understand the functional significance of RIPs in pokeweed, we developed a hairy root system for the expression and manipulation of constitutive RIPs. Hairy roots show stable expression of root-specific biosynthetic pathways, and thus have been used as an experimental system to study the biology and biochemistry of underground organs . Plant roots synthesize and store various macromolecules, including storage and defense-related proteins such as chitinase and beta-1,3-glucanase, to cope with pathogenic challenge . Here, we report the identification of a novel RIP, termed PAP-H, located in the cell walls of hairy roots and root border cells of pokeweed. PAP-H was also found to be constitutively secreted as part of the root exudates, and its secretion was enhanced by elicitation with ethylene. Hairy root exudates of pokeweed containing PAP-H and other defense-related proteins showed strong antifungal activity against fungi causing root rot. We have previously reported that in vitro root secretions of secondary metabolites and proteins compare with root secretions under natural settings , suggesting that pokeweed may secrete RIPs into the soil. This paper reveals a new mechanism by which roots are able to secrete RIPs into the rhizosphere to prevent pathogen infection.
Development of Pokeweed Hairy Roots | The transformation of pokeweed with Agrobacterium rhizogenes American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) no. 15834 was accomplished. Several hairy root clones were established and selected based on growth and stability, and root cultures were established in 125-mL flasks as indicated in "Materials and Methods" (Fig. A). Pokeweed root cultures showed stable growth and phenotype, producing a substantial biomass yield. As shown in Figure B, pokeweed hairy roots showed a biphasic root growth until d 30, which contained two periods of exponential growth. Maximum tissue accumulation under these conditions was approximately 180 g fresh weight L-1 medium, representing about a 900-fold increase in biomass starting from a single root tip inoculum. Root intracellular (in organ) and extracellular (secreted) proteins that accumulated in the culture medium during the time course were also examined by SDS-PAGE followed by western blotting using a PAP-specific antibody (Fig. C). Cross-reactivities with the PAP antibody were found in both the intracellular and the extracellular protein fractions. In the intracellular protein fraction, PAP antibody cross-reactivity increased during very early stages of growth, and maximum protein accumulation occurred before the end of exponential root growth phase at approximately 20 d. PAP cross-reactivity developed in culture media (extracellular proteins) after d 8, and increased through the time course.  Figure 1 | Establishment of pokeweed hairy roots, and time course of root growth and PAP-H accumulation. Establishment of pokeweed hairy roots, and time course of root growth and PAP-H accumulation. A, Developed hairy roots of pokeweed as described in "Materials and Methods." B, Growth curve of fresh and dry weight accumulation over 32 d. C, Western-blot analysis of intra- and extracellular PAP-H accumulation over 32 d. The same amount (0.2 g fresh weight) of hairy roots from each sample was harvested to extract total proteins, and 1 mL of media from each sample was collected to concentrate the root secreted proteins followed by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation as described in "Materials and Methods."  Identification and Purification of RIP from Hairy Roots of Pokeweed | To ascertain whether PAP expressed in established hairy roots is similar to PAP isoforms produced in leaves, seeds, and roots of pokeweed, the protein profiles of these different organs were probed with a PAP antibody by western blotting. Total protein was extracted from 40-d-old hairy root cultures of pokeweed, and from pokeweed leaves, seeds, and roots (Fig. A). Western-blot analysis indicated slight differences in Mr among immunodetected proteins from different extracts. The immunoreactive band observed in hairy roots by western blotting was slightly larger in size than that of PAP (from leaves) but smaller than that of PAP-S (from seeds). It also differed in size from the immunoreactive bands of RIPs detected in storage roots, but was of a similar size to that of an RIP from primary roots. Based on these results, we concluded that RIP is produced in the transformed hairy roots of the pokeweed plant. Interestingly, RIP production was also detected as part of the root exudates secreted both in vitro from hairy root cultures and from whole-plant cultures.  Figure 2 | Identification and purification of PAP-H. Identification and purification of PAP-H. A, Profiling of SDS-PAGE and western blot. Total proteins prepared from different organs of the pokeweed plant, and media where the hairy roots and whole pokeweed plant were grown were concentrated and run through 12.5% (w/v) SDS-PAGE. The antibody raised against PAP was used for western blotting. Approximately 25 mug of protein was loaded per lane. B, Cation-exchange chromatography of the total hairy root proteins from pokeweed. Total protein and samples of each fraction were run in 12.5% (w/v) SDS-PAGE, and western blot was performed using the PAP antibody. Approximately 5 mug of total, basic fractions, PAP-S and PAP, and 15 mug of acidic fraction were loaded per lane. To biochemically purify the RIP from hairy roots of pokeweed, total proteins were subjected to ion-exchange chromatography as outlined in "Materials and Methods." Because RIPs are mostly basic proteins, the unretained protein solution from the anion-exchange column was applied to a cation-exchange column (Sep-Pack, Waters, Milford, MA), and basic proteins were eluted with NaCl step gradients from 40 to 600 mm. A 29.5-kD protein corresponding to the RIP detected in hairy roots was resolved in the 80 mm fraction and analyzed by western blotting (Fig. B). The RIP was further resolved using UNO S1 cation-exchange column chromatography (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). The RIP was determined to have a molecular mass of 29.5 kD as determined by SDS-PAGE.  Characterization and Enzymatic Activity of PAP-H | The N-terminal region of the RIP purified from hairy roots of pokeweed was sequenced and compared with those from PAP isoforms and other RIPs (Fig. A). The data showed that the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the hairy root RIP differed from those of all known PAP isoforms and other RIPs. The N-terminal regions of the hairy root RIP had 61% homology with PAP, and 56% homology with PAP-S. The N-terminal region of the hairy root RIP also showed a significant homology with PAP-alpha , as well as PIP 2 from P. insularis  and PD-S2 from P. dioica . Importantly, the data indicated that highly conserved hydrophobic residues reported in the N-terminal region of all other RIPs, such as a Tyr-14 and Phe-17  were found in the N-terminal region of the hairy root RIP. Based on these results, we concluded that the RIP purified from transformed hairy roots of pokeweed is a novel type of PAP, and named it PAP-H. PAP-H was determined to be, unexpectedly, a neutral protein with a pI of 7.8 by isoelectric focusing (IEF)-PAGE (Fig. B), and amino acid composition analysis showed that the amino acid distribution of PAP-H was similar to that of other RIPs (Fig. C).  Figure 3 | Characterization of PAP-H. Characterization of PAP-H. A, Comparison of the N-terminal sequences of PAP-H. PAP (GenBank accession no. ); PAP-R ; PAP-S ; PAP II ; PAP-alpha, antiviral protein precursor from pokeweed ; PIP 2, RIP 2 from Phytolacca insularis ; PD-S2, protein synthesis inhibitor from Phytolacca dioica ; ME1 and 2, Mirabilis expansa protein 1 and 2 ; MAP, Mirabilis jalapa antiviral protein ; SAP, saporin from S. officinalis . Shaded boxes represent two amino acids that are absolutely conserved in all RIPs . Bold characters indicate homology regions among RIPs purified from pokeweed plants. B, Determination of pI. SDS-PAGE of the purified PAP-H was performed as described in "Materials and Methods." pH range of the first dimension gel was pH 3 to 10 using Bio-Lyte ampholytes (Bio-Rad). C, Amino acid composition of PAP-H, PAP , PAP-R , PAP-S , PAP II , MAP , and ME 1 and ME 2 . The RNA N-glycosidase activity of PAP-H was tested using yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ribosomes as a substrate. When depurinated rRNAs are treated with aniline, cleavage occurs at the depurinated site and a small nucleotide fragment is released from the 26S rRNA . Yeast ribosomes were incubated with PAP-H and with RIPs from M. expansa (ME), S. officinalis (saporin), and R. communis (ricin). As shown in Figure , PAP-H dupurinated the rRNAs and released the 367-nucleotide fragment upon treatment with aniline . These results demonstrate the enzymatic activity of PAP-H as an RIP.  Figure 4 | Enzymatic activity of PAP-H in vitro. Enzymatic activity of PAP-H in vitro. Ribosomes were isolated from yeast and incubated with PAP-H, ME, saporin, and ricin as described in "Materials and Methods." rRNAs were extracted, treated with aniline, separated on a 4.5% (w/v) urea-polyacrylamide gel, and stained with ethidium bromide. The presence (+) or absence (-) of aniline is denoted. The arrow shows the presence of the diagnostic 367-nucleotide cleavage product of rRNA.  PAP-H Is Localized at the Cell Wall Matrix in the Hairy Roots and Root Border Cells of Pokeweed | We examined the location of PAP-H in hairy roots of pokeweed using fluorescent microscopy. As shown in Figure A, thin longitudinal-sectioned hairy roots were treated with an anti-PAP antibody and a fluorescein-labeled secondary antibody as described in "Materials and Methods." Green fluorescence, which indicates PAP-H presence as measured by the fluorescent tag-antibody interaction, was observed in the walls of every cell in the hairy roots. According to the broad density of fluorescence imaging along the entire circumference of the cell wall, PAP-H is most likely embedded in the cell wall matrix rather than bound to the cell wall (Fig. A). Interestingly, we found that PAP-H was also located in the cell walls of root border cells released from the root cap as the root grows (Fig. B). This observation suggested a possible secretion mechanism of PAP-H from the roots into the rhizosphere.  Figure 5 | Localization of PAP-H in hairy roots of pokeweed. Localization of PAP-H in hairy roots of pokeweed. The tips of hairy root tissues were cut into thin sections and fixed as described in "Materials and Methods." Sections of cells were then stained with PAP antibody, followed by fluorescein-labeled secondary antibody reaction. Green fluorescence as observed in a fluorescent microscope indicates the presence of PAP-H in the cells. A, Longitudinal section of hairy roots. B, Longitudinal section of hairy roots showing root border cells (the arrows) near the root cap. Phase images were taken by light microscopy. Control root images not incubated with PAP antibody and fluorescein-labeled secondary antibody did not show fluorescent signal, indicating no root endogenous fluorescence (data not shown). Bars = 20 mum.  cDNA Cloning of PAP-H | Total RNA was isolated from hairy roots of pokeweed using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen USA, Valencia, CA; see "Materials and Methods"). To clone the cDNA corresponding to the PAP-H protein, two gene-specific primers (GSPs) were designed for RACE. The sequences of these primers were formulated based upon the partial amino acid sequence of the N terminus region of PAP-H, as well as the codon preferences of several previously cloned PAP-related genes from pokeweed. One outer primer covered amino acids 6 through 14, including the first absolutely conserved hydrophobic residue, Tyr-14 (Y), whereas a second primer was designed from amino acids 9 through 18, overlapping the outer primer and covering the two absolutely conserved hydrophobic residues, Tyr-14 (Y) and Phe-17 (F). A 968-bp fragment obtained by 3'-RACE was cloned into the pCR4Blunt-TOPO and pCR4TA-TOPO (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and its nucleotide sequence was determined as addressed in "Materials and Methods." A 3'-untranslated region of 51 bp with a polyadenylation site was found downstream from the stop codon. To obtain a 5' sequence of PAP-H, 5'-RACE was performed using two GSPs designed from the fragments produced by 3'-RACE. These primers were designed so that a full-length cDNA clone sequence could be assembled from sequences of overlapping 5'- and 3'-RACE amplification products. A GSP of 27 bp was designed; it corresponded to the DNA sequence located approximately 100 bp downstream from the GSPs used for 3'-RACE. A second GSP of 29 bp was designed, corresponding to the DNA sequence located approximately 200 bp downstream of the 3'-RACE GSPs. 5'-RACE was performed and amplification products were cloned and sequenced as described for the 3'-RACE procedures. After DNA sequencing of the multiple clones for each amplification product produced with the various GSPs, the PAP-H cDNA sequence was assembled using the Jellyfish 1.5 Gene Analysis software package  and found to be 1,125 bp in length with an open reading frame of 1,074 bp (Fig. A; GenBank accession no. ). The deduced translated amino acid sequence indicated that PAP-H cDNA has a putative signal peptide sequence of 47 amino acids, and a coding sequence of 292 amino acid residues. The first 18 amino acid residues from the deduced mature PAP-H polypeptide were found to be identical to those obtained by N-terminal sequencing of the purified PAP-H protein (Fig. C). A polyadenylation signal (AATAAA) was found between 10 and 30 bases upstream of the polyadenylation site, as found in most plant and animal mRNA . Using the gene analysis software package mentioned above, the coding region of the PAP-H cDNA was found to be slightly longer than that of PAP (GenBank accession no. ), especially on the 5'-upstream region. When compared with the previously cloned PAP cDNA, PAP-H was found to contain an additional 25 amino acids upstream of the N-terminal sequence. Approximately 50% amino acid sequence homology was found to exist between PAP-H and PAP in the N-terminal extension region. Analysis also indicated that the C-terminal extension region of PAP-H might comprise 28 instead of 29 amino acids as found in PAP, with six amino acids differing between the two translated sequences. The cDNA sequence of the open reading frame region from PAP-H has 59.1% homology with PAP, 69.7% with PAP-S, 64.7% with PAP-alpha, and 52.1% with PAP II (GenBank accession nos. , , , and ). The analysis also shows that the predicted mature protein from PAP-H cDNA has 66.8% identity with PAP, 64.4% with PAP-S, 58.4% with PAP-alpha, and 36.0% with PAP II. Highly conserved hydrophobic residues reported by  were found in the deduced amino acid sequences of the PAP-H cDNA (Tyr-14, Phe-17, Arg-22, Tyr-74, Tyr-125, Gly-143, Ala-166, Glu-178, Ala-179, Arg-181, Glu-207, and Trp-210), and the relatively well-conserved region (172AIQMVSEAARFKYI186) thought to be the active site of enzymatic activity of RIPs  was also found in PAP-H (Fig. B).  Figure 6 | cDNA and deduced amino acid sequences of PAP-H. cDNA and deduced amino acid sequences of PAP-H. A, The amino acid sequence of the mature protein (PAP-H) is in dark bold and the absolutely conserved amino acid residues among RIPs  are in dark bold and underlined. The dark bold and italic characters represent amino- and carboxyl-terminal extensions. The polyadenylation sites are indicated in italics and underlined. The cDNA sequence  of PAP is aligned along with PAP-H. B, Comparison of the mature proteins between PAP-H and PAP .  Ethylene Enhances the Secretion of PAP-H into the Rhizosphere | Based on PAP-H cell wall localization and on the observation that PAP-H was secreted as part of the root exudates (Fig. A), we decided to study the exudation mechanism of PAP-H. Upon closer examination, we observed exudates resembling water drops that were secreted from the root hairs of pokeweed root cultures growing in solid culture media (Fig. A). The exudate was collected using a pipette, filtered to avoid collecting root border cells, and run on an SDS-PAGE gel (Fig. B). The exudate showed slight differences in protein patterns compared with the proteins expressed in hairy roots. To determine if PAP-H was also secreted as a part of the root exudates, the intracellular (in organ) and extracellular (in exudate) proteins of pokeweed hairy roots were probed with the PAP antibody (Fig. B). The antibody strongly cross-reacted with both intra- and extracellular proteins and showed the same band, PAP-H (29.5 kD), which indicated that PAP-H is secreted as part of the root exudates as well as with the root border cells. In accordance, in vitro-grown pokeweed plants growing in liquid media also released PAP-H, presumably through roots (Fig. A).  Figure 7 | Identification and ethylene induction of extracellular PAP-H. Identification and ethylene induction of extracellular PAP-H. A, Water drop-shaped exudates secreted from hairy roots of pokeweed grown in solid culture media. B, SDS-PAGE and western blotting of total protein and exudates from hairy roots of pokeweed. The PAP antibody strongly cross-reacted with intra- and extracellular proteins and showed the same band, PAP-H (29.5 kD), indicating that PAP-H was secreted as part of the root exudates. Approximately 20 mug of protein was loaded per lane. C, Western-blot analysis of elicitation experimentation during one time course study. Hairy roots of pokeweed grown for 30 d were transferred into 50 mL of fresh Murashige and Skoog media, and treated with air (top), ethylene (middle), and air + methylcyclopropane (MCP; bottom) through 6 d. The medium from which the hairy roots were grown for 30 d was used as control. One milliliter of media from each sample was collected to concentrate the root secreted proteins followed by TCA precipitation as described in "Materials and Methods," and subsequently the concentrated protein was loaded in each lane. D, Ethylene concentration in the headspace of flasks during the course of each treatment. E, Western-blot analysis of intra- and extracellular PAP-H elicited by ethylene in the time course. One milliliter of media from each sample was collected, concentrated, and loaded as described above. To analyze the biological significance of PAP-H exudation, hairy root cultures of pokeweed were challenged with the stress-related chemical ethylene. As shown in Figure C, an enhanced induction of PAP-H was observed in the root exudates when the hairy roots were treated with ethylene. The secretion of PAP-H was induced shortly after beginning the ethylene treatment, and constantly increased through d 6 of ethylene treatment. On d 6, the secretion of PAP-H was increased up to 8-fold compared with a control, which consisted of roots secreting PAP-H for 30 d without any treatment. Air treatment showed no induction of PAP-H until 3 d after culture transfer, showing PAP-H secretion on d 4. In contrast, treatment with an ethylene inhibitor (MCP) suppressed the natural secretion of PAP-H. This result suggested that MCP blocked the binding of the endogenous ethylene and thus PAP-H secretion. The concentration of ethylene in the headspace of the flask was measured in replicates of all three treatments. Endogenous ethylene produced in the hairy roots treated with air began to increase in d 4, and reached 5 muL L-1 at d 6, a level similar to the concentration supplied in the ethylene treatment (Fig. D). The increase of endogenous ethylene concentration correlates to the increase of PAP-H production starting on d 4, as detected by western blotting. The result shown in Figure D indicated that MCP also blocked the production of endogenous ethylene. Thus, our results clearly show that PAP-H is secreted under natural conditions by a mechanism mediated by ethylene induction. Interestingly, the western-blot analysis of intracellular PAP-H indicates that its concentration inside the hairy roots slightly decreased upon ethylene treatment, which correlates to increasing PAP-H accumulation in the media (Fig. E). These results suggest that ethylene induces secretion of PAP-H rather than the novo production of this RIP. Taken together, these results suggest that ethylene induces secretion of PAP-H into the rhizosphere but does not induce production of PAP-H.  Antifungal Activity of PAP-H | To explore the biological significance of PAP-H, we examined the N-glycosidase activity of PAP-H against fungal ribosomes. The depurination experiment described for PAP-H against yeast ribosomes was repeated using ribosomes isolated from Trichoderma reesei. After aniline treatment, a small fragment of about 360 nucleotides was detected by urea-acrylamide gel electrophoresis (Fig. A). This result indicates that PAP-H may be involved in inhibiting fungal growth by actively depurinating the fungal ribosomes. Based on this result, we tested the antifungal activity of PAP-H against an array of fungi (see "Materials and Methods"). However, PAP-H did not show fungal inhibitory activity in plate assays. Subsequently, we tested the total secreted proteins (exudates) from pokeweed hairy roots for fungal inhibition to check any possible antifungal effect with other pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins that may allow PAP-H entrance onto fungal cells. As shown in Figure B, 50 mug of total secreted proteins produced a significant inhibition of the growth of R. solani as well as of T. reesei (data not shown). These data indicate that PAP-H may participate in an active defense mechanism of roots against rhizosphere microbes. Thus, we studied whether fungal inhibition was due to the direct effect of PAP-H on fungal ribosomes. We cocultured R. solani with hairy roots of pokeweed that were grown for 2 weeks before coculture in Murashige and Skoog basal media (Fig. C, a). Fungal hyphae growing in the proximity of the roots were collected after a week of coculture and washed briefly with water to cleanse of medium (solids) attached to hyphae, and ribosomes were then isolated from collected fungal mycelium tissues. Interestingly, a small fragment appeared when the rRNA derived from these ribosomes was run on urea PAGE, indicating rRNA cleavage due to RIP depurination after RNA extraction and aniline treatment (Fig. C, b --d). This result demonstrated that PAP-H entered into the cytosolic region of fungal cells, and depurinated fungal ribosomes.  Figure 8 | Antifungal activity of pokeweed hairy root exudates. Antifungal activity of pokeweed hairy root exudates. A, Depurination of T. reesei ribosomes in vitro. Ribosomes were isolated and incubated with PAP-H, ME, saporin, and ricin. The presence (+) or absence (-) of aniline is denoted. The arrow shows the presence of the diagnostic nucleotide cleavage product of rRNA. B, Radial growth inhibition assay of pokeweed hairy root exudates against Rhizoctonia solani. Twenty-five millimolar NaPO4 buffer, pH 7.5 (a), and filter-sterilized 50 mug of total root exudates (b) were applied to the discs, and tested for antifungal activity. C, Enzymatic activity of exudated PAP-H from hairy roots against R. solani. R. solani was cocultured with hairy roots of pokeweed that were grown for 2 weeks before the coculture in Murashige and Skoog basal media (a), and ribosomes of fungal hyphae growing in the proximity of the roots were isolated after a week of coculture. Then, rRNA was isolated from both ribosomes followed by treatment with aniline (b), and compared with ribosomes isolated from normally grown R. solani, incubated with PAP-H and then treated with aniline (c). Fungal hyphae of R. solani growing alone in a petri dish were collected, and their ribosomes were isolated and examined for no natural occurrence of rRNA depurination in fungal cells without prior incubation with PAP-H and/or the root exudates (d). The presence (+) or absence (-) of aniline is denoted. The arrow shows the presence of the diagnostic nucleotide cleavage product of rRNA. D, Enzymatic activities of chitinase and beta-1,3-glucanase in root exudates. For each activity, triplicate samples were assayed at two different dilutions with each assay run in triplicate. Error bars indicate +-sd. E, Determination of proteolytic activity of root exudates. Zymogram gel electrophoresis containing gelatin was performed as described in "Materials and Methods." The gel was then stained with 0.5% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. The arrow indicates protease activity in root exudates.  Enzymatic Activity Assay of PR Proteins in Root Exudates of Pokeweed | Based on previous results, we hypothesized that root exudates of pokeweed contained other PR proteins that could facilitate the entry of PAP-H into fungal cells by lysing fungal cell walls. Chitinase, beta-1,3-glucanase, and protease enzymatic activities were tested as possible candidates as described in "Materials and Methods." As shown in Figure , D and E, the root exudates demonstrated chitinase and beta-1,3-glucanase (10.18 and 16.82 units mg-1 total protein) activities, as well as protease activities detected by zymogram gel analysis. Correlating the concentration of chitinase and beta-1,3-glucanase in pokeweed root exudates with previously reported enzymatic activity for these enzymes in other plants (approximately 14 units mg-1 for chitinase and 18.5 units mg-1 for beta-1,3-glucanase; ; ; ; ; ), we conclude that the concentration of these PR proteins in the root exudates is sufficient to damage fungal cell walls. These results suggest that these PR proteins in root exudates may generate an additive effect to facilitate entrance of PAP-H into fungal cells.
We established transformed root clones of pokeweed with A. rhizogenes ATCC number 15834. These transformed roots ("hairy roots") displayed similar morphological characteristics to primary roots, including a well-developed cortex with new tissues developing from an apical meristem. The hairy roots of pokeweed showed stable and fast growth, and produced PAP-H steadily and constitutively. Hairy roots of pokeweed grew rapidly after d 20, and reached the stationary stage in approximately 30 d. The production of intracellular PAP-H increased during the very early stage, and remained constitutive after 15 d. In contrast, extracellular PAP-H accumulated to detectable levels in approximately 8 d, and continuously increased with the growth of roots. These results indicate that extracellular PAP-H accumulation occurs over time along with root growth, whereas the expression of intracellular PAP-H is constant. In this communication, we report the isolation of PAP-H, a new constitutively produced RIP, from A. rhizogenes-transformed hairy roots of pokeweed. The pI of PAP-H was determined to be 7.8 by IEF-PAGE, suggesting that PAP-H is the first neutral and active protein among known RIPs (Fig. B). As shown in Figure C, the lower levels of basic amino acids such as Lys and Arg in PAP-H compared with the levels in PAP and other isoforms may contribute to its lower pI. PAP-H showed N-terminal amino acid sequence similarity with other RIPs found in pokeweed, such as PAP and PAP-S, and to a lesser extent with PAP-II . PAP-H cross-reacts with PAP antibodies, but does not react with the PAP-II antibody (data not shown). Amino acid comparisons show 75.8% homology between PAP and PAP-S, and 33% homology between PAP and PAP II. In accordance, PAP-S cross-reacts with PAP antibodies, but PAP II does not react with PAP antibodies . We suggest that because PAP, PAP-S, and PAP-H are constitutively produced, they share more sequence and antigenic specificity, in contrast to PAP II, in which expression is environmentally regulated. Comparing PAP isoforms detected among different types of roots (Fig. A), PAP-H showed size differences with RIPs found in storage roots. However, PAP-H has an Mr similar to the protein expressed in primary roots, which cross-reacted with the PAP antibody. A. rhizogenes-transformed hairy roots, in general, exhibit morphological and genetic similarity with fibrous primary roots (for review, see ; ).  have shown that secondary growth induction leading to storage root formation shifts the protein production and accumulation patterns of RIPs. Therefore, PAP-H may be considered a biochemically identical isoform to the protein found in the primary roots. Our results also showed that storage roots have two immunoreactive bands that indicate a molecular mass (30 kD) close to that of PAP-S isolated from seeds . Furthermore, hairy root 