Tandemly Duplicated Safener-Induced Glutathione S-Transferase Genes from Triticum tauschii Contribute to Genome- and Organ-Specific Expression in Hexaploid Wheat
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) gene expression was examined in several Triticum species, differing in genome constitution and ploidy level, to determine genome contribution to GST expression in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (Triticum aestivum). Two tandemly duplicated tau class GST genes (TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2) were isolated from a single bacterial artificial chromosome clone in a library constructed from the diploid wheat and D genome progenitor to cultivated wheat, Triticum tauschii. The genes are very similar in genomic structure and their encoded proteins are 95% identical. Gene-specific reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed differential transcript accumulation of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 in roots and shoots. Expression of both genes was induced by herbicide safeners, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and abscisic acid, in the shoots of T. tauschii; however, expression of TtGSTU1 was always higher than TtGSTU2. In untreated seedlings, TtGSTU1 was expressed in both shoots and roots, whereas TtGSTU2 expression was only detected in roots. RNA gel-blot analysis of ditelosomic, aneuploid lines that are deficient for 6AS, 6BS, or 6DS chromosome arms of cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat showed differential genome contribution to safener-induced GST expression in shoots compared with roots. The GST genes from the D genome of hexaploid wheat contribute most to safener-induced expression in the shoots, whereas GSTs from the B and D genomes contribute to safener-induced expression in the roots.

Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) belong to multigene families common to all plants . They are well known for their responses to numerous endogenous and xenobiotic stresses, and glutathione conjugation of toxic electrophilic molecules. The roles of GST proteins in endogenous plant metabolism, as well as their role in stress tolerance, have yet to be clearly defined. GST gene expression is induced after exposure to many stresses, including biotic stresses such as pathogen attack and fungal elicitors, and abiotic stresses such as heat shock, cold, high salt, UV light exposure, heavy metals, and herbicides. Phytohormone treatments such as ethylene, auxins, abscisic acid (ABA), methyl jasmonate, and salicylic acid have also been shown to induce expression of GSTs (for review, see ; ; ). Induction of GST expression by so many diverse stimuli implies that plant GSTs are critical in plant response to stress, either by participating in the signal transduction process and/or detoxifying harmful compounds produced in response to or as a result of a given stress. It is likely that GST gene expression is induced by conditions that lead to oxidative stress . The encoded GST proteins play an important but poorly understood role in plant response to stress, possibly through the central role of antioxidant function. GST enzymatic activity could involve direct glutathione conjugation to toxic electrophilic molecules, or gluta-thione-dependent peroxidase activity, using glutathione as reductant for the detoxification of toxic oxygen species, oxygen radicals, and lipid peroxides formed during or after plant stress . One biochemical function of GST proteins that is well defined is their role in herbicide metabolism in crops. GSTs are the predominant detoxification enzymes in maize (Zea mays) and cereal crops that are responsible for metabolism of triazine herbicides, acetamide herbicides, and certain graminicides, such as fenoxaprop-ethyl in wheat . Herbicide-detoxifying GSTs have been well characterized in maize and soybean (Glycine max; ; , ; ; ; ; ), but have also been identified and partially characterized in wheat . Herbicide safeners are chemical compounds that increase the tolerance of certain grass crops (e.g. maize, grain sorghum [Sorghum bicolor], wheat, rice [Oryza sativa]) to herbicides . Herbicide safeners protect the crop plant by increasing herbicide metabolism and detoxification pathways . The increase in metabolism results from an increase in the activity of herbicide detoxification enzymes, such as GSTs, cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenases, and glucosyltransferases . Despite the widespread agronomic use of safeners and information about their effects on GST and P-450 enzymatic activity, there is little information on the precise molecular mechanism for safener induction of the genes that encode these herbicide-detoxifying enzymes. A safener-binding protein and its activity have been characterized in maize seedlings, along with its gene expression patterns . An area that is especially lacking in information is the identification and characterization of important regulatory sequences present in the promoters of safener-responsive GST genes, and the transcription factors that bind to these DNA sequences in agronomically important grasses such as maize, rice, and wheat. Molecular analyses of plant GST genomic sequences have focused mainly on dicot species, and have examined GST gene expression in response to pathogen attack, plant hormones, or stress treatments. Promoter regulatory elements that confer increased GST gene expression in response to auxins, ethylene, salicylic acid, hydrogen peroxide, heat shock, heavy metals, and plant pathogens have been identified in several dicot species including potato (Solanum tuberosum), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), Arabidopsis, soybean, and carnation (Dianthus caryophyllus; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Safener-responsive expression of GSTs and their cDNA sequences have been reported for maize, wheat, and rice . However, among these safener-responsive genes in monocot crops, only the maize GST-27 promoter has been partially characterized . Our studies have utilized the diploid wheat Triticum tauschii (synonymous with Aegilops tauschii and Aegilops squarrosa) as a model plant and genome to understand regulation of GST expression in grass crops with large and/or polyploid genomes . Previous research focused on a herbicide safener-induced GST isozyme that was purified from T. tauschii using anion-exchange and affinity chromatography, and was biochemically characterized . This safener-inducible GST isozyme can use the chloroacetamide herbicide dimethenamid as a substrate , where its conjugation with reduced glutathione results in metabolic detoxification of the herbicide . In subsequent studies, a corresponding cDNA was isolated from T. tauschii and was used to map the homoeologous GST genes to a chromosome arm in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) and to a linkage group in barley (Hordeum vulgare; , ). Here, we report the analysis of genomic sequences for the safener-inducible, tau class GST genes (TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2) and characterization of their expression profiles in T. tauschii. We also utilized ditelosomic, aneuploid wheat lines and various wheat species that differ in genome constitution and/or ploidy level to determine genome contributions to expression patterns in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat. Our results provide novel evidence for differential genome contributions to constitutive and inducible gene expression in organs of hexaploid wheat, and differences in expression between closely related gene family members that are organized as a tandem repeat in a large grass genome.
Isolation and Sequence Analysis of GST Genes from T. tauschii | Three different GST genes were isolated by screening a T. tauschii large DNA insert genomic library . The genomic library was screened with the safener-inducible GST TSI-1 (renamed TtGSTU1; ) cDNA that had been isolated previously from T. tauschii . A total of four positively hybridizing genomic clones were obtained and further analyzed. DNA gel-blot analysis of the four bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones digested with different restriction enzymes showed that BAC 1 (insert size of 150 kb) and BAC 4 (insert size of 130 kb) contained overlapping genomic fragments, and each BAC clone appeared to contain at least two GST genes. Subsequent experiments focused on analyzing only BAC 1. BAC 1 contained an approximately 14-kb EcoRI/KpnI-hybridizing fragment. An XhoI site within the 14-kb fragment was utilized to separate this fragment into two smaller fragments of 8.5 and 5.3 kb. Each smaller fragment contained one of two tandemly repeated GST genes, TtGSTU2 and TtGSTU1 (accession no. ; Fig. ). These results are consistent with DNA gel-blot analysis (using XbaI as the restriction enzyme) of the cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat genome , where it was hypothesized that the homoeologous GST genes were represented by at least two copies in each of the three wheat genomes. Sequence analysis of the entire 14-kb fragment showed that the coding region and untranslated regions (UTRs) of TtGSTU1 are identical to the TtGSTU1 cDNA . Both of the tandemly duplicated genes contain an intron that interrupts the coding region at the same location, although the length and sequence of the intron varies between the two genes. TtGSTU1 has a single intron of 99 bp, whereas TtGSTU2 has a 319-bp intron , suggesting that these are tau class, or type III, GST genes .  Figure 1 | Restriction map of the 14-kb region of the BAC 1 clone from T. tauschii Restriction map of the 14-kb region of the BAC 1 clone from T. tauschii, containing the two tandemly duplicated GST genes. Restriction sites are: B, BamHI; E, EcoRI; H, HindIII; K, KpnI; Xb, XbaI; and Xh, XhoI. LE, Left end (position 0); RE, right end (position 13, 710). DNA gel-blot and sequence analysis of BAC 3 showed that it contained only the TtGSTU1 gene, and was not analyzed further. DNA gel-blot analysis of the BAC 2 clone, digested with several restriction enzymes, showed a single, weakly hybridizing band (data not shown). BAC 2 was found to contain a related, yet divergent, GST-like sequence, which was named TtGSTU3 (accession no. ). The nucleotide sequence of the TtGSTU3 gene's coding region is 76% identical to the corresponding region of the TtGSTU1 gene, but this gene apparently does not contain an intron. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences of the three GST genes showed that the TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 proteins are 95% identical and 96% similar, whereas the TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU3 proteins are 68% identical and 80% similar (Fig. A). There is a 31-amino acid residue extension at the C terminus of the TtGSTU3-encoded protein, compared with both TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 (Fig. A). These three GSTs belong to the tau class of plant GSTs, according to the classification system proposed by  and . The encoded proteins contain the triplet of amino acid residues His-Lys-Lys, which are conserved only in the tau class GST sequences, and are located at position 53 to 55 (numbering of amino acid residues is according to the TtGSTU1 sequence throughout the text, unless stated otherwise). The conserved triplet of His-Asn-Gly in the tau class is also conserved in these three GSTs at position 61 to 63 (Fig. A). TtGSTU3 is a unique GST, however, in that it appears to be a tau class GST protein based on its deduced amino acid sequence, but its gene sequence does not contain a single intron, which is characteristic of tau class GST genes.  Figure 2 | Comparison of tau class GST proteins from T. tauschii Comparison of tau class GST proteins from T. tauschii. A, Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences of TtGSTU1, TtGSTU2, and TtGSTU3. Identical amino acids and conservatively substituted residues are shaded with light and dark gray, respectively. The amino acid residue where exon 2 of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 starts is indicated by an asterisk above the sequences. GenBank accession numbers are as follows: TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 , and TtGSTU3 . B, Hydropathy profile of the TtGSTU1 protein, as determined by the method of  using a window of 10 amino acid residues. The hydropathy profiles of the TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 proteins, as determined by the method of , are almost identical. Both proteins contain a strong hydrophilic region around amino acids 110 to 130 (Fig. B, only TtGSTU1 is shown). This hydrophilic region is located where exon 2 of each gene starts (at amino acid 109 in TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2; Fig. A). The function of this hydrophilic region is not known, but may play an important role in substrate binding and/or substrate specificity. Alternatively, this region may play a role in determining the intracellular localization of the GST proteins. This region in TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 is very similar in sequence to the same region of the mouse (Mus musculus) mGSTA4-4 protein (amino acid residues 110 --120), which also contains several charged residues and was shown to be important for a proposed electrostatic interaction with the plasma membrane of mouse liver hepatocytes . Hydropathy analysis of the TtGSTU3 protein showed minor differences relative to TtGSTU1, although slightly less hydrophilic character was noted around amino acids 110 to 130 (Fig. A).  Repeat Elements Are Dispersed in the Intergenic Regions of the 14-kb Contiguous Sequence of BAC 1 | Two open reading frames (encoding the proteins TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2) were found within the completely sequenced 14-kb interval from BAC 1. A BLAST search with this 14-kb interval identified sequences with similarity to several repeat elements from barley, maize, and the diploid wheat Triticum monococcum. The 14-kb interval contains about 2.6 kb of sequence upstream of the TATA box of TtGSTU2  until the EcoRI site (and start of the 14-kb contiguous sequence) is reached. In this region, about 1 kb of sequence (bp 1 --1,039 of accession no. ) was highly homologous to the long terminal repeat (LTR) of several retrotransposons, including the Angela-type retrotransposons from T. monococcum . This 1-kb portion also shares 82% nucleotide identity with a portion of the LTR of the BARE-1 copia-like retroelement from barley . Approximately 8 kb of sequence (bp 3,889 --11, 859 of accession no. ) is located between the TtGSTU2 and TtGSTU1 genes . Within this 8-kb intergenic sequence, there are three regions that show homology to the LTRs of several retrotransposons from cereal species. Sequences from position 5,261 to 5,890 are similar to the LTRs of Angela-type retrotransposons , and also shares about 83% identity with the barley BARE-1 copia-like retroelement over a 170-bp region . Position 8,062 to 8,451 was also similar to the LTRs of Angela-type retrotransposons  and also shares 86% identity with the BARE-1 copia-like retroelement in barley over a 130-bp region . Position 8,775 to 9,124 shares about 90% nucleotide identity with LTRs of the BARE-1-like retrotransposons Angela-2, Angela-3, and Angela-4 . An 868-bp sequence flanks the 3' end of the TtGSTU1 mRNA until the KpnI restriction site (and end of the 14-kb contiguous sequence) is reached. A BLAST search with this sequence showed that a region of about 660 bp (toward the 3' end) shares 95% nucleotide identity with intron 10 of the T. tauschii starch synthase I gene , which may indicate the presence of a repeat family that is present throughout different parts of the wheat genome. This region also shares homology with the intron of the maize ACCase gene (accession no. ), which was noted to contain a number of retroelements, such as colonist-1 and colonist-2.  5'-Flanking Regions of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 | In comparison with the 5'-UTR present in the TtGSTU1 cDNA, the start site for transcription initiation was set approximately 90 bp upstream of the MET start codon for both GST genes . The major distinguishing feature of the 5'-UTRs in the two genes is an "AC" dinucleotide simple sequence repeat, present just upstream of the translational start site. The TtGSTU1 genomic sequence contains eight copies of the AC repeat, whereas the TtGSTU2 gene has five AC repeats . An appropriately placed TATA box can be easily recognized 36 bp 5' to the transcription start site in both genes. Comparison of alignments of the nucleotide sequences of the promoters of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 revealed that the two genes are very similar for about 800 nucleotides upstream of the TATA boxes, except for two large gaps that were noted: a 22-bp gap in the TtGSTU1 promoter at position -195, and a large gap in the TtGSTU2 promoter at position -363 .  Figure 3 | Comparison of the 5'-flanking sequences of the two tandem GST genes, TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2, isolated from the BAC 1 clone. Comparison of the 5'-flanking sequences of the two tandem GST genes, TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2, isolated from the BAC 1 clone. Numbering is determined from the putative transcription start site by comparison of the 5'-UTR sequence of the TtGSTU1 gene with the TtGSTU1 cDNA. Potential transcriptional regulatory elements identified by homology searches are underlined in bold and labeled accordingly. Preliminary analysis of the UTRs and promoter regions using a plant transcription factor homology database  identified several potential cis-acting regulatory elements. Sequences similar to the TATA box of many eukaryotic promoters were found at position -36 of both TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2. The sequence RYACGTGGYR (R = A/G and Y = C/T), which was identified as an ABA-responsive element (ABRE) in Arabidopsis , was found in both TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 promoters at -230 and -249, respectively . An ethylene-responsive enhancer element AWTTCAAA (W = A/T) identified in the carnation GSTI gene  and a fruit-ripening gene  was located in the minus strand of the TtGSTU1 promoter at -525 . The sequences of TGTCTC  and CATATG , which were related to auxin-responsive expression, were found in TtGSTU1 at -1,118 and -119 . The auxin-responsive element TGTCTC was also found in the minus strand of TtGSTU2 at -2,078 (not shown). A G box-like sequence  containing the palindromic hexamer TAGCTA was found at position -308 in the TtGSTU1 gene and position -351 in the TtGSTU2 gene . This same sequence in the TtGSTU2 gene is actually a palindromic octamer, GTAGCTAC.  Expression of GST Genes in T. tauschii following Treatment with Safeners and Hormones | RNA gel-blot analysis showed that constitutive GST expression was detected in roots of T. tauschii, but expression in shoots was low or not detectable . GST expression was highly induced by the safeners cloquintocet-mexyl and fluxofenim in T. tauschii shoots and roots. Induction of GST expression by these safeners in wheat shoots is consistent with previous results . Because potential ABA-, ethylene-, and auxin-responsive regulatory elements were identified (by homology searches) in the promoters of the GST genes , we also examined expression in response to these plant hormones. The synthetic auxin herbicide 2,4-D highly induced GST expression in roots and also induced expression in shoots, although to lower levels than the safeners in shoot tissue. ABA at a relatively high concentration (100 versus 10 mum) slightly increased GST expression in T. tauschii shoots . Ethylene had no effect on GST expression in T. tauschii shoots or roots . The fact that both safeners caused the greatest increase in GST expression, relative to the plant hormones, suggests that safeners may be tapping into a different regulatory pathway for induction of GST expression, or that the signal for induction may be stronger and/or longer lasting for a safener relative to the plant hormones examined.  Figure 4 | RNA gel-blot analysis of GST expression in T. tauschii RNA gel-blot analysis of GST expression in T. tauschii after treatment with herbicide safeners and plant hormones. Total RNA (10 mug lane-1) was analyzed, and the blot was probed with the digoxigenin (DIG)-labeled TtGSTU1 cDNA coding region from T. tauschii. Etiolated seedlings were treated for 48 h with aqueous solutions containing 100 mum 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 10 mum or 100 mum ABA, 20 mug mL-1 2-chloroethyl-phosphonic acid for ethylene treatment, and 10 mum of the safeners cloquintocet-mexyl and fluxofenim. All treatment solutions were applied as vermiculite drenches to the seedlings 72 h after transferring pots to room temperature; the seedlings were exposed to the treatments for 48 h, then shoots and roots were harvested (5-d total growth period). Uniform loading was verified by comparing RNA intensities after ethidium bromide staining and by hybridizing the blots with a wheat actin probe (data not shown).  Differential Expression of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 in T. tauschii | Due to the high degree of similarity between the two GST genes at the nucleic acid level, we used semiquantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR  to detect individual expression patterns of the two tightly linked GST genes in roots and shoots of T. tauschii. Primers were designed  that would selectively amplify only one of the two tandemly duplicated GST genes. Constitutive GST expression in both roots and shoots was contributed mainly by TtGSTU1, and this gene also seems to be the most highly induced and expressed in safener-treated seedlings . TtGSTU1 was also induced by 100 mum ABA and 2,4-D in shoots . TtGSTU2 expression was not detectable in control shoots, but was weakly expressed in control roots. However, TtGSTU2 expression could be detected in control shoots when amplifying for 35 cycles (data not shown), compared with the 25 cycles shown in Figure . TtGSTU2 expression was induced by safeners, 100 mum ABA, and 2,4-D in both roots and shoots, although the level of expression was always less than that of TtGSTU1 . Ethylene had little effect on TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 expression in either shoots or roots .  Table I | Primers for RT-PCR  Figure 5 | Semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis of individual GST gene expression in T. tauschii Semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis of individual GST gene expression in T. tauschii. Expression was analyzed in shoots (A) and roots (B) of T. tauschii. Seedling growth conditions and treatments, and total RNA samples were the same as those used for RNA gel-blot analysis shown in Figure . Total RNA (5 mug) was used to synthesize first strand cDNA, and a fraction (1/20) of the first strand cDNA was used as template for PCR amplification of individual gene transcripts. Ethidium bromide-stained RT-PCR products were separated in 1.2% (w/v) agarose gels and analyzed with 1D image analysis software (Eastman-Kodak, Rochester, NY). The wheat actin gene was used as a constitutively expressed control gene and loading control. We could not detect the expression of TtGSTU3 by RT-PCR in either untreated T. tauschii seedlings or treated seedlings (data not shown), which suggests that TtGSTU3 may be transcriptionally inactive (a pseudogene), or has an expression pattern entirely different from TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2. This might include expression in other tissues or organs, or possibly under different stress conditions.  GST Expression in Cultivated, Hexaploid Bread Wheat and Other Triticum Spp. | In addition to examining GST expression in T. tauschii, we also investigated GST expression in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (ABD genomes). Homoeologous GST genes were previously mapped to the short arms of group 6 chromosomes in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat via Southern hybridization , using the T. tauschii TtGSTU1 cDNA to probe ditelosomic, aneuploid wheat lines of group 6 chromosomes that are missing either the short or long arm of chromosome 6A, 6B, or 6D. RNA gel-blot analyses of these same lines were conducted, again using the TtGSTU1 cDNA as a probe. It is clear that in safener (cloquintocet-mexyl)-treated wheat shoots, removal of the tandem GST genes in the chromosome 6DL line (missing the short arm only) almost completely eliminated GST expression . However, removal of the homoeologous GST genes in the chromosome 6AL and 6BL lines (missing the short arms of 6A and 6B, respectively) had relatively minor effects on GST expression levels, even though the 6A or 6B GST alleles were no longer present.  Figure 6 | RNA gel-blot analysis of GST expression in chromosome group 6 ditelosomic, aneuploid wheat lines. RNA gel-blot analysis of GST expression in chromosome group 6 ditelosomic, aneuploid wheat lines. GST expression was analyzed in aneuploid lines derived from cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat cv Chinese Spring, in both roots and shoots. Treatments included the control (unsafened) or 10 mum of the safener cloquintocet-mexyl for 48 h as described in Figure . Total RNA (10 mug lane-1) was analyzed, and the blot was probed with the DIG-labeled TtGSTU1 cDNA coding region from T. tauschii. L, Long arm only (missing the short arm); S, short arm only (missing the long arm); CS, cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat cv Chinese Spring base genotype. GST expression in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat roots showed a different pattern when individual group 6 chromosome arms were removed . When the short arms of chromosomes 6A and 6D were removed (in lines 6AL and 6DL), there was no detectable difference in the level of GST expression in safener-treated roots. However, when the short arm of chromosome 6B was removed (in the 6BL line), there was a significant decrease in GST gene expression. This suggests that in safener-treated cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat roots, the GST allele(s) on chromosome 6BS is a major contributor to GST expression; in contrast, the GST alleles on chromosome 6DS are most important in safener-treated cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat shoots and the GST alleles on chromosomes 6AS and 6BS appear to be minor contributors in shoots. This difference in genome contribution to GST gene expression in roots and shoots is also noted in Figure , where several Triticum spp. were analyzed for their response to the safener cloquintocet-mexyl in roots and shoots. Triticum spp. were chosen that differ in genome constitution (diploids A only or D only, and tetraploid AB) and were compared with cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (ABD genomes). GSTs were highly induced in the shoots of cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (AABBDD) and T. tauschii (DD), although there was also a relatively high constitutive level of GST mRNA in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat cv Chinese Spring (AABBDD; Fig. ). In contrast, there was no induction of GST expression in the shoots of T. monococcum (AA) and relatively minor induction in Triticum turgidum subsp. durum (AABB) shoots . However, the safener increased GST expression in the roots of all four wheat species, although the lowest induction occurred in T. monococcum roots . These results confirm our previous observation that GST genes in the D genome of wheat are contributing the vast majority of safener-induced expression in shoots; however, in roots, it appears that GST genes in both the B and D genomes are the major contributors to GST expression (Figs.  and ).  Figure 7 | RNA gel-blot analysis of wheat genome contribution to GST expression. RNA gel-blot analysis of wheat genome contribution to GST expression. Four wheat species were examined, each differing in genome composition and/or ploidy level. Wheat seedlings were either unsafened (control) or treated with 10 mum of the safener cloquintocet-mexyl for 48 h as described in Figure . Total RNA (10 mug per lane) was analyzed, and the blot was probed with the DIG-labeled TtGSTU1 cDNA coding region from T. tauschii. AABBDD, Cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat; AABB, T. turgidum subsp. durum; AA, T. monococcum; DD, T. tauschii. Cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat cv Chinese Spring was used in all of our expression studies because it is the base genotype from which the ditelosomic aneuploids were derived . There was a relatively high level of constitutive GST expression in shoots of cv Chinese Spring, compared with T. turgidum subsp. durum, T. monococcum, and T. tauschii, yet it also showed safener induction (Figs.  and ). To further investigate this finding, three other varieties of cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (CITR 9038, Ernie, and P25R57) were used to compare and contrast with cv Chinese Spring. These four wheat varieties differed in both basal level of GST expression and safener induction in shoots in response to the two safeners cloquintocet-mexyl and fluxofenim . The varieties Chinese Spring and CITR 9038 showed the highest basal levels of GST expression, whereas there was no detectable basal GST expression in P25R57. GST expression was highly induced by both safeners in CITR 9038, which is consistent with the large increases in GST enzyme activity (in response to both safeners) reported previously for this wheat line . The variety Ernie showed a higher level of induction of GST expression after treatment with both safeners relative to the variety P25R57 . These varying ranges of constitutive and safener-induced GST mRNA levels among wheat varieties and genetic lines are consistent with the broad range of constitutive and safener-increased GST activity levels reported previously , and provide further evidence that there is a great amount of genetic diversity present for GST expression levels in wheat germplasm.  Figure 8 | Cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat varietal response to safeners and differential GST expression. Cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat varietal response to safeners and differential GST expression. Wheat seedlings were either unsafened (control) or treated with 10 mum of the safener cloquintocet-mexyl or fluxofenim for 48 h as described in Figure . CS, Chinese Spring. Although it was not determined which genome(s) is contributing the constitutive expression observed in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat cv Chinese Spring shoots (Figs.  and ), the variable constitutive and safener-induced expression levels observed in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat varieties  suggest genome complexities indicative of further evolution and diversification of homoeologous GST gene family members after their duplication by polyploidization of the A, B, and D genomes in cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat. The diversification of TtGSTU1 and/or TtGSTU2 expression patterns in both T. tauschii (by a duplication event) and cultivated, hexaploid bread wheat (by polyploidization) is consistent with a relaxation of purifying selection in duplicate genes of recent origin .
Genomic Organization | Screening a T. tauschii BAC genomic library (average insert size of 119 kb; ) allowed us to isolate the BAC 1 clone (insert size of 150 kb) containing the two tandemly repeated GST genes TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2, both contained within a 14-kb restriction fragment. Within this 14-kb fragment, there were only two open reading frames, both coding for the two highly homologous tau class GSTs. These two GSTs contain the entire transcription units in two exons interrupted by one intron, with complete conservation of intron position. However, the length and nucleotide sequences of the two genes' introns are different. Similar GST gene clusters have been identified in the carnation genome  as well as in the Arabidopsis genome . In contrast to TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2, the two tightly linked carnation GST genes were obtained from a single lambda phage clone, and contained 10 exons and nine introns , characteristic of zeta class plant GSTs. These two GST genes showed conservation in their intron positions and also the length and nucleotide sequences of the introns . The recent findings from carnation, Arabidopsis, and wheat all indicate that GSTs from the same subclass are grouped on chromosomes as tandem duplications . Comparisons of TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 sequences with rice genome sequences from GenBank and the draft recently completed by the Beijing Genomics Institute  identified at least two clusters of tandemly duplicated tau class GST genes in rice. One of these clusters contained 20 closely related tau class GST genes on a single BAC clone from rice chromosome 10 (accession no. ). At least 12 of these 20 genes were expressed in leaves, roots, or callus tissue based on their identity with rice GST cDNAs or ESTs. Another tandem duplication of tau class GST genes was found on a rice BAC clone from chromosome 1 (accession no. ). Among these 22 rice tau class GST genes, both TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 show the highest similarity to the same OsGSTU4 gene present within the 20-gene cluster on chromosome 10, suggesting that the duplication event leading to TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 may have occurred after the divergence of the rice and wheat genomes. The high degree of similarity between TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 in both the coding and 5'-flanking regions (except for a few insertions or deletions in their promoters; Fig. ) supports the notion that these genes arose due to a recent duplication event. TtGSTU1 and TtGSTU2 map to wheat chromosome 6 , which is proposed to be syntenic wit