Regulation of Airway Tight Junctions by Proinflammatory Cytokines
Epithelial tight junctions (TJs) provide an important route for passive electrolyte transport across airway epithelium and provide a barrier to the migration of toxic materials from the lumen to the interstitium. The possibility that TJ function may be perturbed by airway inflammation originated from studies reporting (1) increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-8 (IL-8), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), and IL-1beta in airway epithelia and secretions from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and (2) abnormal TJ strands of CF airways as revealed by freeze-fracture electron microscopy. We measured the effects of cytokine exposure of CF and non-CF well-differentiated primary human airway epithelial cells on TJ properties, including transepithelial resistance, paracellular permeability to hydrophilic solutes, and the TJ proteins occludin, claudin-1, claudin-4, junctional adhesion molecule, and ZO-1. We found that whereas IL-1beta treatment led to alterations in TJ ion selectivity, combined treatment of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma induced profound effects on TJ barrier function, which could be blocked by inhibitors of protein kinase C. CF bronchi in vivo exhibited the same pattern of expression of TJ-associated proteins as cultures exposed in vitro to prolonged exposure to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma. These data indicate that the TJ of airway epithelia exposed to chronic inflammation may exhibit parallel changes in the barrier function to both solutes and ions.

Tight junctions (TJs) are characteristically located at the apicolateral borders of adjacent epithelial cells and are responsible for the selective regulation of the passage of ions and neutral molecules through the paracellular space. In addition to their key role in maintaining barrier function of the epithelium, TJs have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several diseases. One group of disorders, inflammatory bowel disease, displays a highly deregulated barrier function that appears to be a fundamental event in disease pathogenesis . Whether the alteration in TJ barrier function is a primary phenomenon associated with the disease or an acquired response caused by the high degree of inflammation associated with the disease is unclear. If, indeed, the TJ response is acquired, this would suggest that other diseases known to be associated with a high level of inflammation may display a characteristic change in TJ barrier function. Cystic fibrosis (CF) serves as an excellent model for the study of the effects of inflammation on TJ barrier function. The airway disease of CF is characterized by an inflammatory response with a marked influx of neutrophils and chronic bacterial infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proinflammatory cytokines detected in CF airways serve in part to perpetuate this inflammatory response. High levels of the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin (IL)-8, and IL-1beta as well as the soluble intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 have been measured in the airways of patients with CF . The airway epithelium of patients with CF also expresses an increased level of signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT-1), a component of the interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) signaling cascade, indicating that IFN-gamma may also be increased in CF airways . In addition, increased levels of IFN-gamma mRNA have also been detected in the airway epithelium of CF patients . Freeze-fracture electron microscopy (EM) has shown previously that the TJ strands of inflamed CF airways appear to be altered compared with those from non-CF patients . The cytokines IL-1, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma have all been shown to regulate the TJ of both epithelia and endothelia . In addition, IL-1beta has been shown to alter TJ permeability through an effect on the claudin family of transmembrane proteins thought to be important in maintaining junctional integrity in astrocytes . However, these studies have not focused on the effects of chronic cytokine exposure on airway epithelial TJ function. The TJ is a complex structure composed of several protein components, some of whose function(s) remain largely unclear. The claudin family of transmembrane proteins are thought to be key components of the TJ, but the growing number of members of this family impedes a complete understanding of their function. Several other components, such as occludin, junctional adhesion molecule (JAM), and more recently the coxsackievirus and adenovirus 2/5 receptor, have been localized to the TJ . Occludin, the first transmembrane TJ protein identified, has been localized to the TJ strand with claudins. JAM has been identified as a component of the TJ necessary to allow the transmigration of monocytes through the paracellular space, which makes it a likely target for inflammation-induced alterations in TJ function. Which of these components is significant in maintaining the integrity of the airway TJ during inflammation is unknown. The regulation of TJ function is incompletely understood and may vary among different cell types. Several protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms have been associated with changes in paracellular permeability. Previous studies have shown a correlation between the level of membrane-associated PKCalpha and the extent of paracellular permeability, and PKCbeta has been shown to play a role in the regulation of endothelial TJs . In addition, the atypical PKC isoforms PKCzeta have been localized to the TJ of MDCK cells . Atypical PKC isotype-specific interacting protein may also localize to the TJ via interactions with PKCiota/lambda and PKCzeta, forming a complex that is tethered to the junction by a direct interaction with JAM . Although PKC isoforms appear to play a functional role in the TJ, factors regulating their expression remain unclear, in particular, how these isoforms are affected by biological stimuli, including inflammation. The difference in the morphology of CF airways as determined by freeze-fracture EM suggests that the environment of the CF airway might lead to disruption of the barrier function of the TJ. To determine whether the chronic inflammation of CF airways leads to modulation of airway TJs, we exposed CF and non-CF well-differentiated (WD) primary human airway epithelial (HAE) cells to cytokines that are upregulated in CF, including IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma. We then assessed the effects of this treatment on TJ barrier function and on components of the TJ. To correlate the effects of cytokines on primary HAE cells in vitro with the effects seen in vivo, we performed immunofluorescence localization of TJ components in freshly excised human CF and non-CF large airways.
Chemicals and Antibodies | TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma were purchased from Sigma Chemical Inc. (St. Louis, MO). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies to ZO-1, claudin-1, and occludin and mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to occludin, ZO-1, and ICAM-1 were purchased from Zymed Laboratories (San Francisco, CA). Rabbit polyclonal and goat polyclonal antibodies to ICAM-1 were purchased from Santa Cruz Biochemical (Santa Cruz, CA). The 3D8 mouse mAb to JAM was kindly provided by Dr. Kenji Ishii (Kyoto, Japan). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies to both PKCiota/lambda and PKCzeta were purchased from Santa Cruz. The mouse anti-claudin-4 mAb was generously provided by James M. Anderson (Yale University, New Haven, CT). The FITC-conjugated dextrans were purchased from Sigma. The PKC inhibitor H7 and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein were purchased from Sigma. Chelerythrine chloride was purchased from Alexis Corp. (San Diego, CA).  Cell Culture | Primary airway cells from human subjects were obtained in accordance with guidelines approved by the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of Human Subjects. Bronchial cells of normal (non-CF) and CF type were isolated from surgical specimens, plated at a density of 2 x 105 cells/12-mm Transwell-Col (0.4-mum pore size) insert, and maintained in a 50:50 mixture of LHC Basal Medium (Biofluids, Rockville, MD) and DMEM-H medium supplemented with growth factors, retinoic acid, and BSA as previously described . After cultures reached confluence, medium was aspirated from the apical surface, and cells were maintained at an air-liquid interface for 4 wk. Cultures with 10% cilia as determined by microscopy and a transepithelial resistance (RT) of 600 Omega-cm2 measured with an ohmmeter (EVOM; World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) were selected for experiments. Cultures were exposed to cytokines on the basolateral surface for 24, 48, or 72 h.  Transepithelial Cell Permeability | Permeation of FITC-dextrans of 10 and 2000 kDa across primary HAE cells was measured after 24, 48, or 72 h exposure to cytokines. Compounds were added to the apical surface (200 muL of a 5-mg/mL solution in HEPES-buffered Ringer's solution containing 1.3 mM CaCl2), and samples (10 muL) were removed from the apical and basolateral compartments at 10, 20, 30, 40, and 60 min. The rate of permeation was determined by measuring the sample fluorescence at 496 nm in a 96-well fluorescent plate reader. The paracellular permeability to hydrophilic solutes (Papp) coefficients were calculated as previously described .  Electrophysiological Measurements of Dilution Potential | Polarized CF primary HAE cultures were treated with IL-1beta for 72 h and mounted in modified Ussing chambers interfaced with an electrometer, in which transepithelial potential difference (VT) and RT were measured continuously under open-circuit conditions. The temperature of all solutions was maintained at 37C, and pH was regulated by bubbling with 95% O2 --5% CO2. Basal VT, RT, and current were recorded across cultures in a buffer containing high NaCl (in mM: 120 NaCl, 10 HEPES at pH 7.4, 10 NaHCO3, 1.2 CaCl2, 5 KCl, and 1 MgSO4) and 10-4 M amiloride. The change in VT (DeltaVT) in response to luminal substitution with a buffer containing low NaCl (in mM: 60 NaCl, 120 mannitol, 10 HEPES at pH 7.4, 10 NaHCO3, 1.2 CaCl2, 5 KCl, and 1 MgSO4) and 10-4 M amiloride was subsequently recorded . Blank filters were used to determine background and subtracted from subsequent measurements. Dilution potentials (DeltaVT) and PCl-/PNa+ were calculated as previously described . All measurements were performed in a minimum of six total cultures isolated from two patients.  Immunofluorescence Labeling and Confocal Microscopy | Cells were permeabilized with methanol at -20C for 30 min. Antibodies to ZO-1, occludin, claudin-1, claudin-4, PKCiota/lambda, and JAM diluted to 1:1000 were added to the luminal surface for 1 h. Cells were washed with PBS, and Texas Red --labeled secondary antibodies (Amersham), diluted 1:600 in 10% goat serum/PBS, were added to the luminal surface. For occludin and claudin-1 double labeling, a mouse mAb to occludin conjugated to FITC was incubated with rabbit polyclonal antibody to claudin-1 and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. For JAM and ZO-1 double labeling, 3D8 mouse anti-JAM and rabbit anti-ZO-1 were added to the culture. After washing, anti-rabbit Texas Red and antimouse FITC were incubated in 10% goat serum/PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were postfixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Transwell-Col inserts were excised and mounted on slides with 100 muL Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) containing 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (, Exton, PA). Freshly excised human bronchi from non-CF and CF (DeltaF/DeltaF) subjects were embedded in OCT, and frozen sections (10 mum) were cut. Sections were incubated in 95% ethanol followed by a brief wash in PBS. After incubation in acetone, sections were washed in 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, and then primary and secondary antibodies added as described above.  Western Blotting | Lysates of primary HAE cells were prepared with 0.1% Triton X-100 extraction buffer containing phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and dithiothreitol (DTT). Equal amounts of protein (30 mug) were loaded onto Tris-glycine gels (Novex, San Diego, CA). After electrophoresis for 1 h at 200 V, protein was transferred to nitrocellulose or polyvinylidine difluoride (PVDF) membrane at 33 V and blocked in 5% fat-free milk. Membranes were probed at antibody dilutions of 1:1000 in Tris-buffered saline --Tween-20 (TBS-T). Protein was visualized with a peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (1:20,000) by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) or Supersignal west femto maximum sensitivity substrate for JAM blotting (, Rockford, IL). For immunoprecipitation of PKCiota/lambda and zeta and JAM, lysates were incubated with rabbit polyclonal antibodies to PKCiota/lambda or zeta or mouse mAb to JAM for 2 h (PKC) or overnight (JAM) at 4C, and Sepharose G beads were added for an additional 1 h. After centrifugation, beads were washed in cell lysis buffer and then heated at 95C for 15 min. Loading buffer was added and Western blotting performed as described above. Blots were stripped with Restore Western blot stripping buffer according to the manufacturer's protocol (Pierce). Human bronchi from non-CF and CF (DeltaF/DeltaF) lungs were dissected immediately after removal from patients undergoing clinical lung transplantation (freshly excised) and placed in ice-cold PBS, and epithelium was removed with a scalpel. Protein was isolated in 7 M urea buffer containing SDS and beta-mercaptoethanol and sonicated for 30 s. Protein concentration was determined with the RC/DC Protein Assay (, Hercules, CA), 50 mug total protein run on Tris-glycine gels and transferred to PVDF membrane at 33 V for 2 h. Western blotting was performed as described above. For Western blotting of JAM, membranes were incubated with 3D8 antibody overnight at 4C. Occludin Western blotting was performed with the rabbit polyclonal antibody as described above. Densitometry was performed with Scion Image for Windows (Scion, Frederick, MD) to determine average band intensity and percent difference between non-CF and CF. The intensity of lanes containing no bands was set to the background level.  RT-PCR and Quantitative RT-PCR | Total RNA was isolated with Qiagen RNeasy Protect according to the manufacturer's protocol (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). RNA was then treated with DNase (Ambion, Austin, TX). For complementary DNA synthesis, 1 mug total RNA was used in a 20-muL reaction containing 1 mM deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), 2.5 mM random hexamers or oligo dT, 1000 U/ml RNase inhibitor, 0.1 volume 10X buffer (supplied by manufacturer), and 2500 U/ml murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The reverse transcription (RT) reaction was carried out at 1 cycle in a thermal cycler at 42C for 50 min, followed by 15 min incubation at 70C. For competitive quantitative RT-PCR (cQRT-PCR), an internal standard was generated containing a 60-nucleotide deletion that would be recognized by the same primers as the target sequence . RNA for this internal standard was generated by ligation of a T7 promoter followed by in vitro transcription. Before RT, the standard was added at a concentration range of 0.0001 to 1 ng, and cDNA was generated. For semiquantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR), primers to the gene of interest and those to GAPDH were added simultaneously to the PCR reaction. PCR was carried out with Taq DNA polymerase for 25 cycles. PCR products were separated on a 1.5% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide. The relative band intensities were then determined with Scion Image, and the amount of JAM mRNA expression was calculated as previously described . The amount of standard added to the reaction (in ng) versus the ratio of standard (DeltaJAM) to transcript was plotted on a double logarithmic plot. The amount of transcript was then determined by measuring the point on the plot at which the y-intercept equals 1, indicating an equal ratio of standard to transcript, and then calculating the x-intercept.  Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay | Primary HAE cells were treated with cytokines for 24, 48, or 72 h, and total protein was isolated as described above. For ICAM-1, a 96-well assay plate  was coated overnight with mouse monoclonal ICAM-1, then lysate was added at 1, 3, and 10 mug and incubated for 2 h. After washing, rabbit polyclonal anti-ICAM-1 was added for 2 h, followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled secondary antibody. For JAM, plates were coated overnight with 1, 3, 10, or 30 mug lysate and incubated with mouse monoclonal anti-JAM (3D8) for 2 h and visualized with antimouse HRP. Protein was detected by addition of a 1:1 ratio of H2O2:tetramethylbenzidine. Optical density was determined at 450 nm. Data are expressed as percent change in JAM or ICAM-1 relative to vehicle controls.  Freeze-Fracture EM | Cultures treated with vehicle or cytokines were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) at 4C overnight. The epithelium was gently removed from the Transwell-Col with a scalpel and rinsed in phosphate buffer containing 0.2 M sucrose at room temperature, followed by a 25% glycerol cryoprotectant solution. The epithelium was sandwiched between gold double-replica mounts and frozen in liquid nitrogen --cooled Freon. Specimens were fractured in a Balzers BAF 400T freeze-fracture plant at a stage temperature of -100C, and replicas were made at a 30o angle with platinum/carbon shadowing. The replicas and adherent tissue were removed by placing in distilled water, followed by transferring to a solution of 5% sodium dichromate in 50% sulfuric acid for cleaning. Replicas were then moved again to distilled water, where they were retrieved and placed onto standard copper microscopy grids. The replicas were examined, and fields exhibiting TJs at a plate magnification of 20,000x were photographed with a Zeiss EM-10A at an accelerating voltage of 60 kV. Morphometric analysis of TJ strands was performed as previously described . Photomicrographs were enlarged to a final magnification of 60,000x, and TJs were transected by lines perpendicular to the luminal border with adjacent transects no closer than 1 mum apart. Strand depth was calculated at the transected lines by measuring the distance from the most luminal strand to the most distal strand.  Statistics | Data are presented as mean +- SEM. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni's correction for multiple comparisons were used to determine statistical significance (p < 0.05).
Effect of Cytokine Treatment on RT and Papp | WD primary HAE cells of non-CF and CF types were exposed to cytokines involved in CF inflammation, IL-1beta, IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha. To determine whether treatment with either cytokine could elicit effects on airway TJ permeability, we exposed the basolateral surface of HAE cells to IL-1beta (100 ng/ml), TNF-alpha (10 ng/ml), or IFN-gamma (100 ng/ml) alone or in combination and determined the effects on RT and Papp at 24, 48, and 72 h. These concentrations were chosen because they are similar to levels detected in the airways of CF patients . After 24 h exposure of non-CF WD HAE to IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or IFN-gamma alone, there were no significant effects on Rt. However, in cultures exposed to combined treatment of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma, RT at 24 h decreased to 65% of control (vehicle-treated) cultures (Figure A). After 48 h exposure, cultures exposed to IFN-gamma alone exhibited RT values that were 80% of vehicle cultures, whereas RT in those exposed to TNF-alpha or IL-1beta alone decreased to 60%. The RT of HAE cells treated with a combination of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma decreased to 30% of control cultures (Figure A). The effect of cytokines on RT was even more dramatic after 72 h exposure, with RT of cultures treated with TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination falling to 8% of control cultures (Figure A), whereas exposure to IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or IFN-gamma alone decreased RT to similar60% of vehicle controls. Exposure of cultures with TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and IL-1beta simultaneously did not alter the kinetics or magnitude of either RT or Papp (data not shown). Upon removal of cytokines at 72 h, RT returned to control levels by 24 h posttreatment (Figure B).  Figure 1 | Effect of cytokines on RT. Effect of cytokines on RT. (A) RT of non-CF WD primary HAE cells exposed to TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, or IL-1beta alone, or TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination. (B) Recovery of RT after removal of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma at 4, 12, and 24 h after washing. (C) Effect of combined TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma treatment on RT in non-CF and CF primary HAE cells. (D) Effect of IL-1beta on RT in non-CF and CF primary HAE cells. *Significantly different from (A) vehicle and TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, or IL-1beta alone or from (C) non-CF controls, at p < 0.001. Data presented are a minimum of n = 12 cultures from at least three patients. CF cultures displayed a different kinetic profile of cytokine-induced changes in RT than did non-CF cultures. Whereas the RT of non-CF cultures was only modestly affected by cytokine treatment at 24 h (61% of vehicle), the RT of CF cultures exposed to combined TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma treatment was reduced to 18% of vehicle-treated controls (Figure C). This trend continued after 48 h exposure, with RT in non-CF cultures reduced to 32%, compared with 10% of vehicle controls in CF cultures. However, by 72 h exposure, the RT in both non-CF and CF cultures was reduced to 5 --10% of vehicle controls (Figure C). In contrast, there was no significant difference between non-CF and CF cultures after exposure to IL-1beta at any time point (Figure D). To correlate the changes in RT induced after cytokine exposure to alterations in the barrier function of the TJ, the permeability coefficients of cultures to both a small solute, a 10-kDa FITC-labeled dextran, and a larger solute, 2000-kDa FITC-labeled dextran, were measured after cytokine exposure. In non-CF cultures, there was no difference in the Papp to the 10- and 2000-kDa dextrans by 24 h (Figure , A and B) in cultures treated with TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination. However, pronounced increases in Papp after 48 and 72 h exposure were detected. The Papp to the 10-kDa dextran increased by 8-fold and that to the 2000-kDa 19-fold when treated with TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination for 48 h. By 72 h after treatment, Papp to the 10-kDa dextran was increased 17-fold and that to the 2000-kDa dextran 25-fold (Figure , A and B, respectively). There were no differences in the Papp between cultures treated with vehicle and those treated with IL-1beta alone at any time point (Figure , A and B). There was also no difference in cultures exposed to TNF-alpha or IFN-gamma alone (data not shown). To provide evidence that cytokines were increasing Papp via passive mechanisms typical of the paracellular route, the permeability to solutes from the basolateral to apical compartments were measured and were equal to those from the apical to basolateral compartments (data not shown).  Figure 2 | Effect of cytokines on Papp. Effect of cytokines on Papp. Papp to (A) 10-kDa or (B) 2000-kDa FITC-labeled dextran in WD primary HAE exposed to IL-1beta alone or TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination for 24, 48, or 72 h. (C, D) Comparison of the effects of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma combined treatment on Papp in non-CF vs. CF WD primary HAE cells to (C) 10-kDa or (D) 2000-kDa FITC-labeled dextran. *Significantly different from vehicle (A, B) or from non-CF (C, D) controls at p < 0.05. Data presented are a minimum of n = 12 cultures from at least three patients. The kinetics of the changes in Papp of CF cultures treated with TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in combination were more significant than those of non-CF cultures. After 24 h exposure, Papp of CF cultures was 10-fold greater than both vehicle-control and non-CF cultures. At 48 h, the Papps of CF cultures were similartwofold greater than those of non-CF cultures. However, like RT, Papp after 72 h exposure was equal between non-CF and CF cultures (Figure C). In addition, Papp to the 2000-kDa dextran was also significantly increased in CF versus non-CF cultures (Figure D). Although there was no increase in Papp in non-CF cultures after 24 h, there was a fivefold increase in CF cultures. In addition, at 48 and 72 h, there is an similar1.5-fold greater increase in Papp of CF cultures than non-CF (Figure D).  IL-1beta Effects on Na+ and Cl- Permeability | Because treatment of primary HAE cells with IL-1beta did not induce alterations in Papp to dextrans but did lead to a modest decrease in RT, we evaluated more subtle effects on TJ function by measuring the relative ion selectivity of the paracellular path in CF cultures at 72 h after IL-1beta exposure. The effect of NaCl ion substitution on the transepithelial dilution potentials were determined and used to calculate the ratio of the relative permeabilities of Cl- to Na+ (PCl-/PNa+). To exclude ion permeation via the transcellular pathway, experiments were performed in CF cultures that do not express the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel on the apical membrane, thereby excluding Cl- permeation via the transcellular route. To block Na+ transcellular permeation, all luminal solutions contained amiloride (10-4 M). Cultures treated with IL-1beta relative to vehicle exhibited a decrease in DeltaVT in response to dilute NaCl solutions from 9.00 +- 0.28 mV (vehicle) to 3.50 +- 0.30 mV (IL-1beta), indicating an effect on ion permeation . This reduction in DeltaVT correlated with an increase in PCl-/PNa+ in cultures exposed to IL-1beta for 72 h, from 0.29 +- 0.03 to 0.73 +- 0.30 . The twofold increase in PCl-/PNa+ in IL-1beta --treated cultures also correlated with a similartwofold increase in conductance (GT), an increase from 1.20 +- 0.20 mS/cm2 (vehicle) to 2.43 +- 0.13 mS/cm2 (IL-1beta). Because IL-1beta led to increased GT and a hyperpolarization of VT while exhibiting a net increase in PCl-/PNa+, it can be concluded that IL-1beta leads to a selective increase in paracellular permeability to Cl-.  Figure 3 | Effect of IL-1beta on relative ion selectivity. Effect of IL-1beta on relative ion selectivity. Polarized CF WD primary HAE cells were exposed to IL-1beta for 72 h. Electrophysiological measurements and dilution potential (DeltaVT) were measured and permeability ratio of Cl-/Na+ (PCl-/PNa+) calculated as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS. Shown are the transepithelial voltage recordings with intermittent current pulses in amiloride (Amil)-treated cultures before and after luminal substitution with a low-NaCl solution. Current pulses and voltage scales are the same. Summary data are presented in the table. Data presented are representative of recordings from 12 cultures from 2 patients. *Significantly different from vehicle-treated controls.  Cytokines and TJ Morphology | To determine whether the effects of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma cotreatment on the distribution of TJ proteins also affected the morphology of TJ strands, we performed freeze-fracture EM and quantified the effect of cytokine treatment on junctional depth and strand number. Freeze fracture splits the cell membrane along a hydrophobic core, thereby allowing an en face view of the strands of the TJ. Electron micrographs of freeze-fracture replicas from non-CF cultures treated with TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma for 72 h revealed that treatment decreased overall junctional depth and number of strands (Figure , A and C). In cultures exposed to cytokines, junctional depth was measured at 0.295 +- 0.020 mum, whereas that of vehicle controls was 0.469 +- 0.103 mum as determined by morphometric analysis (Figure C). Strand number was decreased from 6.90 +- 0.372 in vehicle controls to 4.85 +- 0.214 in cultures exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma.  Figure 4 | Morphology of TJs of primary HAE cells exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma. Morphology of TJs of primary HAE cells exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma. Freeze-fracture analysis of TJ strands of WD non-CF (A) or CF (B) HAE cells exposed to vehicle or cytokines for the indicated times. (C) Quantification of strand number and depth. Micrographs are representative of 40 mum (vehicle non-CF), 20 mum (vehicle CF), 70 mum (non-CF 72 h), 60 mum (CF 24 h), and 50 mum (CF 72 h) of TJ analyzed. Significantly different from vehicle controls (*), vehicle controls and 24 h exposure (**), and from non-CF 72 h  at p < 0.05. Unlike non-CF cultures, which were unaffected by cytokines at 24 h, the effect of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma on RT of CF cultures was pronounced by 24 h after treatment (Figure C). For this reason, freeze-fracture analysis was also performed on CF cultures at 24 h. After exposure for 24 h, CF cultures displayed a significant change in both depth and strand number, with changes similar to those seen in non-CF cultures after 72 h cytokine exposure (Figure B). By 72 h, the number of strands had decreased to 1.97 +- 0.214 and junctional depth to 0.068 +- 0.007 mum, compared with a strand number of 6.7 +- 0.227 and a depth of 0.501 +- 0.170 mum in vehicle-controls. Although the RT and Papp of CF cultures at 72 h after cytokine exposure do not differ significantly from non-CF, TJ morphology differs significantly, suggesting an increased sensitivity of CF cultures to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma.  Cytokine Effects on the Integrity of TJ-Associated Proteins | To determine whether exposure to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma disrupted the organization of TJ-associated proteins, we performed immunofluorescence localization of ZO-1, JAM, claudin-1, claudin-4, and occludin. When double-immunofluorescence localization was performed for the cytoplasmic protein ZO-1 and the integral membrane protein JAM, we saw redistribution of both proteins at 48 h and 72 h (Figure A), with less obvious alterations at 24 h (data not shown). The apparent disruption was detected only in cultures treated with the combination of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma and not in cultures treated with IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or IFN-gamma alone (data not shown). CF cultures at 24 h exposure to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma exhibited a similar pattern of reorganization of ZO-1 and JAM as non-CF cultures at 72 h (Figure A). CF cultures exposed to cytokines for 72 h displayed a similar relocalization of ZO-1 and JAM as non-CF at 72 h (data not shown). The apparent change in localization of ZO-1 and JAM shown by immunofluorescence was also associated with a decrease in ZO-1 and JAM expression by Western blot analysis of non-CF cultures exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma for 72 h (Figure B).  Figure 5 | Effect of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma treatment on expression and localization of JAM and ZO-1. Effect of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma treatment on expression and localization of JAM and ZO-1. (A) Immunofluorescent staining for JAM and ZO-1 in non-CF and CF primary HAE cells exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma for 72 or 24 h. Red staining (left) represents ZO-1, green staining (middle) is JAM, and (right) merged image of both ZO-1 and JAM. Areas of colocalization appear as yellow. Images are representative of a minimum of n = 6 cultures from two patients. (B) Western blotting of ZO-1 (top) and immunoprecipitation of JAM (middle) in non-CF cultures. Western blot for ZO-1 was stripped and reprobed with an antibody specific for claudin-1 to control for loading (bottom). However, immunofluorescence localization of claudin-1 showed no apparent change in either the intensity or distribution of fluorescent staining for either protein (Figure A). Occludin exists in both a high-molecular-weight (HMW) and low-molecular-weight (LMW) form. Although immunofluorescence did not reveal a change in the expression or localization of occludin, the antibody used recognized only the LMW form of the protein (Figure A). To reconcile whether there were TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma --induced effects on either occludin expression or phosphorylation, we performed Western blots with two antibodies, one recognizing only the LMW and one recognizing both forms. Samples isolated from cultures exposed to TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma for 72 h and probed with an antibody recognizing both the LMW and HMW forms appeared to express more of the 73-kDa occludin than vehicle-controls (Figure B, lanes 4 --6). However, when the membrane was reprobed with an antibody that recognizes only the LMW form of the protein, there was no change in the 65-kDa occludin band after treatment (Figure C). This finding would indicate that the relative increase seen correlates