Probing in Vivo Metabolism by Stable Isotope Labeling of Storage Lipids and Proteins in Developing Brassica napusEmbryos
Developing embryos of Brassica napus accumulate both triacylglycerols and proteins as major storage reserves. To evaluate metabolic fluxes during embryo development, we have established conditions for stable isotope labeling of cultured embryos under steady-state conditions. Sucrose supplied via the endosperm is considered to be the main carbon and energy source for seed metabolism. However, in addition to 220 to 270 mm carbohydrates (sucrose, glucose, and fructose), analysis of endosperm liquid revealed up to 70 mm amino acids as well as 6 to 15 mm malic acid. Therefore, a labeling approach with multiple carbon sources is a precondition to quantitatively reflect fluxes of central carbon metabolism in developing embryos. Mid-cotyledon stage B. napus embryos were dissected from plants and cultured for 15 d on a complex liquid medium containing 13C-labeled carbohydrates. The 13C enrichment of fatty acids and amino acids (after hydrolysis of the seed proteins) was determined by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Analysis of 13C isotope isomers of labeled fatty acids and plastid-derived amino acids indicated that direct glycolysis provides at least 90% of precursors of plastid acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA). Unlabeled amino acids, when added to the growth medium, did not reduce incorporation of 13C label into plastid-formed fatty acids, but substantially diluted 13C label in seed protein. Approximately 30% of carbon in seed protein was derived from exogenous amino acids and as a consequence, the use of amino acids as a carbon source may have significant influence on the total carbon and energy balance in seed metabolism. 13C label in the terminal acetate units of C20 and C22 fatty acids that derive from cytosolic acetyl-CoA was also significantly diluted by unlabeled amino acids. We conclude that cytosolic acetyl-CoA has a more complex biogenetic origin than plastidic acetyl-CoA. Malic acid in the growth medium did not dilute 13C label incorporation into fatty acids or proteins and can be ruled out as a source of carbon for the major storage components of B. napus embryos.

Plant oils represent the largest renewable resource of highly reduced carbon chains and there is interest in increasing their production by oilseed crops. Brassica napus (canola, oilseed rape) is a major oil crop and a multitude of literature focuses on the biochemistry and physiology of oil accumulation in developing seeds of B. napus (see ; ; ; ; ). Although the biochemical pathways leading from Suc to oil storage are largely understood, a number of questions remain regarding, for example, the subcellular organization of reactions, and the origin of acetyl-CoA, reducing power, and ATP for fatty acid synthesis. These questions are particularly difficult to address using standard in vitro or organellar biochemical analyses that often result in loss of key activities. In addition, due to several reasons including dilution of isotopes by internal metabolite pools, many classical radioisotope tracer experiments may have led to major misinterpretations of in vivo metabolic fluxes. New stable isotope labeling methods have been developed to dissect a number of aspects of in vivo intermediary metabolism . Most frequently, 13C-labeled substrates are fed to cells followed by NMR or gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analysis of the products of this metabolism. Because the carbon atoms incorporated into amino acids and fatty acids can be traced back to the structures of a number of central intermediates, different pathways of intermediary metabolism can be said to differently "imprint" the pattern of 13C recorded in end products of metabolism. In addition, under metabolic and isotopic steady-state conditions, fluxes through the central carbon metabolic network can be quantified. So far, the more evolved techniques of metabolic flux analysis with stable isotope labeling have been applied almost exclusively to microorganisms or plant cell cultures, where physiological and growth conditions can be controlled very exactly. If the steady-state condition is fulfilled, the labeling pattern in amino acids and other products gives important information on carbon fluxes in the central carbon metabolism during growth. In principal, these techniques can be extended toward growth of a plant organ on a general 13C-labeled carbon source under conditions similar to those found in planta. Recently,  reported initial results in this direction by labeling of maize (Zea mays) kernels. Developing embryos of B. napus take up nutrients from the liquid endosperm, which surrounds them . After the mid-cotyledon stage, rapid accumulation of storage lipid and proteins occurs , resulting in mature seeds with 40% to 50% (w/w) oil and 30% (w/w) protein . During storage product accumulation, Suc at high concentration is the predominant sugar in the seed and has been considered the main carbon source for the embryo . However, in addition to sugars, considerable amounts of amino acids and organic acids have been reported to be present in the endosperm liquid of Phaseolus vulgaris  and, as reported in this paper, are also present in the endosperm liquid of B. napus. Therefore, in addition to Suc, the embryo may take up at least a part of carbon in the form of amino acids and/or organic acids. The uptake and influence of amino acids is also suggested by the presence of amino acid transporters in developing embryos of Arabidopsis  and by the finding that protein content is correlated with the concentration ratio of amino acids to sugars in the phloem sap between different genotypes of B. napus . In addition, it has been shown for rapeseed plants that with the beginning of seed filling, nitrogen is moved from roots, stem, and leaves into the pods, while the uptake of NO3- into plants comes to an end . This suggests that most or all the nitrogen is imported into the developing embryo in the form of amino acids. During oil and protein accumulation in the developing embryo, both fatty acid and protein biosynthesis have high demands for precursor molecules and cofactors (NADH, NADPH, and ATP). If amino acids are taken up from the liquid endosperm, the demand of precursors and cofactors for protein synthesis will be much lower than if the amino acids must be synthesized de novo from Suc and nitrate. Thus, the carbon economy of the developing embryo is dependent on which sources of carbon, nitrogen, and energy are used. As a consequence, unless all natural carbon sources are considered in the composition of the growth medium for labeling experiments, even very precise measurements of carbon flux ratios in intermediary metabolism would be of reduced significance. Therefore, in this study, we present the analysis of organic constituents of EL and the design of a liquid growth medium that mimics the in planta liquid environment. With this medium, embryos can be grown on different isotopically labeled compounds and accumulate milligram amounts of labeled storage lipids and storage proteins. By supplying uniformly 13C-labeled Glc with either unlabeled amino acids or malate and subsequent measurement of the 13C enrichment in fatty acids and amino acids by GC/MS, we have determined the contribution of the different carbon sources to fatty acid and storage protein biosynthesis. In addition to the measurement of 13C enrichment, the fractional 13C labeling of fatty acids and proteinogenic amino acids can be investigated by GC/MS to provide additional quantitative information on fluxes through alternative pathways of central carbon metabolism in developing B. napus embryos.
Analysis of EL for Sugars, Amino Acids, and Organic Acids | To understand which carbon sources are available in planta to developing B. napus embryos, we analyzed the endosperm liquid after dissection of seeds of greenhouse-grown B. napus plants. Sugars | As shown in Table , endosperm liquid of seeds at the beginning of oil accumulation (embryos of 0.1 --0.5 mg fresh weight, mid-cotyledon stage, 20 DAF) contains Glc and Fru as the main sugars and at similar concentrations. As development proceeds, the concentration of Glc and Fru decreases severalfold, whereas that of Suc increases about 10-fold  such that for seeds in the late cotyledon stage (>3 mg fresh weight, late cotyledon, 26 DAF), Suc dominates over Glc and Fru. The change in the ratio of hexoses to Suc is similar to that observed earlier by  in whole seeds of B. napus as well as by  in endosperm liquid. After 26 DAF, the growth of the embryo comes to an end and the embryo takes up most of the volume inside the seed coat. In this stage, the embryos have maximal oil accumulation . Similarly, in Vicia faba, a shift from high hexose to Suc ratio to a high Suc to hexose ratio is believed to govern the developmental process from cell division to cell expansion and accumulation of storage compounds .  Table I | Concentration of several organic constituents in the endosperm liquid  Amino Acids | TLC of endosperm liquid and staining with ninhydrin revealed that in all stages of embryo development, Gln is the main amino acid constituent of the endosperm liquid. The concentration of l-Gln was determined enzymatically and ranged between 20 (mid-cotyledon stage) and 36 mm at late cotyledon stage . In addition, the concentrations of 16 other proteinogenic amino acids were determined at mid- and late cotyledon stage and the sum totaled 40 and 70 mm, respectively, with Gln, Glu, and Ala as the dominating components . Thus, the amino acids in the endosperm liquid represent substantial possible sources of carbon and reduced nitrogen for seed storage product biosynthesis. In contrast to the endosperm liquid, in phloem sap of B. napus, Gln, Glu, Ser, Thr, and Asp have been found as the major amino acids .  Malic Acid | By TLC of endosperm liquid, malic acid was found in all stages of seed development as the principal carboxylic acid. This result was confirmed by GC/MS of a derivatized acidic fraction of endosperm liquid. The concentration of malic acid, as quantified enzymatically, increased during development from 6 to 15 mm .   Design of the Culture Medium Composition and Labeling Experiments | Based on the above analysis, we developed a culture medium to mimic the composition of the endosperm liquid and to allow stable isotope labeling. In all experiments, the volume of liquid medium per embryo provided approximately 10-fold excess of carbon and nitrogen sources as related to the expected yield of oil and protein. Glc and Suc were provided at 40 and 80 mm, respectively, to mimic the composition during the most active oil and protein synthesis stage .  General Procedure of Labeling Experiments | Embryos were grown on media under day length and low-light conditions simulating in planta growth. Media contained the following carbon sources: sugars (40 mm Glc and 80 mm Suc [S medium]); sugars and amino acids (SA medium); or sugars, amino acids, and malate (SMA medium). For labeling experiments, 13C-labeled Glc (99% 13C enrichment) was mixed with unlabeled Glc and Suc in the molar ratio of 20:20:80, which is a 10:20:160 molar ratio based on hexose units, and results in a 10% isotopic enrichment in hexose units. In an additional experiment, 13C-labeled Suc was supplied (see below). After 15 d of growth, the (fractional) 13C enrichment in fatty acids and amino acids (after protein hydrolysis) was analyzed by GC/MS as outlined by the scheme shown in Figure .  Figure 1 | Overview of the analytical techniques used for the measurement of 13C labeling in amino acids and fatty acids (see also "Materials and Methods"). Overview of the analytical techniques used for the measurement of 13C labeling in amino acids and fatty acids (see also "Materials and Methods"). After extraction of labeled embryos, the seed protein was hydrolyzed and the amino acids derivatized to their N,O-t-butyl-dimethylsilyl (TBDMS) derivatives. By GC/MS, the amino acid molecule is represented by the fragment M-57. For most amino acids, additional fragments were measured that represent parts of the amino acid molecule. The abundances of mass isotope isomers (isotopomers) of a measured fragment (m0, m1, m2... mn) were corrected for isotopomer content in the derivatization reagent and for heteroatoms (1H, 13C, 15N, 17O, 18O, 29Si, and 30Si) as well as for natural 13C in the derivatized molecule fragment. Finally, the relative abundance of mass isotopomers (13C1, 13C2, 13C3... 13Cn) was obtained. After transmethylation of seed oil, fatty acid methyl esters were analyzed by GC/MS. The molecular ion and the McLafferty fragment (m/z 74) were measured and the relative abundance of mass isotopomers was obtained as described for the amino acids.  Formation of Storage Products in Cultured Embryos Reflects Seed Development in Planta | As shown in Figure , the main accumulation of fatty acids of B. napus embryos in culture occurs during the first 2 weeks of culture (20 --35 DAF). In a labeling experiment, the amount of newly formed labeled fatty acids and protein were more than 10-fold greater than the initial biomass. After 45 d of growth, Suc and Glc were still abundant in the growth medium at similar concentrations as added initially, indicating constant nutrient supply. In some experiments, amino acids and/or malate were included into the media (SA, SM, and SMA media, see "Materials and Methods"). No substantial differences in overall growth of embryos were found between S, SA, SM, and SMA media. In general, the cultured embryos developed similar to in planta embryos. In average, 4 mg fresh weight (2 mg dry weight) and 20% fatty acids/fresh weight was obtained, which is similar to the data given for late cotyledon embryos (26 DAF) grown in planta . In embryos of the rapeseed cv Reston (a high-erucic acid line), the accumulation of seed oil is characterized by a sharp increase in C20:1 and C22:1 . The final fatty acid composition of the embryos grown in our medium is similar to literature values for embryos grown in siliques . The content of soluble protein increased continuously over more than 30 d , which is also the case for B. napus embryos grown in planta . In summary, after growth of B. napus cv Reston embryos on S medium, gain of fresh weight and protein as well as content and composition of fatty acids were similar to embryos developing in planta. We conclude that the development of embryos under these culture conditions mimics development in siliques of intact plants. The major increase in fatty acid content during the 15-d growth period defines the main phase of storage deposition in seed development, during which we assume a condition of metabolic steady state (see "Materials and Methods").  Figure 2 | Gain of lipid (micrograms fatty acid per embryo) and soluble protein (micrograms protein per embryo) of B. napus Gain of lipid (micrograms fatty acid per embryo) and soluble protein (micrograms protein per embryo) of B. napus cv Reston embryos cultured in liquid medium. The embryos were taken into culture about 20 DAF, which is mid-cotyledon stage, and were cultivated up to 30 d. The duration of labeling experiments was 15 d, as indicated. Each data point is the average from three embryos. Table II | Fatty acid composition in embryos of B. napus cv Reston  Glc Is Metabolized Preferentially over Suc as Carbon Source for Seed Metabolism | When both Glc and Suc were provided with a 20% 13C enrichment (S medium, [U-13C6]Glc, [U-13C12]Suc), after 15 d growth, the 13C enrichment in both fatty acids and amino acids was found to be very close to 20% (data not shown). This result indicates that fatty acids and proteins have been fully labeled to the same isotope abundance as provided by the 13C carbohydrate in the media. This 13C abundance would not have been reached if preexisting or other carbon sources than Glc and Suc were available. This result also indicates that incorporation of atmospheric CO2 does not contribute substantially to fatty acid or protein synthesis despite the obvious ability for photosynthetic CO2 fixation of developing B. napus embryos (; see below). In preliminary experiments, when embryos were grown on S medium with uniform 13C-labeled Glc (99% 13C enrichment) and unlabeled Suc in a molar ratio of 20:80 (as related to hexose units), the resulting total 13C enrichment in fatty acids and amino acids was 30% to 35%, which is substantially higher than the expected 20%. Although both Glc and Suc clearly have been used as carbon sources in this labeling experiment, the 13C enrichment of approximately 35% in labeled end products indicates a preferential utilization of Glc over Suc. In addition, as described in "Materials and Methods," MS analysis of the 13C label pattern in different fatty acids indicated that a small subpopulation of fatty acid molecules was derived mainly from [U-13C6]Glc, whereas the bulk of fatty acid molecules derived from [U-13C6]Glc diluted as described above. This inhomogeneous distribution of labeled carbon in the metabolic products can pose problems for the interpretation of 13C-labeling patterns . As a result of these considerations, further experiments were performed with a carbohydrate mixture in which, in addition to unlabeled Suc, unlabeled Glc was added (10% [U-13C6]Glc, 10% unlabeled Glc, and 80% unlabeled Suc, as related to hexose units). Under these conditions, analysis of the labeled fatty acids (GC/MS, molecular ion clusters) showed that the inhomogeneity of 13C in the fatty acids was greatly reduced such that valid interpretations based on the isotopic steady-state assumption could be made (see "Materials and Methods").  Glycolytic Breakdown of Glc Dominates in Plastidic Acetyl-CoA Formation | The oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (OPPP) provides an alternative pathway to glycolysis for metabolism of hexose to acetyl-CoA and has been proposed as a source of reductant for fatty acid synthesis in oilseeds . Earlier studies attempted to assess OPPP activity by measurement of the reduction of label from [1-13C]Glc in metabolic products by Glc 6-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction relative to the label from [6-13C]Glc. However, refixation of the 13CO2 released and/or redistribution of label due to exchange reactions make such experiments difficult to interpret . For a first semiquantitative estimate of carbon flux through the OPPP, we used multiple 13C-labeled Glc ([1,2-13C2]Glc and [U-13C6]Glc). When cells metabolize [13C]Glc containing 13C-13C bonds and in the presence of unlabeled Glc, information on metabolic pathways can be gained from the conservation of 13C-13C bonds ("connectivity") in metabolites formed from the Glc . By sole glycolytic breakdown of Fru-6P via triose-P to pyruvate and finally oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl-CoA, the 13C-13C bonds of [U-13C6]Glc or of [1,2-13C2]Glc are 100% retained in pyruvate and in acetyl-CoA. In contrast, during the oxidative pentose phosphate cycle, synthesis of Fru-6P from pentose-P involves the enzyme transfer of two and three carbon units between different intermediate sugar phosphates, which results in the reduction of 13C-13C connectivity, i.e. a characteristic isotopomer pattern in Fru-6P and in its glycolytic products (triose-P, pyruvate, and acetyl-CoA). In addition, the reversibility of transketolase and transaldolase reactions leads to exchange reactions with glycolytic intermediates, producing similar isotopomer patterns. As shown in Figure a, glycolysis of [1,2-13C2]Glc will produce [2,3-13C2]pyruvate. The 13C2 isotopomers will also be retained by the reversible exchange of C1/C2 of Fru-6P by transketolase. However, if Glc enters the OPPP, C-1 of [1,2-13C2]Glc is lost by decarboxylation producing [1-13C]pentose-P. Recycling of Fru-6P from [113C]pentose-P by transketolase and transaldolase reactions will result in different single positional 13C-labeled Fru-6P isotopomers.  Figure 3 | Predicted and observed isotopomer pattern in triose-P (TP) and derivatives (pyruvate and acetyl-CoA) after feeding of 13C-labeled Glc. Predicted and observed isotopomer pattern in triose-P (TP) and derivatives (pyruvate and acetyl-CoA) after feeding of 13C-labeled Glc. Developing embryos were labeled with [1,2-13C2]Glc (A) or [U-13C6]Glc (B) in SMA medium (10% enrichment of labeled Glc). Fragments of Ala and C18:1(1-2) were measured by GC/MS, representing pyruvate and acetyl-CoA, respectively. For the sake of clarity, the figure does not show all expected and found isotopomers. Fru-6P is derived from Glc or by reactions of the OPPP. After glycolytic cleavage of Fru-6P (a), dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate are assumed to be in isotopic equilibrium (triose-P [TP]). A, By sole glycolysis, the abundance of 13C2 label from [1,2-13C2]Glc is retained in triose-P, whereas the OPPP reduces the abundance of 13C2-labeled triose-P. Nearly 100% of possible 13C2 abundance was found for pyruvate and acetyl-CoA. B, By sole glycolysis, [U-13C6]Glc is transformed to [U-13C3]pyruvate (100%). By involvement of transketolase (TK) and transaldolase (TA) in synthesis of Fru-6P, the abundance of [U-13C3]pyruvate is reduced and mainly [1-13C]- and [2,3-13C2]pyruvate are formed. Because the contribution of the oxidative part of the OPPP is very low (A), the observed labeling pattern from [U-13C6]Glc can be explained by reversible exchange of C1/C2 of Fru-6P by transketolase. Due to highly reversible reactions of the OPPP, an exact determination of fluxes requires the measurement of fractional labeling in intermediates of the OPPP (see e.g. ). PDH, Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; PP, pentose-phosphate. After labeling with [1,2-13C2]Glc, the distribution of 13C in pyruvate was measured for the fragments Ala(1-3), Ala(2-3), and Phe(1-2), representing pyruvate(1-3), pyruvate(2-3), and pyruvate(1-2), respectively. The fractional 13C label of these three pyruvate fragments allows the determination of the abundances of all eight possible 13C isotopomers in pyruvate, as described by . Our analysis of pyruvate isotopomers revealed that the relative abundance of [2,3-13C2]pyruvate was 89% of the abundance defined by sole glycolysis (Fig. A). Similarly, the abundance of 13C2 isotopomer in acetate units of C18:1 [fragment C18:1(1-2)] was 93% of the maximal possible abundance (Fig. A). Together, these fatty acid and amino acid analyses indicate that approximately 90% of the [1,2-13C2]Glc molecules were transformed to pyruvate without being subjected to oxidative decarboxylation. Although Ala possibly does not represent the plastidic pyruvate pool, Val is derived from plastidic pyruvate . The isotopomer pattern of Val(2-5) was found to be in accordance with the 13C2 abundance found in Ala (data not shown), confirming that approximately 90% of the [1,2-13C2]Glc molecules were transformed to plastidic pyruvate without being subjected to oxidative decarboxylation. In addition, the mass spectrum of His, labeled from [1,2-13C2]Glc, revealed that pentose-P is mainly formed by transketolase, rather than by the oxidative decarboxylation of [1,2-13C2]Glc-6P (data not shown). Additional conclusions on the extent of reversibility of transketolase were derived after labeling with [U-13C6]Glc. This analysis revealed that the transketolase reaction largely reduced the abundance of the [U-13C3]pyruvate isotopomer to 55% of its abundance defined by sole glycolysis (Fig. B). By carbon transfer reactions, mainly [1-13C]pyruvate and [2,3-13C2]pyruvate were produced, which is interpreted as a signature of the transketolase reaction on [U-13C6]Fru-6P (Fig. B). In summary, labeling with both [1,2-13C2]Glc and with [U-13C6]Glc with subsequent analysis of isotopomer abundance in pyruvate and C18:1(1-2) demonstrated that during Glc breakdown, about 90% of 13C-13C connectivity from [1,2-13C2]Glc is retained in pyruvate and acetyl-CoA, indicating low OPPP activity relative to the total glycolytic flux. Furthermore, labeling with [U-13C6]Glc showed that the precursors of pyruvate and acetyl-CoA (Fru-6P and Glc-6P) are subjected to the reactions of the nonoxidative part of the pentose phosphate pathway. Because only the isotopomer pattern of the oxidative part of the OPPP is missing, we consider unlikely the possibility of a "sequestered" OPPP in which [1-13C]pentose-P could be largely produced by oxidative decarboxylation of [1,2-13C2]Glc-6P, but the recycled single 13C-labeled Fru-6P would not enter the glycolytic route leading to fatty acids ---and, therefore, would not contribute to the measured isotopomer pattern . This kind of "sequestered" cyclic OPPP is also not supported by the labeling pattern of His, which is derived from plastidic pentose-P. We conclude that the OPPP has a low contribution to Glc breakdown, and is unlikely to provide the major source of NADPH for fatty acid synthesis in B. napus embryos cultured as described. However, more exact measurements of relative fluxes through glycolysis and OPPP will require labeling experiments specifically designed for the sensitive measurement of small fluxes through OPPP. Also, modeling of the central carbon metabolism, including compartmentation effects and the effect of highly reversible reactions of the nonoxidative part of the OPPP, are necessary to further confirm our findings.  Amino Acids Do Not Provide Carbon for Plastidic Fatty Acid Synthesis | From the data given in Table , it can be calculated that amino acids and malate constitute up to 25% of the carbon in endosperm liquid. To assess the contribution of these compounds to protein and fatty acid synthesis, embryo labeling experiments with the basic growth medium containing [U-13C6]Glc were compared with experiments where unlabeled carbon sources (amino acids and/or malate) were also added. In such experiments, a reduction in 13C label in the end product indicates incorporation of carbon from the unlabeled carbon source. As shown in Figure A, the 13C enrichment of fatty acids is not significantly reduced by addition of either unlabeled amino acids or malate as carbon sources. In contrast, as shown in Figure B, 13C levels of several amino acids of proteins were strongly reduced by added unlabeled amino acids. Thus, amino acids provided to the embryos are readily incorporated into proteins but do not serve as a carbon source for de novo fatty acid synthesis.  Figure 4 | Incorporation of [U-13C6]Glc into seed oil and storage protein of B. napus Incorporation of [U-13C6]Glc into seed oil and storage protein of B. napus embryos and dilution of label by additional unlabeled carbon sources. Amino acids (Glu, Asp, and Ser) and/or malic acid were added to the growth medium. Isotopic enrichment was measured by GC/MS of fatty acid methyl esters and TBDMS amino acids. A, The fatty acids from seed oil show no isotopic dilution, except for the terminal acetate units of C20:1 and C22:1. B, Several amino acids from seed protein show high isotopic dilution by unlabeled amino acids in the medium. The percentage of carbon contributed from each amino acid (or fragment) to seed protein is given. Due to acidic conditions during hydrolysis of seed protein, Asn and Gln are found as Asp and Glu, respectively. Not measured were Lys, His, Arg, Cys, and Trp. For the calculation of the isotopic dilution in total seed protein, the 13C enrichment of these amino acids was derived from other amino acids according to the closest biosynthetic relations. The seed protein was assumed to consist of 60% (w/w) cruciferin, 20% (w/w) napin, and 20% (w/w) oleosin . For these proteins, the amino acid compositions were taken from  and . For five independent experiments, the average 13C label +- se is given.  Carbon from Amino Acids Contributes to the Cytosolic Acetyl-CoA Pool | B. napus cv Reston produces 38% C20 and C22 fatty acids in addition to 62% C16 and C18 fatty acids . Whereas de novo fatty acid synthesis of C16 and C18 fatty acids occurs in the plastid from acetyl-CoA, elongation of oleic acid outside the plastids is responsible for the addition of the terminal two or four carbons of C20:1 and C22:1, respectively . Therefore, these very long-chain fatty acids offer an opportunity to compare the labeling of plastid versus cytosolic pools of acetyl-CoA. Label in the terminal acetate unit of fatty acids was examined from the abundant McLafferty fragment (m/z 74, see "Materials and Methods"). For oleic acid (Fig. A) and palmitic acid (data not shown), no dilution of label in the terminal acetate carbon was observed upon addition of unlabeled amino acids to the growth medium (Fig. A). In contrast, 13C labeling of the terminal acetate units of both 20:1 and 22:1 were significantly reduced by added amino acids. The observation that the label of the cytosolic acetyl-CoA pool is significantly diluted by unlabeled amino acids, whereas plastidic acetyl-CoA is not, suggests involvement of different pathways to produce the two pools. Thus, not only is the plastid pool of acetyl-CoA clearly spatially distinct from the cytosolic pool (as previously observed in numerous labeling studies), but these results further demonstrate a different metabolic origin of acetyl-CoA.  Source of Cytosolic Acetyl-CoA | Acetyl-CoA apparently does not cross membranes. Based on a lack of cytosolic pyruvate dehydrogenase, direct synthesis of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate in the cytosolic compartment and the formation of cytosolic acetyl-CoA in plants is still not clearly understood . The results in Figure A indicate a reduction of 13C label in cytosolic acetyl-CoA by carbon from unlabeled Asp and Gln. This result also occurred with experiments using only Gln as unlabeled amino acid (data not shown). This dilution of 13C by Asp and Gln points to a possible relation of cytosolic acetyl-CoA to mitochondrial metabolism because both amino acids can be metabolized to tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates. From known metabolic pathways in plants, and from the results in Figure A, the following possible route can be proposed: (a) Unlabeled Glu and Asp are transformed into TCA cycle intermediates 2-ketoglutarate, oxaloacetate, succinate, fumarate, and malate. (b) Mitochondrial pyruvate, imported from the cytosol and derived from sugars, would have maximal 13C enrichment as found in plastid-derived fatty acids and amino acids (Val and Leu). A reduction of 13C enrichment is most likely due to the activity of mitochondrial malic enzyme  because malate is in part derived from unlabeled Asp and Glu. (c) By pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, mitochondrial acetyl-CoA is formed and transformed to citrate by citrate synthase. After export of citrate to the cytosol, acetyl-CoA is formed by cytosolic ATP:citrate lyase (EC ; ; ). In particular, due to the Pro-3S specific cleavage of citrate by ATP:citrate lyase, only carbons of mitochondrial pyruvate are the source of cytosolic acetyl-CoA and no carbons from mitochondrial oxaloacetate end up in acetyl-CoA. In summary, given the influx of unlabeled carbon into the TCA cycle via oxaloacetate and 2-oxoglutarate and the export of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA into the cytosol via citrate, the isotopic dilution in mitochondrial pyruvate and in cytosolic acetyl-CoA can best be explained by the action of mitochondrial malic enzyme. As an alternative to the export of acetyl-CoA via citrate, free acetate export from mitochondria, after acetyl-CoA hydrolysis , cannot be ruled out because direct acetate export would lead to the same conclusions on isotope dilution as made with the export of citrate. However, some in vitro biochemical data suggest a lack of cytosolic acetyl-CoA synthase .  Is Malate an Intermediate in B. napus Embryo Fatty Acid Biosynthesis? | Unlabeled malic acid did not significantly reduce the incorporation of [U-13C6]Glc into fatty acids or amino acids (Fig. B). Even Asp, which can be formed from malate via malate dehydrogenase and Asp aminotransferase, was not significantly reduced in 13C label (Fig. B, SM medium). This indicates that externally supplied malic acid is not used as a major carbon source during embryo development, although it was found in considerable concentration in the endosperm liquid . This, however, does not exclude the existence of malate metabolism into fatty acids inside the embryo from internally generated pools and in this regard, malate was proposed to be a precursor for plastidic acetyl-CoA in developing rapeseed embryos . Based on in vitro enzyme activity analysis,  proposed that cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is transformed to oxaloacetate (by PEP carboxylase) and reduced to malate (