Pkh1 and Pkh2 Differentially Phosphorylate and Activate Ypk1 and Ykr2 and Define Protein Kinase Modules Required for Maintenance of Cell Wall Integrity
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pkh1 and Pkh2 are functionally redundant homologs of mammalian protein kinase, phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1. They activate two closely related, functionally redundant enzymes, Ypk1 and Ykr2 (homologs of mammalian protein kinase, serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible protein kinase). We found that Ypk1 has a more prominent role than Ykr2 in mediating their shared essential function. Considerable evidence demonstrated that Pkh1 preferentially activates Ypk1, whereas Pkh2 preferentially activates Ykr2. Loss of Pkh1 (but not Pkh2) reduced Ypk1 activity; conversely, Pkh1 overexpression increased Ypk1 activity more than Pkh2 overexpression. Loss of Pkh2 reduced Ykr2 activity; correspondingly, Pkh2 overexpression increased Ykr2 activity more than Pkh1 overexpression. When overexpressed, a catalytically active C-terminal fragment (kinase domain) of Ypk1 was growth inhibitory; loss of Pkh1 (but not Pkh2) alleviated toxicity. Loss of Pkh2 (but not Pkh1) exacerbated the slow growth phenotype of a ypk1Delta strain. This Pkh1-Ypk1 and Pkh2-Ykr2 dichotomy is not absolute because all double mutants (pkh1Delta ypk1Delta, pkh2Delta ypk1Delta, pkh1Delta ykr2Delta, and pkh2Delta ykr2Delta) were viable. Compartmentation contributes to selectivity because Pkh1 and Ypk1 were located exclusively in the cytosol, whereas Pkh2 and Ykr2 entered the nucleus. At restrictive temperature, ypk1-1tsykr2Delta cells lysed rapidly, but not in medium containing osmotic support. Dosage and extragenic suppressors were selected. Overexpression of Exg1 (major exoglucanase), or loss of Kex2 (endoprotease involved in Exg1 processing), rescued growth at high temperature. Viability was also maintained by PKC1 overexpression or an activated allele of the downstream protein kinase (BCK1-20). Conversely, absence of Mpk1 (distal mitogen-activated protein kinase of the PKC1 pathway) was lethal in ypk1-1tsykr2Delta cells. Thus, Pkh1-Ypk1 and Pkh2-Ykr2 function in a novel pathway for cell wall integrity that acts in parallel with the Pkc1-dependent pathway.

A cascade of protein kinases is a commonly used mechanism for amplifying and disseminating signals that control metabolism, growth, survival, and differentiation in eukaryotic cells. In animal cells, recruitment of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase by growth factor receptors generates 3-phosphoinositides, which stimulate 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1) (for review, see ; ). Activated PDK1 phosphorylates and activates multiple downstream targets, including protein kinase B/c-Akt , p70 S6 kinase , protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms , and serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible protein kinase (SGK) isoforms , thereby eliciting physiological responses. We have demonstrated previously that, in budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), Pkh1 and Pkh2 are the homologs and functional equivalents of mammalian PDK1. Pkh1 and Pkh2 share an essential function because pkh1Delta and pkh2Delta single mutants are viable, whereas a pkh1Delta pkh2Delta double mutant is inviable. Expression of human PDK1 rescues the lethality of a pkh1Delta pkh2Delta strain . The PDK1 enzymes from Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and Homo sapiens all possess a C-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain that binds phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns)(3,4,5)P3 and PtdIns(3,4)P2 . However, S. cerevisiae does not produce PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 or PtdIns(3,4)P2 . Moreover, Pkh1 and Pkh2 lack discernible PH domains, and PDK1 lacking its PH domain was sufficient to rescue the growth of pkh1Delta pkh2Delta cells , suggesting that the activity of Pkh1 and Pkh2 in yeast does not depend on phosphoinositides. It was shown subsequently that sphingosine (4-dehydro-sphinganine) can also stimulate mammalian PDK1 autophosphorylation and increase its ability to phosphorylate in vitro known PDK1 substrates, such as c-Akt and PKCbeta . Correspondingly, it has been reported recently that Pkh1 and Pkh2 can be activated in vitro by nanomolar concentrations of the major sphingoid base in yeast, phytosphingosine (4-hydroxy-sphinganine) . Moreover, endocytosis in yeast seems to require sphingoid base synthesis and overexpression of Pkh1 or Pkh2 can suppress this requirement , suggesting that sphingoid bases activate a signaling pathway involving Pkh1 and Pkh2. Mammalian PDK1 activates its downstream targets by phosphorylating a Thr residue (starred) in a sequence motif, Thr*-Phe-Cys-Gly-Thr-X-Glu-Tyr (where X represents any amino acid), that lies within the "activation loop" of their catalytic domains  and is unique to and conserved in all known PDK1 substrates. Full activation of c-Akt/PKB and other PDK1 targets also seems to require phosphorylation at a second site (starred) situated in a hydrophobic motif, Phe-X-X-Ar-Ser*/Thr*-Ar (where Ar represents an aromatic residue), that is located near the C terminus of each of these enzymes . In S. cerevisiae, four previously characterized protein kinases possess both of these motifs, suggesting that they are physiological substrates of Pkh1 and/or Pkh2. These four protein kinases are the products of the following genes: YPK1 , YKR2/YPK2 , PKC1 , and SCH9 . Studies from this laboratory have demonstrated that Ypk1 is a direct substrate of Pkh1  and that Ykr2 is phosphorylated by Pkh2 . Similarly, it has been shown that Pkc1 can also be phosphorylated by Pkh1 and Pkh2 . Reduced Pkc1 activity was observed in a pkh1-1ts pkh2Delta strain, and the temperature sensitivity of this strain was partially suppressed by a dominant PKC1(R398P) allele, suggesting that Pkh1 and Pkh2 are required for Pkc1 function in vivo . The catalytic domains of Ypk1 and Ykr2 are 88% identical and these proteins also share extensive homology across their N- and C-terminal extensions. Moreover, the catalytic domains of Ypk1 and Ykr2 closely resemble (55% identity) that of mammalian SGK. Indeed, cells lacking Ypk1 or Ykr2 are viable, whereas cells lacking both Ypk1 and Ykr2 are inviable , and expression of mammalian SGK rescues this inviability . Furthermore, both purified PDK1 and purified Pkh1 phosphorylate the same residue (Thr504) in the consensus motif in purified Ypk1, and Ypk1 phosphorylation is significantly diminished in vivo in cells lacking Pkh1 . Thus, just as SGK is a downstream target of PDK1 in animal cells, Ypk1 and Ykr2 seem to act downstream of Pkh1 and Pkh2 in yeast. Moreover, lipid-derived signals are required as upstream activators in both pathways, 3-phosphoinositides and sphingosine in the case of PDK1 and closely related sphingoid bases in the case of Pkh1 and Pkh2. Consistent with this view, overexpression of Ypk1 confers resistance to myriocin (ISP-1), an antibiotic that specifically inhibits serine C-palmitoyltransferase (product of the LCB1 gene), which is the enzyme responsible for sphinganine biosynthesis . Herein, we describe experiments that address the genetic and biochemical interrelationships between Pkh1 and Pkh2 and Ypk1 and Ykr2, which we undertook to try to understand the reason for the redundancies within these protein kinase cascades. To provide further insight, we also investigated the subcellular localization of all four proteins. Finally, as two independent approaches for discerning the physiological function of the Ypk1 and Ykr2 enzymes, we selected for dosage suppressors and also for chromosomal mutations that suppress the lysis phenotype of ypk1-1ts ykr2Delta cells.
Strains and Growth Conditions | Yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table . Standard rich (YP) and defined minimal (SC) media , containing either 2% glucose (Glc), 2% raffinose (Raf), or 2% galactose (Gal) as the carbon source and supplemented with appropriate nutrients to maintain selection for plasmids, were used for yeast cultivation. For gene expression from the galactose-inducible GAL1 promoter in liquid media, cells were pregrown to mid-exponential phase in SC containing 2% raffinose-0.2% sucrose (Raf/Suc) and then Gal was added to a final concentration of 2% and incubation continued for 2 h. In experiments involving growth on solid medium containing 5-fluoroorotic acid, 5-fluoroorotic acid was used at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml . Cells were grown routinely at 30C, except for strains carrying temperature-sensitive mutations, which were propagated at their permissive temperature (26C).  Table 1 | S. cerevisiae strains used in this study  Recombinant DNA Methods | Escherichia coli strain DH5alpha  was used for the construction and propagation of plasmids. Conventional recombinant DNA methods were used for the construction of plasmids . The sequences of constructs that contained DNA fragments amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were verified by the dideoxy chain termination-sequencing method . Native and Turbo Pfu polymerases (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) were used for PCR, unless noted otherwise.  Plasmids | Plasmids pYPK1, pYKR2, pGAL-YPK1, pGAL-YKR2 (pAM1), pGAL-Ypk1-Myc (pAM54), pADH-YPK1, pRS316-YKR2 (pAM12), pGAL-PKH1 (pAM73), and pGAL-PKH2 (pAM79) have been described previously . To create plasmid pADH-YKR2 (pAM4), which constitutively overexpresses YKR2 from the ADH1 promoter, a 2.4-kb XhoI (blunt)-SalI fragment containing the entire YKR2 gene was excised from pYKR2, gel purified, and inserted into vector pAD4 M  that had been linearized with SmaI/SalI. To generate a version of Ykr2 tagged at its C-terminal end with the c-Myc epitope , a PCR-based method for precise gene fusion  was performed using the YKR2 sequence cloned in pUC18 as one template (pYKR2), and as the other template, pOGFP (E. Swartzman, this laboratory), which contains a sequence encoding the 16-residue version of the c-Myc epitope followed by a (His)6 tag cloned in pBluescript (Stratagene); with three appropriate synthetic oligonucleotide primers: T3 (Stratagene); 5'-GGA CAT ATT GCA CTG TGT G-3' (RMN5), corresponding to sequences in YKR2 overlapping a DraIII site near the C terminus; and a "joiner" primer, 5'-TTC AGA AAT CAA CTT TTG TTC ACT AAT GCT TCT CCC CTG-3' (RMC), corresponding to the 3' end of the YKR2 coding sequence and the first several residues of the c-Myc epitope. An similar1.6-kb DraIII/KpnI fragment of the resulting PCR product was used to replace the corresponding segment in pYKR2, yielding pYkr2-Myc (pAM24). An similar3-kb NcoI/HindIII fragment from pYkr2-Myc was gel purified and used to replace the corresponding similar2.2-kb NcoI/HindIII segment in pGAL-YKR2 to create a 2-mum DNA-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid, pGAL-Ykr2-Myc (pAM59), that overexpresses Ykr2-Myc upon galactose induction. To generate a catalytically inactive ("kinase-dead") version of Ypk1, a PCR-based method for site-directed mutagenesis was performed using pYPK1 as the template and three appropriate synthetic oligonucleotide primers: 5'-CTT GAA CAC AGT AAG TAA CGG-3' (PKC2), corresponding to the flanking genomic sequence commencing 68-base pairs downstream of the stop codon; 5'-CAC AAA AAG TAT ACG CCT TGG CGG CAA TCA G-3' (PKD), where the underlined nucleotide is a silent mutation to introduce a BglI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to an introduced alanine codon (GCG) in place of the native lysine codon (AAG); and 5'-GTC CAT CGA TGA TTT CGA TC-3' (Pseq2), corresponding to the coding strand of YPK1 starting at nucleotide position 1024. The resulting similar1.1-kb PCR product was digested with ClaI and NcoI, and the resulting similar850-base pair fragment was used to replace the corresponding segment in pYPK1, yielding pYPK1(K376A-KD) (pAM46). Conversion of the Lys residue at the equivalent position in all other protein kinases examined to date eliminates their catalytic activity . To generate a catalytically inactive (kinase-dead) version of Ykr2, a similar PCR-based approach for site-directed mutagenesis was performed using pYKR2 as the template, and three appropriate synthetic oligonucleotide primers: 5'-AGT ATA GCC CTG CCC CAA C-3' (Rseq2), corresponding to the noncoding strand of YKR2 commencing at nucleotide position 1544; 5'-CCC AAA AGA TTT ACG CCT TGG CGG CTC TGA G-3' (RKD), where the underlined nucleotide is a silent mutation to introduce a BglI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to an introduced alanine codon (GCG) in place of the native lysine codon (AAG); and 5'-CGT GGG GTA ATG GCC TG-3' (Rseq3), corresponding to the coding strand of YKR2 starting at nucleotide position 66. The resulting similar1.4-kb PCR product was digested with NcoI and DraIII and used to replace the corresponding segment in pYKR2, yielding pYKR2(K373A-KD) (pAM47). Plasmid pYPK1(K376A-KD) was digested with AlwnI, converted to flush ends by treatment with T4 polymerase (NEB) and all four dNTPs then digested with SalI. The resulting 3.3-kb YPK1(K376A-KD) --containing fragment was gel purified and ligated into YEp351GAL that had been linearized by digestion with XbaI, converted to flush ends by incubation with T4 polymerase and all four dNTPs, and then digested with SalI. The resulting plasmid, pGAL-YPK1(K376A-KD) (pAM48), expresses a catalytically inactive allele [Ypk1-(K376A-KD)] from a 2-mum DNA-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid under control of the GAL1 promoter. An similar1.2-kb NcoI/SalI fragment from pYpk1-Myc was gel purified and used to replace the corresponding NcoI/SalI segment in pGAL-YPK1(K376A-KD) to create pGAL-YPK1(K376A-KD)-Myc (pAM49). An similar2.4-kb XhoI-HindIII fragment containing the entire YKR2(K373A-KD) allele was excised from pYKR2(K373A-KD), gel purified, and inserted into YEp351GAL that had been linearized with SalI and HindIII, to create a 2-mum DNA-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid, pGAL-YKR2(K373A-KD) (pAM50), that overexpresses catalytically inactive Ykr2 upon galactose induction. Galactose-inducible expression vectors that are URA3 based were constructed as follows. An similar3.3-kb BamHI/HindIII fragment carrying YPK1 was excised from pGAL-YPK1, gel purified, and ligated into YEp352GAL , which had been linearized with BamHI/HindIII, yielding YEp352GAL-YPK1 (pAM75). An similar3.8-kb BamHI/HindIII fragment from pGAL-Ypk1-Myc was gel purified and ligated into YEp352GAL that had been linearized with BamHI/HindIII, yielding YEp352GAL-Ypk1-Myc (pAM76). An similar2.2-kb BamHI/HindIII fragment from p2GAL-YKR2 was gel purified and ligated into YEp352GAL, which had been linearized with BamHI/HindIII, yielding YEp352GAL-YKR2 (pAM77). An similar3.0-kb BamHI/HindIII fragment from p2GAL-Ykr2-Myc was gel purified and ligated into YEp352GAL, which had been linearized with BamHI/HindIII, yielding YEp352GAL-Ykr2-Myc (pAM78). To generate an amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1, the following two-step approach was taken. First, an similar1.1-kb fragment corresponding to the last 344 amino acids of Ypk1 was amplified by PCR from pYPK1 with the following oligonucleotides: 5'-GGC GGA TCCATG TCC AGA AAT AAA CCT TTG TCC-3' (PCT), corresponding to sequences in the middle of the YPK1 coding sequence, just upstream of the beginning of the catalytic domain, where the underlined nucleotides correspond to an introduced BamHI restriction site, and the bold nucleotides represent an introduced start codon (ATG); and 5'-CTT GAA CAC AGT AAG TAA CGG-3' (PKC2), corresponding to the flanking genomic sequence commencing 68-base pairs downstream of the stop codon. The resulting PCR product was digested with BamHI and NcoI, gel purified, and used to replace an similar2.6-kb BamHI/NcoI fragment in pRS315-YPK1(B/H). The resulting CEN-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid encodes an amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1, which contains only the catalytic domain, but essentially no promoter sequence, and is called pRS315-YPK1-DeltaN (pAM55). An similar1.2-kb NcoI/SalI fragment from pRS315-Ypk1-myc was gel purified and used to replace the corresponding NcoI/SalI segment in pRS315-YPK1-DeltaN to create a CEN-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid, pRS315-Ypk1-DeltaN-myc (pAM56), that encodes a myc-tagged version of the Ypk1 catalytic domain. To insert a promoter, an similar2.3-kb BamHI/SalI fragment from pRS315-YPK1-DeltaN was gel purified and inserted into YEp351GAL that had been linearized with BamHI/SalI to create a 2-mum DeltaNA-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid, pGAL-YPK1-DeltaN (pAM99), that overexpresses the amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1 upon galactose induction. Likewise, an similar2.0-kb BamHI/SalI fragment from pRS315-Ypk1-DeltaN-Myc was gel purified and inserted into YEp351GAL that had been linearized with BamHI/SalI to create a 2-mum DeltaNA-containing, LEU2-marked plasmid, pGAL-Ypk1-DeltaN-Myc (pAM100), that overexpresses a myc-tagged version of the amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1 upon galactose induction. To move these truncated Ypk1 derivatives into URA3-marked plasmids, an similar2.3-kb BamHI/SalI fragment from pGAL-YPK1-DeltaN was gel purified and inserted into YEp352GAL that had been linearized with BamHI/SalI to create a 2-mum DNA-containing, URA3-marked plasmid, YEp352GAL-YPK1-DeltaN (pAM101), that overexpresses the amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1 upon galactose induction. Similarly, an similar2.0-kb BamHI/SalI fragment from pGAL-Ypk1-DeltaN-Myc was gel purified and inserted into YEp352GAL that had been linearized with BamHI/SalI to create a 2-mum DNA-containing, URA3-marked plasmid, YEp352GAL-Ypk1-DeltaN-myc (pAM102), that overexpresses a myc-tagged version of the amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1 upon galactose induction. To generate a catalytically inactive derivative of the Ypk1-DeltaN allele, a 2.3-kb ClaI/HindIII fragment from pGAL-YPK1-KD, encoding the carboxy terminus (containing the K376A kinase-dead mutation of Ypk1) was gel purified and used to replace the corresponding segment in YEp352GAL-Ypk1-DeltaN-Myc. The resulting plasmid, YEp352GAL-Ypk1-DeltaN-KD (pFR30), overexpresses a catalytically inactive derivative of the amino-terminal truncation of Ypk1 upon galactose induction.  Protein Localization by Using Chimeras Containing Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) | To create vectors for galactose-inducible expression of YPK1, YKR2, and PKH2, each fused to the carboxy terminus of a protein comprising three tandem repeats of an enhanced (S65T V163A) mutant of GFP, the following approach was taken. Two primers, 5'-GCG AGC GGG ATC CAT G, the first 18 bases of the gene-3' (primer A), where underlined bases correspond to an introduced BamHI site and start codon in bold; and 5'-GGC ACG CGT CGA CTT A, the last 18 bases of the gene-3' (primer B), where underlined bases correspond to an introduced SalI site and stop codon in bold, were used to amplify the entire open reading frames of the corresponding genes from genomic DNA. The PCR products were digested with BamHI and SalI and ligated into vector pGS836 (YCpGAL-3GFP)  that had been digested with BamHI and SalI, yielding plasmids pGAL-3GFP-YPK1 (pFR33), pGAL-3GFP-YKR2 (pER2), and pGAL-3GFP-PKH2 (pER3). To create pGAL-3GFP-PKH1 (pFR37), the same approach was used, but due to the presence of BamHI and SalI restriction sites in the gene, two PCR products were made, one with primer A and a primer corresponding to the sequence 3' to the ClaI site present in PKH1, and the other with a primer 3' of the ClaI site and primer B. A three-way ligation was then used to ligate the two PCR products digested with BamHI and ClaI, or ClaI and SalI, into pGS836 that had been digested with BamHI and SalI. Cells expressing the GFP constructs were grown to mid-exponential phase at 30C in SC-Leu containing Raf/Suc and then induced with 2% galactose for 3 h. Nuclear DNA was stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) by adding the dye directly in the medium at a concentration of 1 mug/ml for the last hour of growth. Rhodamine-labeled phalloidin was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). Samples of each culture were viewed directly with a TE300 fluorescence microscope (Nikon, Melville, NY) equipped with a 100x/1.4 Plan-Apo objective and a 1.4 numerical aperture condenser. Digital images were acquired with a bottom-ported Orca 100 charge-coupled device camera (Hamamatsu, Bridgewater, NJ) and Phase 3 Imaging Systems software (Northern Exposure, Inc., Glen Mills, PA). The fraction of lysed cells in cultures was assessed by direct counting of at least 200 cells after staining with a vital dye (LIVE/DEAD Yeast Viability kit; catalog no. 7009; Molecular Probes).  Antibody Production | To express a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Ypk1 fusion protein in E. coli, an similar370-base pair fragment corresponding to the first 114 amino acids of Ypk1 was amplified by PCR from pYPK1 by using the following oligonucleotides: 5'-GGG GGG GGA TCCATG TAT TCT TGG AAG TCA AAG TTT-3', where the underlined nucleotides correspond to an introduced BamHI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to the start codon; and 5'-GGG GGG AAT TCT CAG GTG GCA TCA TTG GGT GTC CC-3', where the underlined nucleotides correspond to an introduced EcoRI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to the reverse complement of an introduced stop codon. This PCR fragment was then digested with BamHI and EcoRI, gel purified, and ligated into the pGEX2T vector (Pharmacia, Peapack, NJ), which had been linearized with BamHI and EcoRI to create plasmid pGEX-Ypk1 (pAM5). To express a GST-Ykr2 fusion protein in E. coli, an similar360-base pair fragment corresponding to the first 111 amino acids of Ykr2 was amplified by PCR from pYKR2 by using the following olignucleotides: 5'-GGG GGG GGA TCCATG CAT TCC TGG CGA ATA TCC AAG-3', where the underlined nucleotides correspond to an introduced BamHI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to the start codon; and 5'-GGG GGG AAT TCT CAA CTC GGT CCC TGC GTC TCA GT-3', where the underlined nucleotides correspond to an introduced EcoRI site, and the bold nucleotides correspond to the reverse complement of an introduced stop codon. This PCR fragment was then digested with BamHI and EcoRI, gel purified, and ligated into the pGEX2T vector, which had been linearized with BamHI and EcoRI to create plasmid pGEX-Ykr2 (pAM6). To prepare antigen, expression of GST-Ypk1(1-114) and GST-Ykr2(1-111) fusions from plasmids, pGEX-Ypk1 and pGEX-Ykr2, respectively, were induced in a protease-deficient E. coli strain BL21 (DE3)[pLys]  by addition of isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalacto-pyranoside to a final concentration of 0.2 mM followed by incubation with aeration for 2 h at 30C. Cells were harvested, washed once with ice-cold wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 100 mM KCl, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM EDTA), and resuspended in 1/20 volume of wash buffer containing 1 M NaCl. Cells were disrupted by digestion with lysozyme (final concentration, 2 mg/ml) followed by sonication. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 x g, and the soluble GST-Ypk1(1-114) or GST-Ykr2(1-111) proteins were purified by adsorption to, and elution from, glutathione-agarose beads (Pharmacia), essentially as directed by the manufacturer, except that elution was performed in the presence of 1 M NaCl and 20 mM glutathione. The purified proteins were used as immunogens to raise polyclonal antisera in adult female New Zealand White rabbits following standard immunization protocols . The resulting anti-Ypk1 antibodies (serum #1446) and anti-Ykr2 antibodies (serum #1732) are specific to Ypk1 and Ykr2 and do not display any cross-reaction against the incorrect antigen. Anti-GFP antibodies were the generous gift of Roger Tsien and Charles Zuker (Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA).  Preparation of Cell Extracts and Immunoblot Analysis | Yeast cells were grown at 30C to mid-exponential phase (A600 nm = 0.5 --1), either in SC medium supplemented in a manner appropriate for maintenance of plasmids or in rich medium (YPGlc). If cells required galactose induction for expression from the GAL1 promoter, galactose was added to a final concentration of 2% and the cultures were incubated at 30C for an additional 2 h. Cells were harvested by brief centrifugation, washed twice by resuspension and resedimentation in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 3 mM DTT and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride), and resuspended in 200 mul of the same buffer. Prechilled glass beads (0.45 --0.6 mm in diameter) were added to the meniscus of the cell suspension, and lysis was achieved by vigorous vortex mixing for six 1-min intervals, with intermittent cooling on ice. To remove the glass beads, the bottom of the Eppendorf tube was punctured with a syringe needle (<0.5 mm in diameter) and inserted into another tube; the lysate was collected into the fresh tube by brief centrifugation in a clinical centrifuge. The crude extract was subjected to centrifugation at 30,000 x g for 15 min to remove unbroken cells and large debris. The protein concentration of the crude extract was measured using a dye-binding method  with a protein assay kit as instructed by the manufacturer (, Hercules, CA), by using bovine serum albumin (, Beverly, MA) as the standard. For immunoblot analysis, samples (50 mug of total protein) were diluted into SDS-PAGE sample buffer , subjected to electrophoresis in an 8 --12% gel, and then transferred to nitrocellulose . To detect Ypk1, rabbit polyclonal anti-Ypk1 antiserum #1446 was used at a dilution of 1:3000. To detect Ykr2, rabbit polyclonal anti-Ykr2 antiserum #1732 was used at a dilution of 1:3000. To detect proteins using the anti-c-Myc monoclonal antibody (mAb) 9E10, ascites fluid containing this mAb was used at a dilution of 1:10,000 . Immobilized immune complexes were detected using a commercial chemiluminescence detection system (Renaissance; PerkinElmer Life Sciences, Boston, MA) and x-ray film (Biomax MR; Eastman Kodak, Rochester, NY).  Immunoprecipitations | Yeast cultures to be used for immunoprecipitation analysis were grown as described above, and then rinsed in ice-cold IP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 125 mM potassium acetate, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mug/ml leupeptin, 1 mug/ml pepstatin A, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 12.5% glycerol). Glass beads were added to the meniscus of the cell suspension, and lysis was achieved by vigorous vortex mixing for eight 30-s intervals with intermittent cooling on ice. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 x g at 4C for 30 min. The clarified extract was assayed for protein concentration, and a sample (1 mg of total protein) was diluted to a final volume of 200 mul in IP buffer. An aliquot (20 mul) of protein G/protein A-agarose beads (30% slurry) (Oncogene Science, Cambridge, MA) and a sample of an appropriate control antibody, either 2 mul of preimmune rabbit serum or 1 mug of purified mouse anti-T-cell receptor antibody (gift of James Allison, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA), were added. The samples were then incubated on a roller drum for 1 h at 4C to adsorb proteins that bound nonspecifically to the solid support and to rabbit or mouse IgG (preclearing). The beads were removed by centrifugation for 10 min in a microfuge, and the supernatant fraction was transferred to a fresh tube containing another aliquot (15 mul) of protein G/protein A-agarose beads and either 2 mul of anti-Ypk1 (or anti-Ykr2) polyclonal antiserum or 1 mul of anti-c-Myc (mAb 9E10) ascites, and incubated on a roller drum for 1 to 3 h at 4C. The beads were sedimented by brief centrifugation in a microfuge and washed three times (1 ml each) with ice-cold IP buffer and collected by centrifugation for 1 min in a microfuge on maximum speed. Bead-bound immune complexes were solubilized in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and immediately boiled for 5 min in a water bath and then clarified by brief centrifugation in a Microfuge before resolution by SDS-PAGE. The proteins of interest were visualized as described above.  Immune-Complex Protein Kinase Assays | Cells expressing either wild-type or kinase-dead Ypk1-myc (or Ykr2-myc) under control of the GAL1 promoter were grown in SC containing Raf/Suc to an A600 nm = 0.6, induced by addition of galactose (2% final concentration), incubated with shaking at 30C for 2 h, collected by centrifugation, washed with ice-cold 1x phosphate-buffered saline, resuspended in 0.2 ml of ice-cold IP buffer, and lysed as described above. The resulting lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4C for 30 min at 30,000 x g. Protein concentration in the resulting crude extracts was determined by the  method. A volume of extract containing 1 mg of total protein was immunoprecipitated with mAb 9E10 as described above. The immunoprecipitates were washed once with ice-cold IP buffer, once with ice-cold IP buffer containing 0.5 M NaCl, and twice with ice-cold buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 mM EGTA, and 0.1% [by vol] 2-mercaptoethanol). As part of the final wash, the slurry of beads was split into two equal portions. For immunoblot analysis, SDS-PAGE sample buffer (similar15 mul) was added directly to one sample of each bead suspension. For protein kinase assays, the activity of the Ypk1-myc or Ykr2-myc immune complex was assayed by adding 30 mul of a mixture containing 1 muM microcystin-LR, 10 mM Mg-acetate, 100 muM [gamma-32P]ATP (200 --400 cpm/pmol), and 100 muM Cross-tide (GRPRTSSFAEG) , which we have documented previously is an excellent peptide phospho-acceptor substrate for Ypk1 and Ykr2 . After incubation for 15 min at 30C, each reaction was terminated by spotting a portion (45 mul) of the reaction mixture onto small squares of phosphocellulose paper (P81; Whatman, Maidstone, United Kingdom), which were washed and analyzed as described in detail previously . In some experiments, samples of the immunoprecipitates were resuspended in an appropriate buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 and 10 mM MgCl2) and treated with shrimp alkaline phosphatase (0.25 U; US Biochemical, Cleveland, OH) in either the absence or presence of a mixture of inhibitors of this phosphatase (25 muM Na-orthovanadate and 100 muM beta-glycerol-phosphate, adjusted to pH 8).  Bioassays for Drug Sensitivity | An agar diffusion (halo) assay  was performed to test the relative sensitivity of various strains to rapamycin, valinomycin, hygromycin B, cycloheximide, and polyoxin D. Nascent lawns of the strains to be tested were prepared by mixing similar2 x 106 cells from a saturated culture with 2 ml of molten (55C) 1% agar. The cell-containing agar was rapidly mixed and immediately poured evenly onto plates containing an appropriate medium. Various concentrations of rapamycin (50 and 500 ng/mul), hygromycin B (5 and 50 mug/mul), or the other drugs indicated, were spotted in the same volume (10 mul) onto sterile cellulose filter discs (0.6 cm), which were placed on the nascent lawn. The plates were incubated at 30C, and photographed after 2 d.  Selection and Analysis of Dosage Suppressors | A library of restriction fragments of yeast genomic DNA cloned into a URA3-marked, 2-mum DNA-based vector, YEp352 , was introduced into strain YPT40 (ypk1-1ts ykr2Delta)  by selecting transformants on SCGlc-Ura medium at 26C. Temperature-resistant clones were then selected by their ability to grow at 35C. One suppressor plasmid obtained carried the EXG1 locus as the sole open reading frame. To create a plasmid that expressed EXG1 from a high-level constitutive promoter, two primers, 5'-GCG TCT CGA GAT GCT TTC GCT TAA AA-3', where the underlined bases correspond to an introduced XhoI site, and the start codon is in bold; and 5'-CGC CGG AGC TC T TAG TTA GAA ATT GTG CC-3', where the underlined bases correspond to an introduced SacI site, and the stop codon is in bold, were used to amplify the entire open reading frame of EXG1 from the library plasmid that was originally isolated as a dosage suppressor of the ypk1-1ts ykr2Delta strain (see RESULTS). This 1.4-kb PCR product was digested with XhoI and SacI and ligated into vector pAD4 M that had been digested with SalI and SacI, yielding pADH-EXG1 (pAM88). To express PKC1 from its own promoter on a high copy number (2-mum DNA) plasmid, a 4.2-kb NsiI fragment containing the entire open reading frame of PKC1 as well as 560 base pairs upstream of the ATG and 175 base pairs downstream of the stop codon, was cut out of a genomic clone obtained by F. Owen Fields (this laboratory; ; ) and ligated into the URA3-based plasmid YEp352 that had been linearized with PstI, yielding plasmid pPKC-PN, or into the LEU2-based plasmid YEp351 that had been linearized with PstI, yielding plasmid pFR32. To express BCK1-20 in a 