Patterns of Expression and Normalized Levels of the Five Arabidopsis Phytochromes
Using monoclonal antibodies specific for each apoprotein and full-length purified apoprotein standards, the levels of the five Arabidopsis phytochromes and their patterns of expression in seedlings and mature plants and under different light conditions have been characterized. Phytochrome levels are normalized to the DNA content of the various tissue extracts to approximate normalization to the number of cells in the tissue. One phytochrome, phytochrome A, is highly light labile. The other four phytochromes are much more light stable, although among these, phytochromes B and C are reduced 4- to 5-fold in red- or white-light-grown seedlings compared with dark-grown seedlings. The total amount of extractable phytochrome is 23-fold lower in light-grown than dark-grown tissues, and the percent ratios of the five phytochromes, A:B:C:D:E, are measured as 85:10:2:1.5:1.5 in etiolated seedlings and 5:40:15:15:25 in seedlings grown in continuous white light. The four light-stable phytochromes are present at nearly unchanging levels throughout the course of development of mature rosette and reproductive-stage plants and are present in leaves, stems, roots, and flowers. Phytochrome protein expression patterns over the course of seed germination and under diurnal and circadian light cycles are also characterized. Little cycling in response to photoperiod is observed, and this very low amplitude cycling of some phytochrome proteins is out of phase with previously reported cycling of PHY mRNA levels. These studies indicate that, with the exception of phytochrome A, the family of phytochrome photoreceptors in Arabidopsis constitutes a quite stable and very broadly distributed array of sensory molecules.

The phytochromes are a family of soluble chromoproteins that function in the absorption of red (R) and far-red (FR) light and the transduction of intracellular signals during light-regulated plant development. In early studies, physiological and biochemical experiments indicated that higher plants contain at least two different forms of phytochrome . These were frequently referred to as type I or "light-labile" phytochrome, which predominated in etiolated tissue, and type II or "light-stable" phytochrome, which predominated in light-grown tissue (for review, see ; ). Identification of PHY gene families, first in Arabidopsis and subsequently in many other plant species, and analysis of their phytochrome protein products have generally confirmed this view , although most plants contain more than two forms and the levels and light stabilities of all of the phytochromes from a single species have not been analyzed up to this time. Complete or partial sequences of PHY genes from a large number of flowering plants have been isolated. Among these, the most intensively studied are those of Arabidopsis, the complete PHY gene complement of which consists of five members, PHYTOCHROME A through PHYTOCHROME E (PHYA --PHYE; ; ). Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum), the only other eudicot from which all of the phytochrome coding sequences have been isolated, also contains five PHY genes . These are similar to the Arabidopsis genes and, with the exception of the pairs of recently derived phyB-like genes Arabidopsis B/D and tomato B1/B2, are thought to be orthologs of the Arabidopsis genes . PHY genes sequenced from a variety of higher plants, including both monocots and dicots, all show extensive similarity in sequence and overall structure to the Arabidopsis sequences. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that a duplication event in early seed plant evolution gave rise to two initial PHY gene lineages, PHYA/C and PHYB/D/E, which underwent later duplications in angiosperms to generate the divergent PHYA, PHYC, PHYE, and PHYB/D lineages . Members of these lineages are found in most plants examined, with the exception of PHYE genes, which have not been found in sampled monocots and may have evolved only in dicots after the monocot/dicot divergence or may have been lost in an early monocot progenitor . Hence, available evidence strongly supports the view that the five Arabidopsis PHY genes and their protein products are representative of phytochrome diversity found across a broad range of angiosperm plants. The phenotypic consequences of mutations in the Arabidopsis PHY genes and in PHY genes from other species have been used to assess the respective roles of these molecules in regulation of R/FR photomorphogenic responses. A single Arabidopsis gene, PHYA, encodes a light-labile type I phytochrome, which has been shown through mutant analysis to function in very low fluence and FR high irradiance responses . Mutations in PHYA genes from tomato, pea (Pisum sativum), and rice (Oryza sativa) result in similar defects in these general classes of phytochrome responses .  showed that the Arabidopsis PHYB and PHYC genes encode proteins that are less abundant than phyA in etiolated tissue and appear to be light stable. These, therefore, resemble type II phytochromes. The abundance and light stability of the phyD and phyE phytochromes have not been analyzed, but these proteins are most closely related in sequence to phyB. Arabidopsis phyB, phyD, and phyE mutants have been isolated and used to demonstrate that all three function in low fluence, R/FR-reversible responses and in shade avoidance responses to altered R to FR ratio . Again, mutations in several PHYB-related genes from other plant species affect low fluence, R/FR-reversible responses and shade avoidance responses in a similar way . Mutations in the Arabidopsis PHYC gene or in PHYC homologs from other species have not yet been described. Before the complexity of the phytochrome family was known, the expression pattern and distribution of phytochrome were characterized in several different plant species using assays based upon spectroscopy, biological activity, and immunolocalization (for review, see ). These experiments were limited to addressing only the type I or phyA form of phytochrome or were nonselective among the various forms. In general, phytochrome was found in most tissues tested spectroscopically or immunologically, although significant variation in its localization was seen in different species. Variation was also observed in the phytochrome content of different cell types in tissues from a given plant, and phytochrome was often observed to be most abundant in young, rapidly expanding cells . Following the description of the five Arabidopsis PHY genes, preliminary characterization of the distributions of the PHY mRNAs in isolated plant organs indicated that these transcripts are relatively constitutive throughout the mature plant and throughout development . A quantitative analysis of the steady-state levels and distributions of all of the five tomato PHY mRNAs was performed and was again found fairly constitutive expression in seedlings . In these studies, induction of all five transcripts was observed over the course of seed germination, 2- to 3-fold diurnal cycling of the PHYA, PHYB1, and PHYB2 mRNAs was seen, and some variation in expression was seen in mature tomato organs, although all five transcripts were detectable in all tissues examined. Promoter-reporter gene fusion constructs for the Arabidopsis PHYA, PHYB, PHYD, and PHYE and tobacco PHYA and PHYB transcription regulatory regions have also been constructed and their activities monitored in transgenic plants . In these experiments, examples of well-defined organ and tissue specificities for promoter activity were observed, however all of the PHY promoters tested were expressed in a large number of different cell types and in most plant organs. Variation between Arabidopsis and tobacco for their respective PHYA and PHYB promoter expression patterns was also described. All of these approaches to characterization of PHY gene transcription patterns indicate that, although some regulation of PHY gene promoter activity occurs with respect to different cell types and stages of development, phytochromes are likely to be broadly distributed in a given plant and most, perhaps all, plant cells are R/FR responsive. Earlier efforts at determining the in vivo levels of the phytochrome apoproteins have been carried out principally using oat or pea seedlings and ELISA, radioimmunoassay, or immunoblot assays for phytochrome . However, in none of these cases was it possible to distinguish completely among the different forms of phytochrome present in the extracts because a comprehensive set of phy-specific antibodies was not available. The most comprehensive analyses were performed by , , ) and used monoclonal antibodies (MAb) specific to each of three phytochrome forms from oat. Levels of these phytochromes were determined in unimbibed oat seeds and in dissected 3-d-old seedlings, and it was concluded that one form, 124-kD phytochrome, was predominant in dark-grown seedlings, whereas the other two, the 123- and 125-kD forms, were more abundant in the light and that there was little evidence for marked differences in the spatial distribution of the three forms. Several lines of evidence indicate that the level of photoreversible phytochrome in plants is a critical determinant of the sensitivity of the plant to light and the strength of the physiological or developmental response to a given light environment. Overexpression of phyA or phyB phytochromes in transgenic plants has striking effects on growth and development in response to light , even at the level of only a doubling of PHYB gene dosage . The PHYA and PHYB wild-type alleles conversely are incompletely dominant to the phyA and phyB null mutations , indicating again that a 2-fold change in photoreceptor level is physiologically significant. Arabidopsis has been used extensively in the analysis of phytochrome function and phytochrome mutants and MAb that specifically detect each of the five Arabidopsis phytochrome apoproteins have been described . We have used these reagents here to investigate the light stabilities, distributions, and levels of this family of photoreceptors in wild-type plants throughout the growth cycle, under different light conditions, and over diurnal and circadian light cycles.
Normalization of Protein Gel Loads to DNA Content of Extracts | Tissues of seedlings grown under different light conditions, of mature plants at various ages, and from different plant organs vary in water content, cell size, and protein content. This raises the question of what basis should be used to compare the levels of the phytochromes present in such different tissues. The amount of phytochrome per gram fresh weight, per seedling or organ, or per milligram of total protein fails to account for the variability in the parameters described above. One useful comparison that would take into account several of these variables is an estimate of the average amount of each phytochrome per cell. As an approximation of this, in our analysis, the amount of extracted plant protein loaded on gels has been normalized to the DNA content of each extract. Frozen tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen, and separate aliquots were extracted and assayed for total protein content, using the standard phytochrome extraction buffer, or for total DNA content. The results of these protein and DNA assays are shown in Table . The protein to DNA ratios range from 65:1 to 138:1 and, for a given tissue, are highly reproducible. Although there is a 7-fold difference in the amounts of protein and DNA per gram fresh weight of tissue when comparing, for example, dark-grown seedlings to flowers, the protein to DNA ratios among all the samples vary only 2-fold. Lanes of gels throughout this paper were loaded as indicated in the last column of Table  where a dark-grown seedling is set as the standard of a 1x load. Therefore, with the exception of the seed germination experiments, where extracts were loaded on a per seed basis (see below), the immunoblot signals on a given immunoblot in the figures in this paper can be interpreted as indicating the level of that phytochrome protein present in a similar number of DNA or genome equivalents from the various tissue samples tested.  Table I | Protein to DNA ratios in Arabidopsis seedlings, mature plants, and plant organs   Light Stabilities of Phytochrome Proteins in Seedlings |  described the isolation and characterization of MAb against all five of the Arabidopsis phytochromes. With the exception of the recognition by anti-phyD MAb 2C1 of a low abundance non-phytochrome cross-reacting protein (NPXR) in dark-grown tissue that is described in that work, all available evidence indicates that the anti-phytochrome MAb lines are phytochrome specific. Moreover, it was shown that MAb 2C1 can be used to identify and quantify phyD in dark-grown plant extracts if a 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 fraction rather than a 25% fraction is analyzed . To characterize the light stabilities of the Arabidopsis phytochromes, immunoblots of (NH4)2SO4-precipitated fractions of 7-d-old seedlings that were grown in the dark, grown in the dark but irradiated with 3, 12, or 24 h of continuous R light before harvest, or grown in continuous white light (WL) were probed with each of the five anti-phytochrome MAbs. These blots are shown in Figure . For the phyD blot, a 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 fraction was prepared to eliminate NPXR from the extract. The seedling extracts were loaded on gels as indicated in Table , and for each antibody, dilution curves of the dark-grown extracts indicate the response of the assay to relative antigen levels.  Figure 1 | Immunoblot analysis of the light stabilities of the five Arabidopsis phytochromes. Immunoblot analysis of the light stabilities of the five Arabidopsis phytochromes. Seedlings were grown for 7 d in continuous darkness (D) or WL, or in darkness and then placed under R for 3 h (R3), 12 h (R12), or 24 h (R24) before harvest at 7 d. Extracts were prepared and precipitated with 25% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 for phyA, B, C, and E or with 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 for phyD. An amount of protein equivalent to 300 mug of total extractable protein was loaded in the D, R3, R12, and R24 lanes and an amount equivalent to 390 mug in the WL lane. For each phytochrome, dilution curves of the darkness extract were included to estimate the -fold difference in the level of that apoprotein under the different light conditions. MAbs used were: phyA, 073d; phyB, B6B3; phyC, C11 and C13; phyD, 2C1; and phyE, 7B3. In Figure , the phyA protein exhibits the strong R-dependent down-regulation that has previously been described for light-labile or type I phytochrome, resulting in a 50- to 100-fold reduction in level by 12 h in R. The phyB and phyC proteins also show significant R-light-induced down-regulation, although the reduction in protein level is more gradual and much less pronounced compared with the phyA down-regulation . Compared with dark-grown seedlings, levels of phyB and phyC are 4- to 5-fold reduced in seedlings grown either for 6 d in the dark followed by 24 h of R light or for 7 d in continuous WL. The levels of phyD and phyE are not strongly changed upon extended exposure to R or WL, showing at most a 2-fold reduction compared with the dark-grown seedlings . Thus, phyD and phyE most closely resemble truly light-stable phytochromes. Taken together, the varied responses of the five phytochrome protein levels to R and WL indicate that there is a gradation of light stabilities in this receptor family.  Normalized Phytochrome Levels in Arabidopsis Dark-Grown and Light-Grown Seedlings | It is important to note that, in Figure , exposure times for detection of the chemiluminescence signal varied from blot to blot, and although the chemiluminescence signals in the figure accurately reflect the relative levels of each phytochrome protein under the set of conditions being tested, they cannot be used to compare the levels of the different phytochrome proteins with each other. Therefore, the absolute levels of the five phytochromes were determined by comparison with standard curves of purified proteins. Several protocols for preparation of protein extracts for use in immunoblot analysis of phytochrome have been described. We compared four procedures using Arabidopsis seedling tissues: extraction of fresh tissue into hot SDS buffer , (NH4)2SO4-precipitated extraction , the EZ protocol , and grinding and direct extraction of frozen tissue . Extraction of fresh tissue into hot SDS buffer yielded low-quality immunoblots with high backgrounds, and we observed low-phytochrome recovery with the EZ protocol such that the calculated protein levels in the various tissues were approximately 2-fold lower using this method compared with the others. The (NH4)2SO4-precipitated extraction protocol and direct extraction of frozen tissue yielded the most consistent results, and because the (NH4)2SO4-precipitation introduces an additional correction for the fraction of total protein precipitated, the very simple direct extraction method was adopted for most of the quantitative experiments. To construct standard curves of purified phytochrome apoproteins, the five Arabidopsis PHY cDNA sequences were expressed from the pET3c vector in Escherichia coli, and the approximately 120-kD phytochrome products were purified from gels by electroelution. Figure A shows a silver-stained gel of the five purified proteins. For phytochromes B, C, and E, direct extracts of seedlings grown for 7 d in darkness, for 6 d in darkness followed by 24 h in R light (R24), or for 7 d in continuous WL, were analyzed by immunoblotting with standard curves of each of the purified apoproteins. Figure B shows representative blots, which were loaded with 50 mug of the dark-grown or R24 extracts or 65 mug of the WL extract to normalize to DNA content . For the highly light-labile phyA, a R irradiation of only 12 h was used (R12), and separate blots were prepared for the dark and light extracts because of the large difference in the level of phyA in these samples (Fig. C). Measurement of the level of phyD in dark-grown tissue is complicated by cross-reactivity of the anti-phyD 2C1 MAb to a protein (NPXR) found in dark-grown extracts . For this reason, the three extracts for phyD quantitation were precipitated with 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4, which does not precipitate NPXR protein , and these samples were blotted and probed as shown in Figure D.  Figure 2 | Quantitation of phytochrome levels in seedling extracts with purified apoprotein standards. Quantitation of phytochrome levels in seedling extracts with purified apoprotein standards. A, Silver-stained 6% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gel of 50 ng of each of the E. coli-expressed purified phytochrome apoprotein standards and a commercial preparation of 50 ng of purified beta-galactosidase. B, phyB, phyC, and phyE immunoblots of direct extracts of seedlings grown for 7 d in continuous darkness (D) or WL, or for 6 d in the dark followed by 24 h in R (R24) with dilution curves of the purified apoproteins. Fifty micrograms of D and R24 extract protein and 65 mug of WL extract were loaded, and blots were probed with the MAbs described in Figure . C, Two separate phyA immunoblots, one with 10 mug of darkness direct extract and one with 130 mug of the R12 or WL direct extracts and appropriate dilution curves of the purified phyA apoprotein, were probed with MAb 073d. D, To eliminate cross-reactivity of the anti-phyD MAb 2C1 with a non-phytochrome protein, 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 precipitated fractions were used instead of direct extracts on the phyD blot. An amount of precipitated protein equivalent to 300 mug of darkness or R24 extract or 390 mug of WL extract was loaded. Three independent immunoblots for each of the phytochromes, similar to those shown in Figure , B through D, were scanned and quantitated by densitometry. Figure  shows curves generated from representative blots and Table  gives the average values determined for nanograms of the five phytochromes per 100 mug of total protein extracted from dark-grown and R-irradiated seedlings and per 130 mug of total protein from WL-grown seedlings (see Table  for normalization to DNA content). The choice of expressing the phytochrome levels using nanograms per 100 mug of total extracted protein from dark-grown seedlings as a base, and all other values relative to this, is arbitrary. It allows phytochrome levels to be compared with each other and, using corrections for the weight, protein content, or estimated number of cells per seedling, can be converted to other units (see "Discussion"). For phyD blots, the amounts of (NH4)2SO4-precipitated protein loaded on gels were the equivalent of 300 mug of total protein from dark-grown seedlings and 390 mug from R- or WL-grown seedlings . To confirm the comparable nature of the two different types of samples, in a separate experiment, the phyD level in direct extracts of light-grown tissues, where the cross-reacting NPXR protein is absent , was measured as 3 ng 100 mug-1 total protein (data not shown).  Figure 3 | Quantitation of phytochrome immunoblots by densitometry. Quantitation of phytochrome immunoblots by densitometry. Chemiluminescence signals on films of blots similar to those shown in Figure  were scanned and analyzed by densitometry. Densitometry units in integrated OD units are plotted versus the amount of purified apoprotein loaded per lane of the gel. The values obtained for darkness (D), R24 (phyB, C, D, and E), or R12 (phyA), and WL extracts are indicated by arrow heads. Table II | Nanograms of phytochrome apoprotein per DNA equivalent In dark-grown seedlings, where all five phytochromes are at their highest levels (Figs.  and ), the normalized amounts of the phytochromes per 100 mug total extracted protein are measured as: 355 ng of phyA, 39.7 ng of phyB, 8.1 ng of phyC, 5.4 ng of phyD, and 6.1 ng of phyE. Hence, 85% of phytochrome in the etiolated seedling is phyA, 10% is phyB, and 5% is phyC, D, and E combined. In continuous WL-grown seedlings, the measured levels per 130 mug of total extracted protein are: 0.7 ng of phyA, 7.3 of ng phyB, 2.2 ng of phyC, 2.9 ng of phyD, and 4.8 ng of phyE. This represents a large change in photoreceptor content compared with the results from etiolated seedlings, with approximately 5% phyA, 40% phyB, 25% phyE, and 15% each of phyC and phyD. With reference to overall light stability, these values are consistent with the results in Figure  obtained with (NH4)2SO4-precipitated extracts. Phytochrome A, as expected, is a highly light-labile or type I phytochrome, whereas among the type II forms, phyB and phyC have intermediate light stability compared with the most light-stable phyD and phyE forms.  Phytochrome Levels Are Similar in Commonly Used Arabidopsis Ecotypes | Because various Arabidopsis ecotypes exhibit differences in light-regulated morphological and developmental characteristics and one ecotype, Wassilewskija (Ws), lacks phyD , the levels of the phytochromes in four commonly used ecotypes were examined. Immunoblots of (NH4)2SO4-precipitated extracts of dark-grown 7-d-old seedlings of the Columbia (Col), Landsberg erecta (Ler), Nossen (No-0), and Ws ecotypes probed with the phytochrome-specific MAbs are shown in Figure A. Little variation in the expression levels of these proteins is observed among the lines aside from the lack of phyD in the Ws ecotype. All other experiments reported here were performed on the Col ecotype.  Figure 4 | Analysis of phytochrome levels in diverse Arabidopsis ecotypes, in mature rosette plants, and in plant organs. Analysis of phytochrome levels in diverse Arabidopsis ecotypes, in mature rosette plants, and in plant organs. A, Seedlings of Arabidopsis ecotypes Col, Ler, No-0, and Ws were grown in darkness for 7 d, proteins were extracted and precipitated with 25% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 (for phyA, B, C, and E) or 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 (for phyD), and an amount of precipitated protein equivalent to 300 mug of total extractable protein was fractionated on 6% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gels and blotted. Blots were probed with the MAbs described in Figure . B, Seven-day-old seedlings grown in the dark (D) or under continuous WL (WL7) and rosette-stage plants grown under continuous WL for 14 (WL14) or 21 d (WL21) were extracted. Extracts were precipitated with 25% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 (for phyA, B, C, and E) or 20% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 (for phyD), and amounts of precipitated protein equivalent to 300 mug (D) or 390 mug (light-grown) of extractable protein were fractionated and immunoblotted as in A above. C, Leaves, inflorescence stems, and flowers were harvested from soil-grown plants, and roots were harvested from liquid grown plantlets. Proteins were extracted and precipitated with 25% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4. Amounts of precipitated protein equivalent to 240 mug (roots), 390 mug (leaves), 450 mug (stems), or 210 mug (flowers) of total extractable protein were fractionated and immunoblotted as in A above.  Phytochrome Levels in Mature Vegetative Tissues and in Plant Organs | To determine whether phytochrome levels change over the transition from seedling to mature plant, the levels of the five phytochrome proteins in 14- and 21-d-old continuous WL-grown Arabidopsis plants were compared with those in 7-d-old dark- and light-grown seedlings. Figure B shows that the phyA protein remains very low, below the detection limit on this blot, throughout this time. The levels of phyB, phyC, phyD, and phyE are not strikingly altered in 14- and 21-d-old plants compared with 7-d-old light-grown seedlings. At 21 d, when the plants were beginning to bolt, all four of these receptor proteins are present at equivalent or, at most, 2-fold reduced levels compared with 7-d-old light-grown seedlings, on a per DNA content basis (see Table ). In Figure C, the relative levels of the five phytochrome proteins in four mature plant organs are compared. Extracts of roots, harvested from 14-d-old liquid-grown plants, and rosette leaves, flowering bolt stems, and whole flowers from 28-d-old soil-grown plants were assayed on immunoblots. In each case, the amount of plant extract loaded on the gel was normalized to the DNA content of the extract, as indicated in Table . After a long exposure to film, the phyA protein is detected weakly in roots and, at very low levels, in flowers. The phyB, phyC, phyD, and phyE proteins are observed in all four plant organs, in each case most abundantly in flowers.  Phytochrome Levels during Germination and Early Seedling Development | To determine which phytochromes are present during seed germination and early seedling development, the levels of the five Arabidopsis phytochrome proteins over a time course from imbibed seeds through 5 d growth in the dark and in the light were measured as shown in Figure . Dry seeds were sterilized (approximately 20 min), then imbibed for 1 h shaking in water in the dark. The 0-h time points in Figure  are extracts prepared at the end of this imbibition period. The time course was performed in liquid growth medium, in the dark or in continuous light, to facilitate collection of tissue samples. A parallel experiment done on solid growth medium gave similar results (T. Clack and R.A. Sharrock, unpublished data). The first four lanes of all of the blots shown in Figure  contain extract from 20 seeds per lane except the light-grown blot probed for phyA, which contains extract from 50 seedlings per lane to increase the detection sensitivity. The fifth lanes in each blot, containing the 120-h samples, were not loaded on a per seed basis but on a DNA equivalent basis, as in Figure , because, by 120 h of development, the quantity of protein in 20 seedlings had increased to the point where it caused the lanes to distort. The stained gel at the bottom of Figure B illustrates the protein loads in each lane of the blots shown in Figure B. Although not shown here, these blots were compared with standard curves of purified phytochrome apoproteins, as in Figures  and . The levels of the antigens determined in this way are given below the lanes in the blots in Figure . The level of phyD was not assayed in the dark in these experiments because of the detection of the cross-reacting NPXR protein by MAb 2C1 in dark-seedling direct extracts.  Figure 5 | Phytochrome levels in germinating seeds and young seedlings. Phytochrome levels in germinating seeds and young seedlings. A, Seeds were germinated in the dark for 0, 4, 24, or 48 h, and the amounts of protein extracted from 20 seeds were loaded in wells of a 6% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gel. One batch of seeds was allowed to grow in the dark for 5 d, the seedlings were extracted, and 10 mug of total protein was loaded in the fifth lane. Seeds were also germinated in continuous WL for 0, 4, 24, or 48 h, and the amount of protein extracted from 50 seeds was loaded on a gel. In the fifth lane of this gel, 130 mug of protein from 5-d-old light-grown seedlings was loaded. After electrophoresis, the gels were blotted and probed with the anti-phyA MAb 073d. B, Seeds were germinated in the dark or in continuous WL for 0, 4, 24, or 48 h, and the amounts of protein extracted from 20 seeds were loaded on 6% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gels. Batches of seeds allowed to grow for 5 d in darkness or continuous light were extracted and 50 or 65 mug of total protein from these seedlings was loaded in the fifth lane of the respective gels. Duplicate identical gels were run, blotted, and probed with MAbs for phyB (B6B3), phyC (C11 and C13), phyD (2C1), and phyE (7B3). Dilution curves of purified apoprotein standards were run next to the lanes shown here and the levels of the phytochromes were measured by scanning densitometry. These levels are given below each lane (ud, undetectable). A representative blot containing the dark and light protein samples and stained with copper stain is shown at the bottom of B to illustrate the relative protein loads. A blot of the dark extracts was not probed for phyD level because of the presence of a cross-reactive protein to that antibody in the dark. Figure A shows that phyA is undetectable in this assay in seeds at the end of the sterilization and 1-h imbibition period (0-h lanes). The seeds used in this experiment were harvested from plants grown in continuous light, and whether phyA accumulates in seeds that are allowed to develop in darkness or under a short photoperiod was not investigated. In the dark, the level of phyA becomes detectable by 4 h after imbibition and rises dramatically over the 5-d time course to reach a level of 230 ng 100 mug-1 extracted protein at d 5. In the light, phyA is detectable by 24 h and reaches a level of 0.5 ng 130 mug-1 extracted protein by d 5 (Fig. A). These results are consistent with those in Table  for 7-d-old seedlings, assuming the level of phyA in the dark continues to rise as the seedlings get older. Phytochromes B, D, and E are all present at significant levels (1 --3 ng seed-1) in freshly imbibed seeds, whereas phyC is 5- to 10-fold lower (Fig. B). On a per seed basis, phyB and phyC increase slightly over the first 48 h of germination and seedling development in the dark but are relatively constant in continuous light. The levels of phyD and phyE do not change over early seedling development. By d 5, the measured levels of all of the phytochromes in Figure  are consistent with those measured in 7-d-old seedling in Table .  Diurnal and Circadian Cycling of Phytochromes | Studies using phy null mutants have demonstrated that phyA, phyB, phyD, and phyE have roles in sensing the input light signals to the circadian clock . In addition, pronounced circadian cycling of the activities of the PHYA, PHYB, PHYD, and PHYE promoters has been observed . To determine whether the levels of the Arabidopsis phyA, B, C, and E apoproteins cycle in a diurnal fashion, seedlings were grown for 5 d under a 12-h WL/12-h dark photoperiod (LD) and harvested at 3-h intervals throughout the 5th d. Protein extracts were prepared, precipitated with 25% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4, and analyzed by immunoblotting. The levels of phyD were not followed in these experiments because of the complication of detection of the NPXR protein by the 2C1 MAb. Figure A shows that over a single LD cycle, clear diurnal cycling of the levels of phyA and phyC is evident. Low amplitude cycling of phyB is also indicated, whereas the level of phyE remains constant. The data in Figure  are representative of two independent repetitions of this experiment, both of which showed qualitatively similar responses of the four phytochrome proteins. The potential circadian regulation of cycling of the phytochromes was