Activation of Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase (Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase/Extracellular Signal-regulated Kinase) Cascade by Aldosterone
Aldosterone in some tissues increases expression of the mRNA encoding the small monomeric G protein Ki-RasA. Renal A6 epithelial cells were used to determine whether induction of Ki-ras leads to concomitant increases in the total as well as active levels of Ki-RasA and whether this then leads to subsequent activation of its effector mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase) cascade. The molecular basis and cellular consequences of this action were specifically investigated. We identified the intron 1-exon 1 region (rasI/E1) of the mouse Ki-ras gene as sufficient to reconstitute aldosterone responsiveness to a heterologous promotor. Aldosterone increased reporter gene activity containing rasI/E1 threefold. Aldosterone increased the absolute and GTP-bound levels of Ki-RasA by a similar extent, suggesting that activation resulted from mass action and not effects on GTP binding/hydrolysis rates. Aldosterone significantly increased Ki-RasA and MAPK activity as early as 15 min with activation peaking by 2 h and waning after 4 h. Inhibitors of transcription, translation, and a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist attenuated MAPK signaling. Similarly, rasI/E1-driven luciferase expression was sensitive to glucocorticoid receptor blockade. Overexpression of dominant-negative RasN17, addition of antisense Ki-rasA and inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase also attenuated steroid-dependent increases in MAPK signaling. Thus, activation of MAPK by aldosterone is dependent, in part, on a genomic mechanism involving induction of Ki-ras transcription and subsequent activation of its downstream effectors. This genomic mechanism has a distinct time course from activation by traditional mitogens, such as serum, which affect the GTP-binding state and not absolute levels of Ras. The result of such a genomic mechanism is that peak activation of the MAPK cascade by adrenal corticosteroids is delayed but prolonged.

Small, monomeric Ras GTP-binding proteins initiate pleiotropic signaling cascades to affect many aspects of cellular physiology. Ras signaling through the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) 1/2, for instance, is well documented to play a pivotal role in cellular growth and differentiation. Protein hormones, which target GTP exchange factors and GTPase-activating proteins via plasma membrane receptors, activate the MAPK cascade by increasing the GTP-bound state of Ras proteins and not the absolute levels of these proteins. Thus, the "classic" paradigm of Ras -> MAPK signaling involves posttranslational control of Ras. Emerging evidence suggests that numerous steroids, including aldosterone, also affect Ras signaling . The molecular basis and end effect of this steroid action remain, for the most part, not well described. Because steroids control cell activity through receptors that function as trans-acting factors to modulate gene expression, it is possible that steroids act on the Ras signaling cascade via a "genomic" mechanism that is dependent on transcription and subsequent translation to increase Ras protein levels and thus, distinct from the classic mechanism. The current study, which investigated this possibility, identifies a novel paradigm by which corticosteroid activate the Ras -> MAPK signaling cascade. The adrenal cortical steroid hormone aldosterone is the major endocrine factor regulating Na+ and K+ homeostasis. Aldosterone, consequently, plays a central role in maintaining electrolyte and water balance . Aldosterone also plays a direct role in pathological remodeling of the heart, possibly by promoting fibrosis and cellular proliferation both of which are generally known to be impacted by Ras signaling via ERK cascades . Although the systemic effects and target tissues of aldosterone are well known, little is actually known about its cellular mechanisms of action. Many integral membrane proteins involved in epithelial cell transport, such as the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC), apical membrane potassium channel, Na+/Cl- cotransporter, H+/K+-ATPase, and Na+/K+-ATPase are end effectors of aldosterone signaling . Although aldosterone affects cell activity by modulating gene expression, the expression levels of these proteins involved in transport, however, are not themselves initially controlled by the steroid. This has led to the proposal that aldosterone must control expression of factors that initiate or impinge upon signal transduction. Adrenal corticosteroids, including aldosterone, increase the levels of the small, monomeric GTP-binding protein Kirsten Ras (Ki-Ras; ; ; ; ). Aldosterone preferentially increases expression in epithelia of the A splice variant of Ki-Ras via control of transcription with induction of Ki-ras mRNA being a primary response to steroid that is independent of de novo protein synthesis and begins within 30 min after steroid addition. Induction of Ki-RasA is necessary and sufficient for aldosterone action, in part, on Na+ transport . In addition, Ki-RasA activates ENaC when both proteins are overexpressed in a heterologous system  and increases the open probability of this channel in native epithelia . Consequently, Ki-RasA is a likely candidate in some instances to transduce information form the nucleus to final effectors in response to aldosterone. Induction of Ras expression by steroids may impact more than just ENaC and epithelial transport for glucocorticoids and estrogen increase Ras expression in mammary epithelia with enhanced expression possibly being associated with tumor formation and metastasis . Indeed, it has long been recognized that in cells that lack mutant Ras, elevated levels of normal Ras can lead to cell growth and/or transformation, presumably through inappropriate stimulation of Ras effector cascades . This suggests that through mass action, induction of Ras leads to activation of this protein and subsequent signaling. The general consequences and in particular those associated with cell signaling of steroid-dependent induction of Ki-ras are not well understood. It also is not clear whether increases in Ki-RasA levels in response to aldosterone result from actions mediated by nuclear receptors and whether steroid-sensitive increases in Ki-RasA result in concomitant increases in functional GTP-bound Ki-RasA. Similar to the other Ras proteins (Ha-Ras, N-Ras, and Ki-RasB), active Ki-RasA initiates many different intracellular signaling cascades, including the MAPK cascade. This cascade is known to affect several aldosterone-target proteins, such as ENaC, Na+/K+-ATPase, Na+/H+ exchanger, Na+/Cl-, and Na+/bicarbonate cotransport; and Na+/Ca2+ exchange proteins . Thus, the MAPK cascade may play a pivotal role in signaling aldosterone action secondarily to stimulation of Ki-RasA or may ultimately be involved in a negative feedback pathway initiated by this steroid. The current work tested the hypothesis that aldosterone-stimulated Ki-RasA activates the MAPK cascade in renal epithelia. In addition, we asked whether Ki-RasA and the MAPK cascade are activated in response to aldosterone via nuclear steroid receptors, and whether increases in Ki-RasA expression in response to steroid result in increases in functional Ki-RasA:GTP levels. Through the course of this work, we also investigated possible molecular mechanisms by which aldosterone induces Ki-Ras expression and compared aldosterone effects on Ki-Ras -> MAPK signaling with that of a traditional mitogen, such as serum.
Cell Culture | All experiments were performed with renal A6 epithelial cells (passages 75 --81; American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA). Cells were cultured on polycarbonate supports (Transwell-Clear Inserts, pore size 0.4 muM, growth area 4.7 cm2; , Cambridge, MA) and allowed to form polar monolayers by using standard methods described previously (,, , ). In brief, cells were maintained at 26C in 4% CO2 with complete amphibian medium (3/10 Coon's F-12, 7/10 Leibovitz's L-15) supplemented with fetal bovine serum (10%). Basic medium was devoid of serum and aldosterone. High-resistance (>2 KOmega), polarized A6 cell monolayers were used for all experiments. To observe the full action of aldosterone, confluent cells were treated with basic media for 48 to 72 h before experimentation.  Molecular Biology | Plasmid Preparation and Isolation of Ki-ras Intron 1-Exon 1. | The pMMrasDN plasmid was a kind gift form Dr. G. Firestone (University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA). In brief, this construct allows glucocorticoid-inducible expression of dominant-negative Ha-RasN17. Similar to that described previously by the Firestone laboratory for Con8 rat mammary epithelial cells , this construct in conjunction with G418 selection was used to create clonal A6 cell lines stably expressing inducible dominant-negative RasN17. The firefly luciferase reporter plasmid pGL2-TK was generated by subcloning the minimal herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promotor from pRL-TK (Promega, Madison, WI) into pGL2 Basic Vector (Promega) with HindIII and BglII. (pGL2-TK was a kind gift from Dr. A. Firulli, University of Texas, San Antonio, TX.) The control pRL-CMV plasmid contains the cytomegalovirus promotor upstream of Renilla luciferase (Promega). Mouse c-Ki-ras2 exon 1 plus its 5'-flanking region (intron 1-exon 1 region; nucleic acids -165 --153 as labeled from the adenosine of the translation start codon ATG in exon 1; see GenBank accession numbers , 52798, , and ; ; ) were amplified with a standard polymerase chain reaction by using mouse whole tail genomic DNA and the 5'-ATGCGGTACCGACTTACAGGTTACTC (incorporating KpnI site, underlined) and 5'-GCATCTCGAGCTGCCGTCCTTTACAAGCG (incorporating XhoI site, underlined) upstream and downstream primers, respectively. The 321-base pair product from this polymerase chain reaction was subcloned into pGL2-TK with KpnI and XhoI to produce pGL2-TK-rasI/E1.  Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay. | A quantitative assay with a Renilla luciferase internal control was used to measure the firefly luminescent signal in A6 cells overexpressing reporter genes. In brief, A6 cells plated at 80% confluence on 100- x 20-mm2 culture dishes were transfected with 100 ng of pRL-CMV in addition to 3 mug of the firefly luciferase reporter plasmid (either pGL2-TK or pGL2-TK-rasI/E1) by using the LipofectAMINE Plus (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) system per the manufacturer's instructions with the exception that cells were exposed to transfection reagents for similar8 h. Twenty-four hours after transfection and 24 h before performing assay, cells were replated in a 96-well culture plate. Luciferase activity then was measured with the Dual-Luciferase Reporter assay system (Promega) per the manufacturer's instructions directly following the experimental treatment period (i.e., exposure to 1.5 muM aldosterone for 4 h.) and 1-h extract preparation period required with passive lysis buffer (see Dual-Luciferase Reporter instructions). An MLX microtiter plate luminometer (Dynatech Labs, Chantilly, VA) was used to record luminescent signal. For these experiments, all firefly luciferase activity data are normalized to the internal Renilla luciferase control.   Biochemistry | Western Blot Analysis. | Whole A6 cell lysate was extracted after three washes with Tris-buffered saline by using standard procedures . Cells were scraped and then maintained for 1 --2 h at 4C in gentle lysis buffer (GLB) (76 mM NaCl, 50 mM HCl-Tris, 2 mM EGTA plus 1% Nonidet P-40, and 10% glycerol, pH 7.4) and protease inhibitors (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, leupeptin, tosylphenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone, and 1-chloro-3-tosylamido-7-amino-2-heptanone). For Western blot analysis of phosphorylated proteins, GLB was supplemented with 0.1 mM NaPPi, 0.5 mM NaF, 0.1 mM Na2MoO4, 0.1 mM ZnCl2, and 0.04 mM Na3VO4 prepared fresh from 1000x stocks. After clearing cellular debris, standardizing total protein concentration, and addition of Laemmli sample buffer (0.005% bromphenol blue, 10% glycerol, 3% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 77 mM HCl-Tris, and 20 mM dithiothreitol), lysates were heated to 85C for 10 min. Proteins were then separated by standard SDS-PAGE and subsequently electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose (0.2 muM). Western blot analysis was performed using standard techniques and appropriate antibodies (,,, ; see below; primary and secondary antibodies were used at 1/1000 and 1/20000, respectively). Tween 20 (0.1%) and 5% dried milk (Carnation) were used as blocking reagents. Band intensity was quantified with densitometric scanning using Sigmagel (Jandel Scientific, Costa Madre, CA). When possible, the flood configuration with the highest practical threshold was used to measure band density. Western blots were often stripped of primary and secondary antibody to subsequently reprobe with a control antibody. All Western blots were stripped in 100 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.7, and 2% SDS for 30 min at 55C with constant agitation. After removal of antibodies, nonspecific interactions were reblocked by incubating in TBS-Tween, 5% milk for 2 h before reprobing with primary antibody.  Ras:GTP Assay. | Raf-1 RBD agarose was from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake placid, NY). This immobilized fusion protein corresponds to the human Raf-1 Ras binding domain (RBD) (residues 1 --149). Raf-1 RBD binds Ras complexed with GTP. Pull-down experiments were performed in 400 mul (0.4 mg of total protein) of whole A6 cell lysate isolated with GLB. Lysates were incubated with 30 mul of Raf-1 RBD agarose overnight (at 4C and with constant agitation); pellets were washed five times with 2 volumes of fresh GLB each time for a total wash time of 2 h; and after resuspending in sample buffer and heating, Raf-1 RBD agarose precipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and Ki-RasA:GTP identified by immunoblotting.  MAPK Assay. | MAPK activity in lysates prepared from cells treated with and without aldosterone was assayed by quantifying phosphorylation of exogenous myelin basic protein (MBP). MAPK activity was measured in whole A6 cell lysate (2 mg/ml) extracted in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors as described above. MAPK activity was measured for 30 min at 30C in the following assay dilution buffer (ADB; Upstate Biotechnology): 20 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 25 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 5 mM EGTA, 0.4 mM MnCl2, 0.4 mM CaCl2, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and 1 mM dithiothreitol. The final reaction contained 10 mul of substrate cocktail (from stock of 2 mg/ml dephosphorylated MBP in ADB), 10 mul of inhibitor cocktail (from stock of 20 muM PKC inhibitor peptide, 2 muM PKA inhibitor peptide, and 20 muM compound R24571 in ABD), 10 mul of A6 cell extract, and 10 mul of Mg2+/ATP cocktail (from a stock of 75 mM MgCl2, 500 muM ATP in ADB). Reactions were initiated with Mg2+/ATP and terminated with Laemmli sample buffer (described above). Phosphorylation of MBP (in 10 mul of final reaction) was assessed after SDS-PAGE by immunoblot analysis with a specific anti-phospho-MBP antibody.   Electrophysiology | Transepithelial Na+ current was calculated as described previously (,,, ), from Ohm's law as the ratio of transepithelial voltage to transepithelial resistance under open circuit conditions by using a Millicel Electrical Resistance System with dual Ag/AgCl pellet electrodes (Millipore, Bedford, MA) to measure voltage and resistance.  Materials | All reagents unless indicated otherwise were from either BIOMOL Research Laboratories (Plymouth Meeting, PA), Calbiochem (San Diego, CA), Invitrogen, or Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Phosphorothiate oligonucleotides were synthesized by the Emory University Microchemical Facility and stored frozen as 10 mM (in water) stocks. Aldosterone, dexamethasone, and mifepristone (RU486) were stored frozen as 1.5, 0.1, and 1.0 mM (in dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO]) stocks. Cycloheximide (in MeOH) and emetine (in H2O) were stored frozen as 1.0-mg/ml stocks. Actinomycin D was stored at 4C as a 1.0-ng/ml (in MeOH) stock. PD-98059 and U-0126 were prepared fresh (in DMSO) before each experiment at stock concentrations of 10 and 5 mM, respectively. All reagents used for Western blot analysis unless noted otherwise were from  (Hercules, CA) and  (Rockford, IL). For each lysate, protein concentration was determined with the bicinchoninic acid protein assay. Kodak BioMax Light-1 film and Chemiluminescence Reagents Plus (PerkinElmer Life Sciences, Boston, MA) were used to develop Western blots.  Antibodies | The rabbit polyclonal anti-MAPK 1/2 (Erk 1/2-CT) antibody was from Upstate Biotechnology. The mouse monoclonal anti-c-Raf-1 antibody was from Transduction Laboratories (Lexington, KY). The rabbit polyclonal anti-MKP-1 (V-15; MAPK phosphatase), anti-Fra-2 (L-15), and anti-K-Ras2A antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). This latter antibody recognizes only the Ki-RasA isoform of Ras proteins. The mouse monoclonal anti-v-Ha-Ras antibody was from Oncogene Science (Cambridge, MA). This antibody recognizes all isoforms of Ras protein, including Ha-Ras, Ki-RasA, Ki-RasB, and N-Ras. All phospho-specific antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA). All secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies were from Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories (Gaithersburg, MD).  Statistics | All values reported as mean +- SEM. Statistical significance (p <= 0.05) was determined using the t test for differences in mean values, and a one-way analysis of variance in conjunction with the Student-Newman-Keuls test for multiple comparisons.
Aldosterone Increases Absolute and Active GTP-bound Levels of Ki-RasA | Aldosterone via transcriptional control increases Ki-rasA mRNA  and Ki-RasA protein  levels in renal A6 epithelial cells. Experiments in Figure  tested the hypothesis that aldosterone in these cells also increases the amount of active Ki-RasA. Activated Ras bound by GTP interacts with the RBD of Raf . The representative Western blots of Figure A show that the addition of aldosterone for 3 h to A6 cell monolayers markedly increased Ki-RasA (middle) and Ki-RasA:GTP levels (bottom), but had little effect on total Ras levels (top). It is known that Ki-RasA is expressed at levels much lower than other Ras isoforms . Thus, the lack of a marked change in total Ras was not unexpected. For these experiments, Ras:GTP was isolated using GST-RBD agarose from whole cell lysates from cells treated with vehicle (CON; 0.1% DMSO) and aldosterone (ALDO; 1.5 muM) for 3 h. After isolating total cellular Ras:GTP, Ki-RasA:GTP was identified with anti-K-Ras2A antibody, which reacts only with Ki-RasA . Total Ras protein was identified with the anti-v-Ha-Ras antibody, which is reactive with Ki-RasA and B, Ha-Ras, and N-Ras isoforms. The summary graph in Figure B shows the relative change in response to aldosterone for the levels of Ras (1.6 +- 0.2, n = 11), Ki-RasA (3.1 +- 0.4, n = 8), and Ki-RasA:GTP (2.8 +- 0.4, n = 8). Aldosterone, compared with vehicle, significantly increased Ki-RasA, and Ki-RasA:GTP levels (p < 0.005 for both). Although aldosterone also significantly increased total Ras levels (p = 0.03) at a similar time point, as reported previously by our laboratory , the relative increase in total Ras was significantly less than that of Ki-RasA (p = 0.002) and Ki-RasA:GTP (p = 0.009). Importantly, the relative changes in Ki-RasA vs. Ki-RasA:GTP levels were not different (p = 0.60).  Figure 1 | Aldosterone increases active, GTP-bound Ki-RasA levels. Aldosterone increases active, GTP-bound Ki-RasA levels. (A) Western blot analysis of total Ras (top), Ki-RasA (middle), and Ki-RasA: GTP (bottom) in A6 cells treated without (CON) and with ALDO for 3 h. The representative blot probed for Ki-RasA: GTP (bottom) contained the precipitant from whole cell lysate by using Raf-RBD agarose, which specifically binds GTP-bound Ras. Blot probed with anti-Ki-RasA antibody to detect Ki-RasA: GTP. (B) Summary graph showing the relative changes in the levels of Ras, Ki-RasA and Ki-RasA: GTP in response to aldosterone treatment for 3 --4 h. * indicates significantly greater relative increases for Ki-RasA and Ki-RasA: GTP vs. Ras.  Aldosterone Increases MAPK Activity | One potential signaling pathway activated by Ki-RasA is the MAPK cascade. Aldosterone stimulation of MAPK activity in A6 cells was measured in an in vitro reaction by following phosphorylation of exogenous MBP. The typical Western blots in Figure , A and B, showing the time course of aldosterone stimulation of MAPK activity, were probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody. For these blots, each lane contained 3.5 mug of MBP processed for 30 min at 30C by A6 whole cell lysate (equal concentrations of total cellular protein; supplemented with MBP, Mg2+/ATP, and protein kinase C, protein kinase A, and calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, and phosphatase inhibitors) from cells treated with aldosterone for the indicated times (in minutes for Figure A and hours for Figure B). The bar graph in Figure C summarizes such experiments. Aldosterone significantly increased MAPK activity 6.6 +- 1.2-, 10.5 +- 1.8-, 11.5 +- 2.5-, 12.0 +- 4.2-, 7.1 +- 2.8-, and 3.1 +- 0.9-fold at the 15 and 30 min, and 1-, 2-, 4-, and 6-h time points (n >= 4). At 1 and 5 min, MAPK activity was 1.4 +- 0.2- and 3.3 +- 0.8-fold higher (n = 2), respectively. MAPK activity in response to aldosterone increased steadily peaking between 0.5 and 2 h and waning after 4 h.  Figure 2 | Aldosterone increases MAPK activity. Aldosterone increases MAPK activity. (A and B) MAPK activity was assessed by measuring phosphorylation of exogenous MBP. Exogenous MBP was added to equal amounts of A6 cell lysate from cells treated with aldosterone for the indicated times (in minutes, A; and hours, B). These typical Western blots were probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody. (C) Summary graph of such experiments. *p <= 0.05 vs. time 0.  Time Course of Aldosterone Activation of MAPK Is Distinct from That of Classic Mitogens | Results in Figure  suggested that compared with classic mitogens, aldosterone activates MAPK signaling in a distinct manner, taking longer (up to 1 --2 h) to reach maximal activity and having a persistent signal (up to 4 h). Such a time course would be consistent with aldosterone-dependent activation of the MAPK requiring a latent period necessary for transcription and translation of Ki-RasA. Experiments in Figure  were performed to determine whether the time course of aldosterone-dependent activation (phosphorylation) of MAPK in A6 cells was indeed distinct from activation by the traditional mitogen, serum. For these experiments, determining phospho-MAPK levels assessed activation of MAPK. The Western blots in Figure A were probed with anti-phospho-MAPK antibody. These blots contained equal amounts of whole cell lysate from A6 cells treated with serum (10% FBS; top) and aldosterone (1.5 muM) in the absence (middle) and presence (bottom) of the corticosteroid receptor antagonist RU486 (mifepristone; 0.1 muM) for the indicated times in minutes. Western blots in Figure A were stripped and subsequently reprobed with anti-MAPK antibody (Figure B, same order). Serum and aldosterone clearly have temporally distinct effects on activation of MAPK with the effects of serum peaking in the first 15 --30 min and waning thereafter, whereas those of aldosterone rising from 30 min onwards. The actions of aldosterone on MAPK were completely reversed by RU486, suggesting that this steroid stimulates MAPK signaling via its genomic actions. As shown in Figure C, similar results were observed when MAPK activity was assessed in an in vitro reaction by following phosphorylation of exogenous MBP. This blot was probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody and each lane contained 3.5 mug of MBP processed by A6 whole cell lysate (equal concentrations of total cellular protein) from cells treated with serum (10% FBS) for the indicated times (in minutes).  Figure 3 | Aldosterone compared with serum activates MAPK signaling in a delayed manner. Aldosterone compared with serum activates MAPK signaling in a delayed manner. (A) Western blots of A6 whole cell lysate from cells treated with serum (10% FBS, top), aldosterone (1.5 muM), and aldosterone plus RU486 (0.1 muM) for the indicated time in minutes. All blots probed with anti-phospho-MAPK antibody. (B) Blots in A stripped and reprobed with anti-MAPK antibody. (C) Western blot of MBP processed by A6 whole cell lysates from cells treated with serum (10% FBS) for the indicated times in minutes. Blot probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody.  Persistent Stimulation of MAPK by Aldosterone Is Mediated by Nuclear Steroid Receptors | Experiments in Figure  were performed to further characterize the relation of aldosterone-stimulated MAPK at the 2-h time point with the genomic effects of this steroid. Both the effects of aldosterone on activation (phosphorylation) of MAPK in the presence of inhibitors of transcription and translation (Figure A), and the effects of aldosterone on MAPK activity in the presence of inhibitors of nuclear corticosteroid receptors, translation and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) (Figures , B and C) were determined.  Figure 4 | Aldosterone stimulates MAPK signaling in A6 cells through induction of gene expression mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor. Aldosterone stimulates MAPK signaling in A6 cells through induction of gene expression mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor. (A) Western blot containing A6 whole cell lysate from cells treated with aldosterone (1.5 muM), CON, actinomycin D (1 mug/ml), cycloheximide (1 mug/ml), and aldosterone plus actinomycin D or cycloheximide for 2 h. This blot was probed with anti-phospho-MAPK antibody (top), stripped, and then reprobed with anti-MAPK antibody (bottom). (B) This typical Western blot shows phosphorylation of exogenous MBP added to A6 cell lysate from cells treated with aldosterone, and steroid plus RU486 (0.1 muM), emetine (1 mug/ml), cycloheximide (1 mug/ml), PD-98059 (10 muM), and U-0126 (0.5 muM) for 2 h. This typical blot was probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody. (C) Below is a summary graph of five such experiments showing relative MAPK activity. The typical Western blot of Figure A was probed with anti-phospho-MAPK antibody (top), stripped, and then reprobed with anti-MAPK antibody (bottom). This blot contained equal amounts of A6 whole cell lysate from cells treated with ALDO (1.5 muM), CON (vehicle), actinomycin D (1.0 mug/ml), cycloheximide (1.0 mug/ml), and aldosterone plus actinomycin D or cycloheximide for 2 h. Although actinomycin D and cycloheximide had no overt effect on activation of MAPK when added alone, when added simultaneously with aldosterone, they abolished steroid-dependent activation of MAPK, demonstrating that transcription and translation are necessary for aldosterone to activate MAPK signaling. The typical Western blot of Figure B shows phosphorylation of exogenous MBP added to A6 cell lysate from cells treated with aldosterone for 2 h in the absence and presence of the corticosteroid receptor inhibitor RU486 (mifepristone; 0.1 muM) and inhibitors of translation (cycloheximide and emetine 1.0 mug/ml) and MEK (PD-98059 and U-0126 at 10 and 0.5 muM, respectively). For these experiments, inhibitors were added simultaneously with aldosterone. This Western blot was probed with anti-phospho-MBP antibody and contained equal amounts of exogenous MBP processed by the respective A6 cell lysate (equal concentration of total protein). As shown in the summary graph of Figure C, RU486 significantly decreased relative aldosterone-stimulated MAPK activity to 0.2 +- 0.04 (n = 5). Similarly, relative aldosterone-induced MAPK activity was decreased to 0.2 +- 0.1 (n = 5) and 0.3 +- 0.2 (n = 4) by emetine and cycloheximide, respectively. Moreover, PD-98059 and U-0126 decreased relative aldosterone-sensitive MAPK activity to 0.2 +- 0.1 (n = 5) and 0.2 +- 0.1 (n = 5), respectively. At this time point (2 h), the negative control for U-0126, U-0124, did not affect MAPK signaling and Ki-RasA levels were 53, 61, 62, 96, and 108% of (aldosterone-treated) control in the RU486, emetine, cycloheximide, PD-98059, and U-0126 groups, respectively (our unpublished data).  Ki-ras Gene Contains a Functional Steroid Response Element That Confers Aldosterone Responsiveness to a Heterologous Promotor | The results described above and those reported previously by us  and others  suggest that aldosterone via steroid receptors directly affects Ki-ras expression and that this then impinges upon MAPK signaling. However, the molecular basis of this regulation has not been studied. Glucocorticoids and aldosterone ultimately target similar cis-acting elements through either the glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid receptor (reviewed in ). The human and rat Ki-ras genes contain partially characterized cis-acting elements within the intron 1-exon 1 region that are trans-activated by the glucocorticoid --steroid receptor complex . Conserved elements have similarly been identified in the Ha-ras gene as responsive to glucocorticoids . Using this paradigm, we prepared a reporter plasmid containing the mouse c-Ki-ras2 intron 1-exon 1 region (-165 --153 from adenosine of the translation start codon within exon 1; pGL2-TK-rasI/E1), which contains several putative steroid response elements, and as shown in Figure , tested whether this region conferred functional aldosterone responsiveness to a heterologous promotor in A6 epithelial cells. Luciferase activity in cells transfected with pGL2-TK-rasI/E1 in the presence of vehicle and aldosterone (1.5 muM, 4 h) was 1.5 +- 0.3 and 4.6 +- 0.9 (n = 6), respectively. Thus, aldosterone significantly increased (threefold) luciferase expression driven by the pGL2-TK-rasI/E1 chimeric reporter plasmid. Simultaneous addition of RU486 (0.1 muM, n = 3) with aldosterone markedly decreased luciferase activity 50% to 2.3 +- 0.9 in cells transfected with pGL2-TK-rasI/E1. Dexamethasone (DEX) (0.1 muM, 4 h) had a similar effect as aldosterone increasing luciferase activity vs. vehicle 2.5-fold to 3.7 +- 0.9 (n = 3; p = 0.06; our unpublished data). Luciferase activity in the presence of either steroid in cells transfected with pGL2-TK-rasI/E1 was significantly greater (p > 0.05) than that in cells transfected with pGL2-TK and treated similarly (ALDO = 1.0 +- 0.2, n = 6; DEX = 0.7 +- 0.2, n = 3). In contrast, luciferase activity in the presence of vehicle was not different (p = 0.3) between pGL2-TK (0.8 +- 0.3, n = 4) and pGL2-TK-rasI/E1 --transfected cells. Reporter gene activity in cells transfected with the minimal promoter thymidine kinase luciferase plasmid (pGL2-TK) or pRL-CMV control plasmid alone was unaffected by steroid treatment (our unpublished data).  Figure 5 | rasI/E1 region of c-Ki-ras2 is sufficient for steroid responsiveness. rasI/E1 region of c-Ki-ras2 is sufficient for steroid responsiveness. A6 cells were transiently transfected with pRL-CMV plus either control reporter plasmid (pGL2-TK), which contained firefly luciferase expression driven by the minimal thymidine kinase promotor, or reporter plasmid that contained the rasI/E1 region (pGL2-TK-rasI/E1). Luciferase activity in cells treated with vehicle, aldosterone, and aldosterone plus RU486 was quantified 48 h after transfection. *p < 0.05 vs. pGL2-TK treated with aldosterone and vehicle, and pGL2-TK-rasI/E1 treated with vehicle.  Activation of MAPK Cascade by Aldosterone Is Dependent on Ki-RasA Expression | Although all of the above-reported results support the idea that aldosterone activates Ki-RasA via transcriptional control mediated by nuclear steroid receptors, it is unclear whether the aldosterone-sensitive MAPK signaling reported in Figures  -- is in fact dependent on induction of Ki-RasA. Experiments in Figure  directly test the link between aldosterone-dependent induction of Ki-RasA and steroid-dependent activation of MAPK signaling. The typical Western blots in Figure A are of lysates extracted from cells treated with aldosterone (1.5 mum; control) and aldosterone after pretreatment (24 h, 10 muM) with sense and antisense Ki-rasA oligonucleotides. Use of these oligonucleotides in A6 cells has been described previously . The top blot in Figure A was probed with anti-K-Ras2A antibody and demonstrates the efficacy of the antisense oligonucleotide to decrease Ki-RasA levels. Ki-RasA levels in the antisense group were similar40% of th