Aurora B Kinase Exists in a Complex with Survivin and INCENP and Its Kinase Activity Is Stimulated by Survivin Binding and Phosphorylation
Aurora B regulates chromosome segregation and cytokinesis and is the first protein to be implicated as a regulator of bipolar attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochores. Evidence from several systems suggests that Aurora B is physically associated with inner centromere protein (INCENP) in mitosis and has genetic interactions with Survivin. It is unclear whether the Aurora B and INCENP interaction is cell cycle regulated and if Survivin physically interacts in this complex. In this study, we cloned the Xenopus Survivin gene, examined its association with Aurora B and INCENP, and determined the effect of its binding on Aurora B kinase activity. We demonstrate that in the Xenopus early embryo, all of the detectable Survivin is in a complex with both Aurora B and INCENP throughout the cell cycle. Survivin and Aurora B bind different domains on INCENP. Aurora B activity is stimulated >10-fold in mitotic extracts; this activation is phosphatase sensitive, and the binding of Survivin is required for full Aurora B activity. We also find the hydrodynamic properties of the Aurora B/Survivin/INCENP complex are cell cycle regulated. Our data indicate that Aurora B kinase activity is regulated by both Survivin binding and cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation.

Defects in chromosome segregation can generate aneuploidy, a condition that is found in almost all human tumors and is a major cause of miscarriages and birth defects. The complex process of chromosome segregation must be highly regulated to ensure fidelity and to prevent aneuploidy. Many of the mitotic events are regulated by the kinetochore, a proteinaceous structure assembled on centromeric DNA that coordinates at least three mitotic functions (for review, see ). First, the kinetochore is the chromosomal site of microtubule attachment and movement. Second, the kinetochore is the major site of cohesion between sister chromatids. This cohesion must be maintained through metaphase and its dissolution is the critical event that triggers anaphase. Third, kinetochores that are not attached to microtubules send signals to the cell cycle machinery to prevent this dissolution of cohesion, a process referred to as the spindle assembly checkpoint. This checkpoint ensures that all chromatids are attached before the onset of anaphase. How the kinetochore coordinates these various functions is a critical unanswered question. A group of mitotic regulators that includes Aurora B kinase and the inner centromere protein (INCENP) has been given the name chromosomal passengers . The passenger proteins are defined by a dynamic pattern of localization . In G2 and prophase, the passenger proteins have a general chromosomal localization. During prometaphase and metaphase, they move from chromosomes to inner centromeres. When chromosomes move to the poles during anaphase, passenger proteins remain at the spindle midzone where they eventually become part of the midbody . The phenotypes of the chromosomal passenger proteins suggest that they are critical regulators of various steps of chromosome segregation. RNAi experiments in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos and Drosophila cell lines suggest that cells lacking Aurora or INCENP have similar mitotic defects. First, the passenger proteins are necessary for the proper segregation of DNA. During anaphase, the chromosome masses do not properly segregate, leaving a chromatin bridge between the major DNA masses . Second, cytokinetic furrows begin but fail to fully progress in cells lacking either Aurora or INCENP . This suggests a second role for Aurora and INCENP in cytokinesis. Third, studies from budding yeast suggest that Aurora is involved in bipolar attachment of microtubules to kinetochores. The Aurora homolog Ipl1 is required during chromosome segregation, as cells without Ipl1 activity have massive nondisjunction and often segregate both sisters' chromosomes to the same pole. Ipl1 is required for kinetochores to release spindle microtubules both in vitro and in vivo . Current models propose that Ipl1 ensures that each chromosome obtains bipolar attachment of microtubules by coordinating the release of kinetochores attached from a single pole, thereby allowing kinetochores to rebind microtubules until proper bipolar attachment is achieved. This model predicts that Aurora B kinase activity is inactivated by bipolar attachment, but we presently know little about how Aurora B activity is regulated. Some overlapping phenotypes are seen in embryos lacking the Survivin/Bir1 protein (Survivin). Survivin is required in both budding and fission yeast for proper chromosome segregation . RNAi experiments in C. elegans have shown that embryos lacking Survivin display abnormal chromosome condensation, disrupted mitotic spindles, and were ultimately unable to complete cytokinesis, resulting in multinucleate embryos . Survivin-null mouse embryos displayed polyploidy, abnormal mitotic spindles, and failed cytokinesis . The similarities in phenotypes suggest that Aurora, INCENP, and Survivin could function together. INCENP and Survivin have both been shown to genetically interact with Aurora B kinases. Chan and colleagues  first identified mutants of the budding yeast INCENP homolog (Sli15) that are synthetically lethal with temperature-sensitive mutants of the Aurora homolog Ipl1. Moreover, they showed that sli15 cells had phenotypes identical to those of ipl1 yeast. As discussed earlier, similar phenotypes are also seen in fission yeast, C. elegans, and Drosophila cells lacking either Survivin, Aurora, or INCENP (for review, see ). Aurora B kinase is not localized to the kinetochores in fission yeast or C. elegans embryos lacking Survivin . Similarly, in C. elegans embryos and Drosophila cells, loss of INCENP by RNAi also leads to the mislocalization of Aurora B kinase . Biochemical evidence has shown that Aurora B physically interacts with INCENP. Sli15p and Ipl1p form a complex in budding yeast , and a complex containing both INCENP and Aurora B kinase has been purified from Xenopus laevis mitotic extracts . There is no conclusive biochemical evidence that Aurora kinases or INCENP are physically associated with Survivin, although a recent report has shown that human Survivin can interact with either Xenopus INCENP (xINCENP) or Aurora B kinase in both two-hybrid and in vitro pull-down assays . Therefore, some essential questions are whether Aurora, INCENP, and Survivin physically interact in vivo, whether complex formation is cell cycle regulated, and how each subunit interacts in the complex. Moreover, it is critical to identify the molecular function(s) of each protein in the complex. To understand the interrelationship of the passenger proteins and to further understand how Aurora B kinase is regulated, we have cloned the Xenopus Survivin (xSurvivin) gene. xSurvivin is shown to exist in a complex with both xINCENP and Xenopus Aurora B kinase (xAurora B) in S-phase (interphase) and mitotic Xenopus extracts. Moreover, immunodepletion of xAurora B kinase can completely remove xSurvivin and xINCENP from Xenopus extracts, suggesting that all of the xSurvivin and xINCENP is physically associated with xAurora B kinase. We show that the N terminus of xAurora B kinase interacts with the conserved C terminus of xINCENP, whereas xSurvivin interacts with the N terminus of xINCENP. Furthermore, xAurora B activity is stimulated at least 10-fold in mitotic extracts, and this stimulation is shown to be phosphatase sensitive. Adding recombinant xSurvivin protein to xAurora B immunoprecipitations (IPs) stimulates the mitotic kinase activity an additional 10-fold, suggesting that xSurvivin binding to Aurora B plays a regulatory role similar to cyclin binding of CDKs. Therefore, our data suggests that xAurora B kinase is regulated by both complex formation and phosphorylation.
Materials | All chemicals were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO) unless stated otherwise. All DNA restriction enzymes were purchased from  (Beverly, MA). Adult wild-type Xenopus laevis were purchased from Nasco (Fort Atkinson, WI).  Xenopus Interphase and Mitotic Extracts | Interphase extracts were prepared as previously described . Interphase extracts were driven into mitosis by the addition of 66 nM nondegradable glutathione S-transferase (GST)-cyclin B for 20 min at room temperature.  Fusion Constructs and Protein Purification | Based on the sequence of xAurora B , primers 1292098 (5'-GCGGATCCATGGAGTACAAAGAGAATCTCAACCC) and 1292100 (5'-CGGCGGCCGCTTTTGATTGGGTGGACTGGTAGAC) were used to amplify xAurora B from a Xenopus stage 11.5 --14 cDNA library. This polymerase chain reaction (PCR) fragment was subcloned into the NcoI-NotI sites of pET 28 (Novagen, Madison, WI) to create pET 28-xAurB that expresses C-terminal 6His-tagged xAurora B. xAurora B was also amplified using primers 1292098 and 1292099 (5'-GGCTCGAGAAGCTTCATTTTGATTGGGTGGACTGG). The resulting PCR fragment was subcloned into the NcoI-HindIII sites of pET 41 (Novagen) to yield pET 41-xAurB that expresses N-terminal GST-tagged xAurora B. The gene was sequenced by the University of Virginia Biomolecular Research Facility (Charlottesville, VA), and its sequence was deposited into GenBank (accession no. ). Our isolated gene has only two amino acid changes from the published gene. As both of these changes are also found on each of the GenBank deposited expressed sequence tags (ESTs), they are unlikely to be mutations caused by the PCR isolation. Primers 1292099 and 1984819 (5'-GCCCATGGAATTCCCATTGGGGAAGGGG) were used to amplify the xAurora B kinase domain. The resulting PCR fragment was subcloned into the NcoI-HindIII sites of pFastBac and was subsequently subcloned into the NcoI-HindIII sites of pET 41B to create pET 41-xAurB (99 --384) that expresses N-terminal GST-tagged xAurora B kinase domain. To clone xSurvivin, a BLAST search of the EST database was conducted to find a Xenopus EST with high homology to human and mouse Survivin. xSurvivin was then amplified from a Xenopus stage 11.5 --14 cDNA library using primers 1242204 (5'-CTGGCCGGCCCCATATGTATTCTGCCAAGAACAGG) and 1242206 (5'-CGCTCGGGTGGTCGAGATCTATGGAGCACTG). This PCR fragment was subcloned into the NdeI-XhoI sites of pET 41 (Novagen) to yield pET 41-xSurvivin that expresses C-terminal 6His-tagged xSurvivin. xSurvivin was also amplified using primers 1242204 and 1242205 (5'-CCGGCGCGCCTCAGTGGTCAAGATCTATGGAGCAA). The resulting PCR fragment was subcloned into the NdeI-Asc1 sites of pGEXcsFA (a generous gift from Ethan Lee, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA) to yield pGEXcsFA-xSurvivin that expresses N-terminal GST-tagged xSurvivin. xSurvivin sequence was deposited into GenBank (accession no. ). The modeled crystal structure coordinates were generated by SWISS-MODEL . The figures were constructed with RasMol. A XhoI site was engineered into the N terminus of our pCS2+xINCENP  clone using PCR with the oligonucleotides (5'-CCGCGCTCGAGAACGATGCAGA-GTGCCGTGCCC) and (5'CCGGCGGGGCCCTCTAGAGGATCCTCGTATTTGAGGCCATAACC). The resulting product was cloned into the XhoI-Xba sites of Super GFP-Wee1  to form a GFP-xINCENP fusion protein. A HindIII to ApaI fragment containing GFP and the N terminus of xINCENP was cloned back into pCS2+xINCENP, and the remaining PCR product was confirmed by sequence to generate pCS2+GFP-xINCENP. The XhoI to XbaI fragment was cloned into pET 28B in the XhoI and Bpu1103 sites, and finally a NheI to PstI fragment of pET 28B-xINCENP was removed to generate pET 28-xINCENP (677 --874) that expresses N-terminal 6His-tagged xINCENP (677 --874). All proteins were expressed in the Escherichia coli strain BL21 (DE3 pLysS; Novagen). 6His-tagged proteins were purified on Ni2+-NTA agarose (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) as instructed by the manufacturer. GST-tagged proteins were purified on glutathione agarose .  Antibody Production, IP, and Immunoblotting | All polyclonal antibodies were made by Covance Research Products (Denver, PA). To make anti-xAurora B antibodies, rabbits 315 and 316 were immunized with purified C-terminal 6His-tagged xAurora B. To make anti-xSurvivin antibodies, rabbits 342 and 343 were immunized with purified C-terminal 6His-tagged xSurvivin. Anti-xINCENP antibodies were produced in rabbits 354 and 355 immunized with N-terminal 6His-tagged xINCENP (677 --874) encoding the C-terminal fragment of xINCENP. All antibodies were affinity purified on the corresponding immunizing protein coupled to a cyanogen bromide-activated Sepharose column (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) as described . After affinity purification, the antibodies were dialyzed into XB no Ca2+ (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.7, 1 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, and 50 mM sucrose), aliquoted, and stored at -80C. Immunoblotting was performed on Immobilon-P (Millipore, Bedford, MA) and was detected using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated-anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA) by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham Biosciences). To immunoprecipitate complexes from Xenopus extracts, 20 mug of preimmune sera (Pre-I) 1 mug of affinity-purified anti-xAurora B, anti-xSurvivin, or anti-xINCENP antibodies were bound to 50 mul of protein A Sepharose beads (Amersham Biosciences) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were washed five times in XB no Ca2+, and one-half was added to 40 mul of interphase extract and the other one-half was added to 40 mul of interphase extract driven into mitosis by the addition of GST-cyclin B. Beads were incubated with extracts for 1 h at 4C and were subsequently washed five times in XB no Ca2+ containing an additional 200 mM NaCl and 0.1% Brij 35. The concentration of xAurora B, xSurvivin, and xINCENP in Xenopus extracts was determined by quantitatively comparing interphase extracts with recombinant GST-xSurvivin, GST-xAurora B, and 6His-xINCENP (677 --874) levels on immunoblots. For quantification, the amount of INCENP in Xenopus extracts was compared with titrations of 6His-xINCENP (677 --874) transferred to Immobilon by slot blots rather than by SDS-PAGE followed by transfer. To quantify immunoblots, films were scanned with densitometer hardware (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA) into ImageQuant 5.0. Data were then exported into Microsoft Excel and graphed for analysis.  Cell Culture and Immunofluorescence | XTC cells were obtained from Dr. Douglas DeSimone (University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA) and were grown at room temperature in 70% L-15 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. XTC cells were grown on coverslips and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PHEM buffer (60 mM PIPES, pH 6.9, 25 mM HEPES, 10 mM EGTA, and 4 mM MgCl2) containing 0.75% Triton-X-100. Coverslips were subsequently washed in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBS-T). Fixed cells were blocked in 20% heat-inactivated goat serum (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and were then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with monoclonal anti-tubulin antibody at 1:500 and either affinity-purified anti-xAurora B (1 mug/ml) or anti-xINCENP (1 mug/ml) antibodies diluted in PBS-T. Coverslips were then washed three times with PBS-T and then incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G at 1:1000 and Cy3-conjugated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) at 1:1000, washed three times in PBS-T, stained with 1 mug/ml Hoechst No. 33342 for 30 s, and mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Images were collected at x100 using an E600 Eclipse microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a CH350 cooled charged-coupled device camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ). Images were acquired and analyzed using version 4.5 Meta View software.  Gel Filtration Chromatography and Sucrose Gradient Sedimentation | For gel filtration analysis, 100 mul of interphase extract was diluted 1:5 in XB no Ca2+. In parallel, microcystin (5 muM) was added to 100 mul of mitotic extracts and the mitotic extract was diluted 1:5 in 80 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 20 mM EGTA, 10 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM NaF. Clarified interphase and mitotic extracts were prepared by ultracentrifugation at 40,000 rpm for 1 h at 4C in an S120-AT2 rotor (Sorvall, Kendro Laboratory Products, Newtown, CT). The extracts were then concentrated in a Microcon (Millipore) and were subsequently loaded onto a Superose 6 column (Amersham Biosciences). Thirty-two fractions of 500 mul were collected and trichloroacetic acid precipitated as described . Alternating fractions were loaded onto 8 and 15% SDS-PAGE gels and immunoblotted for xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin. Similarly clarified extracts were loaded onto 5 --30% sucrose gradients and centrifuged at 30,000 rpm for 30 h at 4C in a SW-40 rotor. Sixteen fractions were collected, trichloroacetic acid precipitated, and equal volumes of sample were separated on 8 and 15% gels for immunoblot analysis. Molecular weight markers were run in a parallel gradient.  Mapping of Passenger Protein-Binding Domains | To identify binding domains among the passenger proteins, the indicated truncated or wild-type proteins were translated in vitro in the presence of [35S]methionine using the TNT Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate System (Promega, Madison, WI). These proteins were allowed to integrate into endogenous complexes by mixing 10 mul of the in vitro translation reaction with 20 mul of Xenopus extract for 30 min, and then the endogenous protein was immunoprecipitated. Labeled proteins were detected by phosphorimager analysis of dried SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were scored as interacting if the amount of labeled protein immunoprecipitated was fivefold higher than the amount precipitated by Pre-I; typically >80% of a labeled protein was precipitated in these experiments. The deletion set of xINCENP was a generous gift of Susannah Rankin and Marc Kirschner (Harvard Medical School).  Kinase Assays | For each kinase assay, xAurora B kinase was immunoprecipitated from 50 mul of Xenopus extract on similar10 mul of protein A Sepharose beads (Amersham Biosciences). The beads were washed four times in XB no Ca2+ containing an additional 300 mM NaCl and 0.1% Triton-X-100, followed by an additional wash in kinase buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 40 mug/ml bovine serum albumin). Beads were aliquoted into tubes containing the indicated recombinant protein in 25 mul of kinase buffer supplemented with 100 muM gamma[32P]ATP (2 muCi; Perkin Elmer-Cetus Life Sciences, Norwalk, CT) and 1 mug of myelin basic protein (MBP; Invitrogen). Reactions were incubated in a Mixer 5432 (Eppendorf; Brinkmann Instruments, Westbury, NY) at room temperature, and after 10 min, the reactions were stopped by the addition of sample buffer. One-half of the reaction was loaded onto a gel that was Coomassie stained, dried on 3MM paper (Whatman, Clifton, NJ), and analyzed for 32PO4 incorporation with phosphorimager hardware (Molecular Dynamics) and ImageQuant 5.0 software. The other one-half of the reaction was loaded onto a second gel and the amount of xAurora kinase was quantified by immunoblot. In kinase reactions involving lambda phosphatase, beads were washed into lambda phosphatase buffer, treated at room temperature for 30 min with either 200 U of lambda phosphatase or buffer, subsequently washed four times in kinase buffer, and assayed for kinase activity.
Cloning the Xenopus Survivin Gene | To biochemically dissect the regulation of passenger proteins, we used embryonic extracts of the frog Xenopus laevis. These extracts are excellent tools for studying mitotic regulators for three reasons. First, cell cycle regulators are stockpiled in Xenopus eggs and are more abundant than in somatic cells. Second, the cell cycle state of these extracts can be easily controlled and, third, the extracts can recapitulate mitotic events in vitro. We have previously cloned the xINCENP gene and demonstrated that the protein is specifically phosphorylated in mitosis . A gene encoding the xAurora B protein was recently identified , and a highly related gene was isolated from a Xenopus stage 11.5 --14 plasmid cDNA library by PCR. The xSurvivin cDNA was cloned by identifying a Xenopus EST with high homology to human and mouse Survivin. The Survivin cDNA was then isolated from a Xenopus stage 11.5 --14 cDNA library by PCR. The Xenopus Survivin cDNA encodes a protein that is 46% identical to human Survivin (Figure A). The predominant motif on the Survivin protein is an inhibitor of apoptosis domain, a motif that has been shown in a related baculoviral protein to inhibit Caspase-3 activity (for review, see ; ), although the Survivin family does not inhibit Caspase-3 . The xSurvivin protein has the recognizable motifs of Survivin including the inhibitor of apoptosis repeat and a Cdc2 kinase phosphorylation site. Two independent groups have recently published the crystal structure of human Survivin . The Xenopus sequence was modeled into these crystal structures by the program SWISS-MODEL. The program predicts that the backbone structures of the Xenopus and the human proteins are highly similar (Figure , B and C). A prominent motif that is not included on the model is a C-terminal extended alpha helix (Figure , B and C). This is not included because this region is divergent in the primary sequence (Figure A); however, a SOPM secondary structure of this region predicted a long C-terminal alpha helix. Therefore, there is structural similarity between the Survivin homologs throughout the protein. Noel and colleagues  identified two potential interaction regions (an acidic patch and a basic patch) on the surface of human Survivin. To determine if these regions are conserved in xSurvivin, we compared the charged amino acid residues of the xSurvivin model (Figure D) with the placement of charged residues in the solved crystal structure of human Survivin (Figure E). The placement of surface charge on xSurvivin is predicted to be almost identical to human Survivin.  Figure 1 | Structural and sequence homology of Xenopus Survivin. Structural and sequence homology of Xenopus Survivin. (A) Clustal-W alignment of the amino acids encoding sequenced vertebrate Survivins. Significant residues from the crystal structure of human Survivin are conserved and are indicated by letters or symbols above the alignment: P-cdc2 phosphorylation site; star-residues that coordinate the Zn2+ in the Bir domain. (B-E) Comparison of solved human Survivin structure and a structural prediction of Xenopus Survivin protein produced by the SWISS-MODEL server . Ribbon diagram of Xenopus Survivin (B) and human Survivin (C). Charge distribution in Xenopus (D) and human (E) space-filled Survivin models where acidic charged residues are shown in red and basic residues are shown in blue. Note that the long C-terminal alpha helix is present in the Xenopus sequence; however, the homology is too low to fit in the modeled structure.  Characterization of Antibodies | After affinity purification, anti-xAurora B and anti-xINCENP antibodies are specific as they predominantly recognize a band of 41 and 130 kDa, respectively, in a Xenopus interphase extract and a Xenopus tissue culture cell line (XTC) lysate (Figure , B-C). Anti-xSurvivin antibody recognizes a predominant band at 18 kDa (Figure A). Even after affinity purification, the anti-xSurvivin antibody recognizes six additional bands; therefore, it was not used for immunofluorescence. The antibodies are highly sensitive as they all recognize <1 ng of recombinant protein (unpublished data, M. Bolton, P.T. Stukenberg). By comparing immunoblot signals of Xenopus interphase extracts with known amounts of recombinant protein, we estimate that the concentration of xAurora B protein in these extracts is 500 nM, the concentration of xSurvivin is similar250 nM, and the concentration of xINCENP is 100 nM (unpublished data, M. Bolton, P.T. Stukenberg).  Figure 2 | Specificity of affinity-purified anti-xSurvivin, anti-xAurora B, and anti-xINCENP antibodies in Xenopus interphase extracts and XTC cells. Specificity of affinity-purified anti-xSurvivin, anti-xAurora B, and anti-xINCENP antibodies in Xenopus interphase extracts and XTC cells. (A) Affinity-purified anti-xSurvivin antibody recognizes a band of 18 kDa in an interphase extract. (B) Affinity-purified anti-xAurora B antibody recognizes a band of 41 kDa in an interphase extract and in XTC cells. (C) Affinity-purified anti-xINCENP antibody recognizes a band of 130 kDa in an interphase extract and in XTC cells. (D-AA) Immunofluorescence localization of xAurora B (D-O) and xINCENP (P-AA) in XTC cells. (D-I) Immunolocalization of xAurora B during interphase (D) and throughout mitosis (E-I). (P-U) Immunolocalization of xINCENP during interphase (P) and throughout mitosis (Q-U). Colocalization of either xAurora B (J-O) or xINCENP (V-AA) with DNA and microtubules. Blue, DAPI; green, microtubules; red, xAurora B in (K-M), xINCENP in (W-Y); yellow and orange, overlap of xAurora B or xINCENP with microtubules. XTC cells stained with the anti-xAurora B antibody (Figure , D-O) and anti-xINCENP antibody (Figure , P-AA) display typical passenger protein immunolocalization. The concentration of both proteins is low in interphase (Figure , D, J, P, and V), but by prophase, the antibodies recognize both chromatin and kinetochores (Figure , E, K, Q, and W). Both proteins move to kinetochores at prometaphase-metaphase (Figure , F-G, L-M, R-S, and X-Y), and finally to bundles of overlapping microtubules in anaphase (Figure , H, N, T, and Z) where they remain throughout cytokinesis until they are discarded with the midbody (Figure , I, O, U, and AA). These data suggest that the roles of passenger proteins are conserved in Xenopus and demonstrate that the anti-xAurora B and anti-xINCENP antibodies are highly specific.  xAurora B, xINCENP, and xSurvivin Are Physically Associated In Vivo | To determine the native molecular weight of the passenger proteins, Xenopus interphase and mitotic extracts were size separated by both Superose 6 gel filtration chromatography and 5 --30% sucrose gradients, and the location of each of the proteins was detected by immunoblot. In interphase egg extracts, xAurora B, xINCENP, and xSurvivin comigrate in a broad peak from 900 to 600 kDa, whereas all three proteins migrate in a sharp peak at 900 kDa in mitotic extracts (Figure A). A slower migrating form of xSurvivin is often seen in SDS-PAGE gels. Detection of this form depends on phosphatase inhibitors and its appearance is not cell cycle dependent (unpublished data, M. Bolton, W. Lan, and P.T. Stuken-berg). xAurora B, xINCENP, and xSurvivin also comigrate in a sucrose gradient, sedimenting at 9.5S in interphase and at 4.5S in mitosis (Figure B). A number of control proteins, including Eg2, the Xenopus Aurora A homolog, migrated similarly in interphase and mitosis, demonstrating that the differences in migration of the passenger protein complex were caused by cell cycle changes and not due to differences in the manipulations of the sucrose gradients (Figure B). Because of the contributions of shape, neither gel filtration nor sedimentation can accurately predict native molecular weight. Gel filtration measures the Stokes radius, which is determined by the overall length of the molecule, whereas sucrose gradients measure sedimentation, which is retarded by a long thin shape. Therefore, highly elongated molecules such as myosin migrate faster than spherical proteins of similar molecular weight in gel filtration, whereas they sediment more slowly than spheres in sucrose gradients .  have derived equations using the hydrodynamic characteristics of molecules to overcome the contributions of shape and more accurately measure molecular weight. Such calculations suggest that the mitotic complex is one-half the size (similar250 kDa) of the interphase complex (similar490 kDa). Moreover, in both complexes, the overall length is comparable because they migrate similarly by gel filtration. The predicted axial ratio is >20, indicating a size and shape reminiscent of fibrinogen, but not as elongated as myosin. INCENP has a long coiled-coil domain, which is a motif that often contributes to such elongated shapes in proteins. Thus, the passenger proteins complex has a highly elongated shape in both interphase and mitosis, and the mass of the complex doubles in interphase.  Figure 3 | xSurvivin, xAurora B, and xINCENP cofractionate on gel filtration columns and sucrose density gradients during interphase and mitosis. xSurvivin, xAurora B, and xINCENP cofractionate on gel filtration columns and sucrose density gradients during interphase and mitosis. (A) Interphase and mitotic extracts were separated by Superose 6 gel filtration chromatography and equal volumes of alternate fractions were run on SDS-PAGE gels. The fractions were then immunoblotted for xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin to determine the molecular weight of the passenger protein complex. The molecular weights of the void (2000 kDa), thyroglobulin (670 kDa), bovine gamma globulin (158 kDa), chicken ovalbumin (44 kDa), and equine myoglobin (17 kDa) are shown. (B) xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin cofractionate on a sucrose density gradient, but the interphase complex migrates faster than the mitotic complex. Interphase and mitotic extracts were sedimented on 5 --30% sucrose density gradients. Equal volumes of each fraction were run on SDS-PAGE gels and immunoblotted for xINCENP, xAurora B, xAurora A (Eg2), and xSurvivin. Thyroglobulin (19S), bovine gamma globulin (7S), chicken ovalbumin (3.5S), and equine myoglobin (2S) were sedimented in a parallel gradient as markers. To directly test if the passenger proteins are in the same complex in vivo, we immunoprecipitated each of the passenger proteins from Xenopus extracts and immunoblotted the precipitates to determine if other passenger proteins were bound. After IP with xAurora B antibodies, both xINCENP and xSurvivin are also precipitated (Figure A). Because equivalent amounts of these three passenger proteins are detected in both interphase and mitotic extracts, it does not appear that their association is cell cycle regulated in the early embryo. Pre-I controls do not precipitate any of the passenger proteins. Moreover, neither xINCENP nor xSurvivin is immunoprecipitated by the xAurora B antibodies if recombinant xAurora B protein is added to the extract before the IP, demonstrating that the interaction is specific to xAurora B antibodies (unpublished data, M. Bolton and P.T. Stukenberg). In xINCENP IPs, both xSurvivin and xAurora B (Figure A) are detected by immunoblot. Finally, in xSurvivin IPs, both xAurora B and xINCENP are detected (Figure A). Therefore, in Xenopus embryos during both interphase and mitosis, there is a physical interaction between xSurvivin, xINCENP, and xAurora B kinase.  Figure 4 | xSurvivin, xAurora B, and xINCENP are physically associated in vivo during both interphase and mitosis. xSurvivin, xAurora B, and xINCENP are physically associated in vivo during both interphase and mitosis. (A) xAurora B (xAurB), xINCENP, and xSurvivin were immunoprecipitated from interphase and mitotic Xenopus extracts. To determine if the chromosomal passenger proteins are physically associated, the immunoprecipitated samples were loaded onto 8 and 15% gels and were immunoblotted for xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin. Note that xINCENP is phosphorylated during mitosis and therefore exhibits retarded mobility. (B) In Xenopus extracts, the majority of xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin is physically associated. Interphase and mitotic extracts were immunodepleted with anti-xAurora B antibodies. Samples of the immunodepleted extract (xAurB Depleted Extract), beads, and interphase and mitotic whole cell extracts (WCE) were run on 8 and 15% gels and were immunoblotted for xINCENP, xAurora B, and xSurvivin. xINCENP and xSurvivin were depleted below detection levels (<1 ng) and were detected on the beads. Because the three proteins comigrate on a gel filtration column and sucrose gradient , it is possible that the majority of each passenger protein exists in this complex. This hypothesis was directly tested by immunodepleting xAurora B complex from a Xenopus low-speed extracts and immunoblotting the depleted extracts for xINCENP and xSurvivin. When 95% of the xAurora B is removed from extracts, xINCENP and xSurvivin are depleted to similar levels (Figure B). This experiment demonstrates that in the Xenopus em