Patterns of Interference in Sequence Learning and Prism Adaptation Inconsistent With the Consolidation Hypothesis
The studies reported here used an interference paradigm to determine whether a long-term consolidation process (i.e., one lasting from several hours to days) occurs in the learning of two implicit motor skills, learning of a movement sequence and learning of a visuo-motor mapping. Subjects learned one skill and were tested on that skill 48 h later. Between the learning session and test session, some subjects trained on a second skill. The amount of time between the learning of the two skills varied for different subjects. In both the learning of a movement sequence and the learning of a visuo-motor mapping, we found that remote memories were susceptible to interference, but the passage of time did not afford protection from interference. These results are inconsistent with the long-term consolidation of these motor skills. A possible difference between these tasks and those that do show long-term consolidation is that the present tasks are not dynamic motor skills.

The notion that memories initially exist in a labile state and with time become stable was first proposed in 1900 by Muller and Pilzecker (cited in ). These researchers found that memory for a list of words was disrupted if new information was learned less than 1 min later, but not if learned 10 min later. They concluded that the memories had undergone a stabilization process, which they termed consolidation. In the current study, we will use the term consolidation to refer to the stabilization of memory (i.e., a decrease in susceptibility to forgetting via decay or interference) in the absence of further practice of that memory. There are two putative phases of consolidation processes, short-term consolidation processes, which operate over a period of seconds to hours post-training and are mediated by local cellular mechanisms resulting in long-term potentiation (LTP), and long-term consolidation processes, which operate over a period of hours to months post-training and are mediated by neural reorganization (for review, see ; ). The focus of the current study is on long-term consolidation processes. Much of the research on long-term consolidation processes has focused on explicit memory tasks, tasks in which memory is demonstrated through conscious recollection of previously learned information . Although less consolidation research has focused on implicit memory tasks, tasks in which memory is revealed through performance and does not require conscious recollection of learned information, recent interest in the long-term consolidation of motor learning is one exception . The experiments described here were designed to assess whether a long-term consolidation process is ubiquitous for different components of motor skill learning. Although there is much evidence that a long-term process of consolidation is evident in performance on explicit memory tasks (e.g., ; ), it is not immediately apparent that a long-term consolidation process would be evident in the performance of implicit memory tasks. A critical difference between performance on explicit and implicit memory tasks is that performance on explicit tasks relies on the integrity of the medial temporal lobe (i.e., the declarative memory system), whereas performance on implicit tasks does not (; see , for an exception). Performance on implicit tasks depends on the integrity of various anatomical structures outside of the medial temporal lobe (i.e., nondeclarative memory). One result of this difference is that patients with hippocampal damage are impaired on tests of explicit memory (e.g., ), but their performance is relatively spared on tests of motor skill learning . We will focus on the memory supporting motor skill learning as a particular type of nondeclarative memory, although the tasks discussed here are not meant to be representative of all forms of nondeclarative memory. There is behavioral evidence of long-term motor skill consolidation in a force-field task requiring learning of dynamic transformations, that is, the learning of new muscle forces . In this task, subjects must compensate for a perturbing force while moving a cursor to a target location on a computer screen. In one demonstration of temporally graded retroactive interference (RI) in the learning of the force-field task, all subjects practiced on one pattern of forces (force A). Some subjects practiced on a second, opposing pattern of forces (force B) at varying amounts of time after initial learning of the first force. All subjects were then tested on force A 24 h after the initial learning of A. Subjects who trained on force B either 5 min or 1 h after training on force A had impaired retention of A (i.e., greater RI) compared with groups that never trained on force B or that trained on force B 4 h after force A training. This pattern of temporally graded RI, in which only those subjects learning force B soon after having learned force A show an impairment in their memory for A, was interpreted as evidence that a long-term process of consolidation occurs for motor skill. Furthermore, it has been suggested that a reorganization of neural connectivity may be responsible for the consolidation seen in the force-field task . Recent work does indicate that the primary motor cortex (M1) may be responsible for the consolidation of dynamic information.  found that administering repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), which interferes with synaptic activity, to M1 immediately following the learning of a finger movement task-disrupted retention of performance. Administering the rTMS to M1 6 h after completing practice on the task did not, however, disrupt retention of performance. These results provide a possible neuropyschological mechanism for the changes in RI witnessed in the force-field learning task . One problem with attempting to generalize the results that a process of consolidation exists for implicit motor skill learning beyond the force-field learning task is that different brain structures are responsible for the learning and execution of different components of motor skill (for review, see ; ). In particular, learning new patterns of muscles forces relies on M1 , and their representation also relies on pools of interneurons in the spinal cord (see  for a review of recent evidence). On the other hand, learning and performing a sequence of actions relies on the basal ganglia and supplementary motor area ; whereas learning kinematic transformations involving the integration of perceptual and motor information relies on the posterior parietal cortex . Therefore, demonstrating consolidation in the learning of dynamic information, which is dependent on M1, is not necessarily informative about the existence of consolidation in other motor skills that do not rely upon the same brain structure. The set of experiments reported here explored the existence of a long-term consolidation process in two different nondynamic components of motor skill whose anatomical basis is well understood, the learning of a movement sequence and the learning of a new visuo-motor mapping. We used an interference design to assess consolidation. Subjects learned a skill at one point in time (skill A) and their retention of that skill was tested 48 h later. Between the learning session and the test session, some subjects learned a second skill that was incompatible with the first (skill B). The appropriate response for skill B was as different as possible from that for skill A, given very similar retrieval cues. The amount of time between the learning of the first and second skills varied for different subjects.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION : To assess whether consolidation occurs in the learning of a movement sequence, we chose the serial response time (SRT) task. In this task, subjects see circles appear one at a time in one of four boxes arranged horizontally on the computer screen. The task of the subjects is to press a key on the computer keyboard that directly corresponds to the spatial location of the circle as quickly as possible. Unbeknownst to the subject, the circles appear in a repeating sequence of spatial locations. Subjects become faster at responding to the repeating sequence of circles. Additionally, if the experimenter later introduces randomly determined circle locations, the subjects' reaction time (RT) increases. These effects occur even if the subjects do not become aware that the circles are repeating in a sequence . As such, learning in this task can be implicit. SRT | As learning in the SRT task is heavily dependent on making the correct series of spatial responses , six subjects who failed to get at least 90% correct on the SRT task during training were excluded from the analysis, leaving 24 subjects in the control condition, 24 in the 5-min, 24 in the 1-h, 21 in the 5-h, and 23 in the 24-h. For the remaining subjects, accuracy in the SRT task was uniformly high (95% --98% correct for each block in each condition). There were no reliable effects in analyses of the accuracy scores (all Fs <1.5, Ps >0.20). This result is unsurprising given that the subjects were instructed to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible. The remaining SRT analyses reported here are based on RT as recorded in msec. RTs were summarized by taking the median of each group of 12 trials and then finding the mean of the 8 medians for each block, yielding a single summary RT per trial block for each subject. RT across blocks for each of the conditions is depicted in Figure .  Figure 1 | Experiment 1 RT during training and testing sessions for each condition. Experiment 1 RT during training and testing sessions for each condition. (A) Control; (B) 5-min; (C) 1-h; (D) 5-h; (E) 24-h.  Training on Sequence A;  training on Sequence B;  testing on Sequence A. (Rs) Random blocks; (Ss) sequenced blocks. Error bars, +/- 1 SE. The measures of learning were taken when subjects performed the SRT task alone by subtracting performance in the S block from the average of that of the two R blocks. Learning of A | Although it is possible to assess learning during training on sequence A (with the concurrent memory task), any improvements during the sequenced training blocks may be attributable to one of three sources, learning of the movement sequence, general improvements on the button-pushing task, or learning to better coordinate simultaneous performance of both tasks. Additionally, the concurrent memory task may have influenced the expression of learning. Therefore, learning was assessed at transfer (without the concurrent memory task) only. A learning score for sequence A was created by subtracting the response time in the final sequenced block from the average of that in the final two random blocks. (Similar measures were created for the learning of B and testing of A.) All groups showed equivalent learning of sequence A, regardless of when they learned sequence B (see Table ). An ANOVA with time-learned sequence B (control, 5 min, 1 h, 5 h, or 24 h) as a variable failed to reach significance, F<1. The learning scores for sequence A differed reliably from zero, t(115)=8.66, P<0.0001. Subjects responded faster to the sequenced than to the random blocks.  Table 1 | Means and SE of the Learning Scores for Skill A Even though there was not a between-group difference in sequence A learning, it is possible that subjects' learning of A was related to their ability to learn a second sequence, as well as to their ability to retain the initial learning. As proactive interference (PI) and RI depend on prior learning, those who learn more have a greater opportunity for RI and PI ---at the extreme, no learning at all should leave minimal opportunity for RI or PI. To assess this possibility, we used subjects' sequence A learning scores to predict the interference measures (described below) in separate simple linear regressions. The extent of sequence A learning was a reliable predictor of both PI and RI (see Table  for regression statistics). Subjects who showed greater learning of sequence A also experienced greater PI and greater RI. As learning of sequence A was related to subsequent interference measures, all reported ANOVAs for the RT results are analyses of covariance (ANCOVA), with the learning score for sequence A as the covariate. These ANCOVA results for the PI and RI analyses did not differ qualitatively from those results obtained when an ANOVA was used.  Proactive Interference | The nature of PI bears on the interpretation of the RI results. Namely, if a particular group shows no RI, but extreme PI, it may be that this group never learned the second skill well enough to interfere with their memory for the first skill. For example, if RI was temporally graded in the direction predicted by a consolidation account (i.e., the greatest amount of RI occurred when the two skills were learned close together in time), but PI was temporally graded in the opposite direction (i.e., the least amount of PI occurred when two skills were learned close together in time), then the temporal gradient of the RI may only indicate that some subjects never learned the second skill. The PI measure was the difference between each subject's score when learning skills A and B. Positive scores on this measure indicate positive transfer; negative scores indicate PI. As would be expected from a visual inspection of the covariate-adjusted means of the PI scores (see Fig. A), there was PI in the learning of sequence B; however, there was no indication of a temporal gradient to the PI. Overall, the measure of PI was reliably less than zero (M = -8.37, SE=3.8), indicative of interference, t(91) = -2.282, P=0.0249 An ANCOVA on the PI scores with time learned sequence B as a variable yielded no significant effects, F<1. Two planned contrasts were performed to assess the temporal gradient of the PI scores, a planned linear contrast, and a planned comparison contrasting the 5 and 24 hr groups with the other groups learning sequence B. Both failed to reach significance, Fs<1. Even when the second sequence was learned 24 h after having learned the first, there was PI from having learned a different sequence previously. This pattern of proactive interference does not pose a problem for the interpretation of the RI results.  Figure 2 | Covariate-adjusted means of the (A) PI scores and (B) the RI scores for the RT measure in Experiment 1. Covariate-adjusted means of the (A) PI scores and (B) the RI scores for the RT measure in Experiment 1. PI scores were obtained by subtracting the Learning of A score from that for the Learning of B. RI scores were obtained by subtracting the Learning of A score from that for the Test of A. Negative values on these measures indicate interference. Positive values indicate positive transfer or retention.  Assessing Consolidation: Retroactive Interference Measure | The RI results are of critical importance in addressing the question of whether there is consolidation in sequence learning. If the memory for a movement sequence existed in a labile state for some period of time and slowly became stabilized (i.e., it was consolidated), then a person learning sequence B soon after having learned A should have an impaired memory for A. In particular, one would expect a temporally graded RI. That is, the memory impairment for A decreases as the temporal interval between the learning of the two skills increases. The RI measure is the difference between performance when subjects train on sequence A and when they test on A. Positive scores on this measure indicate an improvement in the memory for skill A. Negative scores indicate RI. Statistical analyses confirmed the visual impression created by the covariate-adjusted means of the RI scores (see Fig. B); there was RI in the memory for sequence A. An ANCOVA on the RI scores with time learned sequence B (control, 5 min, 1 h, 5 h, or 24 h) as a variable failed to yield an overall effect, F<1.5, P<0.25. However, a planned comparison revealed that the groups that learned sequence B had greater RI than did the control group, F(1, 106) = 7.995, P=0.0056, MSE=335.662. This result indicates that all groups that learned a second sequence exhibited RI in their memory for the first sequence. However, the extent of RI did not depend on the amount of time that passed between the learning of the two sequences. To test for a temporal gradient in the RI, we performed two planned comparisons, a linear contrast among those groups that learned a second skill and a planned comparison contrasting the groups that learned skill B within 5 h of having learned skill A, with those groups that learned skill B 5 or more hours after having learned skill A. Neither contrast was reliable, Fs<1. Given the lack of temporal gradient in the RI scores, there is no evidence of consolidation in the learning of a movement sequence.   Explicit Memory Measures | Confidence Ratings | A repeated measures ANOVA with time-learned sequence B (control, 5 min, 1 h, 5 h, or 24 h) as a between-subjects variable and session (learn A, learn B, or test A) as a within-subjects variable yielded a reliable effect of session, F(2, 174) = 4.09, P=0.0184, MSE=1.236. Helmhert comparisons revealed that confidence ratings were greater for the second and third training sessions (M=4.22, SE=0.16 and M=4.20, SE=0.15, respectively) than for the first training session (M=3.92, SE=0.14), F(1, 174) = 6.909, P=0.0093. Subjects may have become more suspicious about the nature of the task after they had participated in at least one session. The effect of time-learned sequence B failed to reach significance, as did the interaction between time-learned sequence B and session, Fs<1.5, Ps>0.25. These results indicate that there were no differences between the groups in their confidence in having seen a sequence.  Free Recall | Each subject's free recall score reflected the number of positions in the sequence correctly recalled. A position was considered correct when it was included within a correctly recalled segment consisting of a minimum of three consecutive positions, but these recalled segments themselves need not be consecutive. For example, if a subject saw 314324123142 and recalled 123143, the score would be 6, because both 123 and 143 occurred in the sequence. The time at which sequence B was learned had no influence on subjects' recall of sequences A and B. Overall, however, subjects had greater recall of sequence A (M=5.45, SE=0.19) than of sequence B (M=4.10, SE=0.22), indicating PI in the explicit memory for sequence B. A repeated measures ANOVA with time learned sequence B (control, 5 min, 1 h, 5 h, or 24 h) as a between-subjects variable and learning session (learn A, learn B, or test A) as a within-subjects variable yielded a significant effect of learning session, F(2, 174) = 11.48, P=0.0001, MSE=4.344. Helmhert comparisons revealed that recall of sequence A was greater than that of sequence B, F(1, 174) = 22.701, P=0.0001. Recall of A (learning or test) did not vary with the learning session, F<1. The effect of time-learned sequence B was not reliable, nor was the interaction, Fs<1.3, Ps>0.28. Previous reports of explicit knowledge in SRT with similar amounts of sequence training have found that mean guessing performance is 4.6 . The interference analyses on RT were rerun separately for those subjects who recalled five or more positions of sequence A, that is, more positions than would be expected by chance (n=79) and those subjects who recalled four or less positions (n=36). Splitting the analyses on the basis of recall did not change the qualitative nature of the results. There was ungraded PI and RI in both high and low recall groups.   Summary | In Experiment 1, interpolated sequence learning hurt the memory for a previously learned sequence, regardless of the amount of time that had passed between the original and interpolated learning. This pattern of RI is inconsistent with the notion that implicit sequence knowledge consolidates. Why might there be consolidation in the learning of new muscle dynamics, but not in the learning of a new sequence of movements? One possibility is that the learning of a new sequence of movements and the learning of new muscles dynamics have different anatomic bases and, therefore, different mechanisms of long-term storage. A second possibility is that the sequence-learning task used in Experiment 1 is behaviorally different from the force-field learning task used to assess the learning of dynamic information. In the force field learning task, prior to executing any movements, all of the perceptual cues available to the subject are the same when learning force A and force B. This is not the case in the SRT task. The two sequences in Experiment 1 were chosen to be as different as possible from one another. Therefore, the perceptual cues for learning sequences A and B were not identical. Additionally, in the SRT task, a person does not have to interact with the environment before knowing the correct movement to make. Whereas in the force-field learning task, there is nothing in the environment that dictates the correct movement until the subject begins to interact with the robot arm. In the force-field learning task, the subject must gradually learn the correct movements on the basis of error feedback. In this way, the force-field learning task is an adaptation paradigm. Lastly, learning one sequence of movements is not necessarily incompatible with learning a second sequence of movements. In the force-field learning task, however, learning one force for interacting with the robot arm is incompatible with learning a different force for interacting with that robot arm. In Experiment 2, we investigated this second possibility, that the failure to find consolidation in the learning of a movement sequence was due to the different behavioral requirements of that task, by testing whether there was temporally graded RI in a task that was behaviorally similar to the force-field learning task, yet which has a unique anatomic basis  ---prism adaptation. The prism adaptation paradigm involves a kinematic transformation in which subjects must learn a new mapping between their vision and proprioception. It requires the subject to interact with the environment before knowing the correct movement to make. Likewise, the cues for the appropriate response are identical when learning two incompatible prism displacements.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION : Experiment 2 investigated consolidation in the learning of a new mapping between the perception and action systems (i.e., a kinematic transformation). We chose the prism adaptation paradigm to investigate the learning of a new visuo-motor mapping. In studies of prism adaptation, subjects don prism goggles that displace their vision laterally. During prism exposure, subjects are trained to point at targets with visual feedback. Before and after prism exposure, subjects' target-pointing accuracy is measured with normal vision. During the prism exposure period, the target-pointing performance of subjects is initially inaccurate, but with training, they learn to point accurately. A comparison of subjects' target-pointing performance with normal vision before and after the prism exposure period provides a measure of aftereffects. After prism exposure, subjects usually point inaccurately in the direction opposite of the prism displacement, that is, a negative aftereffect. Performance was measured as the horizontal displacement from the target in inches (rounded to the nearest quarter inch). For throws made while wearing, or after wearing the leftward displacing goggles, the sign on all error was reversed so that the data could be averaged with that for the rightward displacing goggles. Positive values on this measure indicate error in the direction of the displacement; negative values indicate error in the direction opposite the displacement. Exposure Performance | Exposure performance was assessed on trials in which the subjects wore the prism goggles and was summarized by averaging the error across the trials within a block separately for each of the target locations. This was done for each of the three sessions (learning of A, learning of B, and testing of A). Exposure error across sessions appears in Figure .  Figure 3 | Experiment 2 exposure performance across blocks during the training and testing sessions for each condition. Experiment 2 exposure performance across blocks during the training and testing sessions for each condition. (A) Control; (B) 5-min; (C) 5-h; (D) 24-h.  Training on Sequence A;  training on Sequence B;  testing on Sequence A. Error bars, +/- 1 SE. Learning of A | All groups of subjects learned the initial prism displacement equally well. Additionally, subjects were equally good at learning to throw with both right and left displacing prisms. In a repeated measures, ANOVA with trial block (one, two, or three) and target location (left, center, or right) as within-subjects variables and time learned displacement B (control, 5 min, 5 h, or 24 h) and initial prism displacement (leftward or rightward) as between subjects variables, there were no reliable effects of time-learned displacement B or of initial prism displacement, Fs<1. None of the effects involving target location were significant, Fs<1.5, P>0.25, which indicates that no target location was more difficult to learn than another. The only within-subjects variable to reach significance was that of trial block, F(2, 192) = 656.072, P=0.0001, MSE=3.062. As would be expected, subjects' error decreased across blocks of trials during their initial training on displacement A. Because error performance did not reliably vary with target location or initial prism displacement, these variables were excluded from further analyses. Accuracy in the last block of trials while learning displacement A (see Table ) reliably predicted PI scores (see Table  for regression statistics). Subjects with greater learning of displacement A had greater PI. Accuracy in the learning of A did not predict RI scores (see Table ). Therefore, accuracy in the last block of trials of learning displacement A was used as a covariate in the PI analyses only. As in Experiment 1, ANCOVA results for the PI analyses did not qualitatively differ from those results obtained when an ANOVA was used on the PI scores.  Table 2 | Regression Results for Predicting Proactive and Retroactive Interference Scores from Initial Learning of Skill A  Proactive Interference | PI scores were created in the same manner as in Experiment 1. Covariate-adjusted means for the PI scores appear in Figure A. As is apparent in the figure, overall, there was PI in the learning of displacement B. Overall, the PI scores were reliably less than zero (M = -1.2, SE = 0.26), t(71) = -4.644, P<0.0001. However, the extent of PI did not depend on when subjects learned displacement B. In a repeated-measures ANCOVA with trial block (one, two, or three) as a within-subjects variable and time-learned displacement B (5 min, 5 h, or 24 h) as a between-subjects variable, there were no reliable effects, Fs<1.5, Ps>0.25. The planned contrast comparing the 5-min group with the 5- and 24-h group failed to reach significance, as did the linear contrast, Fs<1. All groups showed a similar impairment in their learning of displacement B regardless of the amount of time that had passed between the learning of the two displacements.  Figure 4 | (A) Covariate-adjusted means for the PI scores on the measure of exposure performance. (A) Covariate-adjusted means for the PI scores on the measure of exposure performance. PI scores were obtained by subtracting subjects' Learning of B score from their Learning of A score. (B) Raw means for the RI scores on the measure of exposure performance. Error bars, +/- 1 SE. RI scores were obtained by subtracting subjects' Test of A score from their Learning of A score. Negative values on both the PI and RI measures indicate interference; positive values indicate either positive transfer or retention.  Assessing Consolidation: Retroactive Interference Measure | Once again, the RI measure is of critical importance to the question of whether there was consolidation in the exposure performance of prism adaptation. RI scores were created in the same manner as in Experiment 1. Means for the RI scores appear Figure B. As is apparent in the figure, overall, there was RI; the groups that learned displacement B were impaired in their memory for displacement A relative to the control group. An ANOVA on the RI scores with trial block (one, two, or three) as a within-subjects variable and time-learned displacement B (control, 5 min, 5 h, or 24 h) as a between-subjects variable yielded a reliable effect of time learned displacement B, F(3, 100) = 6.799, P=0.0003, MSE=4.725.The planned comparison between the control group and the groups that learned a second displacement revealed that the control group had greater retention of displacement A, F(1,100) = 9.533, P=0.0026. In the above ANOVA, there was a reliable effect of trial block, F(2, 200) = 7.721, P=0.0006, MSE=1.719, as well as a reliable interaction between time-learned displacement B and trial block, F(6, 200) = 7.548, P=0.0001. Helmhert comparisons revealed that the interaction was due to greater facilitation in the memory of displacement A for the control group in trial block one (M=2.159, SE=0.296 for block one, and M = -0.104, SE=0.196 for blocks two and three), F(2, 100) = 15.51, P=0.0001, whereas, for the remaining groups, there was no difference between trial block 1 and trial blocks 2 and 3, Fs<1. As is apparent in Figure B, there was a temporal gradient to the RI scores. This gradient, however, was in the direction opposite from that which would be expected due to consolidation. The planned linear contrast revealed that impairment in the memory for displacement A increased as the amount of time between the learning of displacements A and B increased, F(1, 69) = 9.782, P=0.0026, MSE=5.175. There is, therefore, no evidence of consolidation in subjects' exposure performance during prism adaptation.   Aftereffects Performance | Exposure performance is thought to reflect the combination of an implicit adaptation between the perceptual and motor systems and the use of explicit strategies that allow for accurate pointing performance. For example, subjects may learn that when wearing the prism goggles, which displace their vision 12 to the right, that accurate performance can be obtained by consciously selecting a spatial target for pointing that is 12 to the left of where the target appears visually. Aftereffects performance, however, is thought to reflect only the implicit adaptation between the perception and action systems. As the subjects are not wearing the prism-displacing goggles during tests of aftereffects, it would not be reasonable for them to consciously draw on a strategy to correct the effects of a displacement. As such, the results central to the question of whether there is consolidation in the implicit learning of a new visuo-motor mapping are those for the aftereffects performance. Aftereffects were assessed in trials during which subjects wore nondisplacing goggles. Only the first aftereffects trial in each block was used, as subjects may begin applying strategies to combat the aftereffects on subsequent throws within that block. To rid the aftereffects scores of any directional bias, albeit small (overall M=0.14, SE=0.14), that the subjects may have started out with prior to prism training, the average of each subject's baseline performance was subtracted from his or her error on each aftereffects trial. Positive aftereffects scores reflect error in the direction of the prism displacement; negative scores reflect error in the direction opposite the prism displacement. Once a subject takes the prism goggles off, error in the opposite direction of the displacement reflects the extent of the implicit adaptation between the perception and action systems. Therefore, aftereffects performance differs from exposure performance in that greater negative values are indicative of greater learning. Subjects' aftereffects performance across blocks for each of the training session is depicted in Figure .  Figure 5 | Experiment 2 aftereffects performance across blocks during the training and testing sessions for each condition: (A) Control; (B) 5-min; (C) 5-hr; (D) 24-hr. Experiment 2 aftereffects performance across blocks during the training and testing sessions for each conditi