Eyeblink Classical Conditioning and Interpositus Nucleus Activity Are Disrupted in Adult Rats Exposed to Ethanol as Neonates
Neonatal exposure to ethanol in rats, during the period of brain development comparable to that of the human third trimester, produces significant, dose-dependent cell loss in the cerebellum and deficits in coordinated motor performance. These rats are also impaired in eyeblink conditioning as weanlings and as adults. The current study examined single-unit neural activity in the interpositus nucleus of the cerebellum in adults following neonatal binge ethanol exposure. Group Ethanol received alcohol doses of 5.25 g/kg/day on postnatal days 4 --9. Group Sham Intubated underwent acute intragastric intubation on postnatal days 4 --9 but did not receive any infusions. Group Unintubated Control (from separate litters) did not receive any intubations. When rats were 3 --7 mo old, pairs of extracellular microelectrodes were implanted in the region of the interpositus nucleus. Beginning 1 wk later, the rats were given either 100 paired or 190 unpaired trials per day for 10 d followed by 4 d of 100 conditioned stimulus (CS)-alone trials per day. As in our previous study, conditioned response acquisition in Group Ethanol rats was impaired. In addition, by session 5 of paired acquisition, Group Sham Intubated and Group Unintubated Control showed significant increases in interpositus nucleus activity, relative to baseline, in the CS --unconditioned stimulus interval. In contrast, Group Ethanol failed to show significant changes in interpositus nucleus activity until later in training. These results indicate that the disruption in eyeblink conditioning after early exposure to ethanol is reflected in alterations in interpositus nucleus activity.

Early exposure to alcohol in humans is known to produce a variety of behavioral and neural abnormalities (for reviews, see ; ; ). In some cases of heavy prenatal exposure to alcohol, fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) can be diagnosed by the presence of the constellation of facial dysmorphology, growth deficiency, and central nervous system damage in the affected child. The development of animal models of FAS has been essential in understanding, at a detailed level, some of the behavioral and neural abnormalities associated with early exposure to alcohol . This research has revealed that cortical, hippocampal, basal gangliar, and cerebellar areas are particularly vulnerable to the teratogenic effects of alcohol, and that the vulnerability of specific brain structures changes over stages of development. Much recent research has concentrated on cerebellar abnormalities that occur in conjunction with early exposure to alcohol. The use of a neonatal rat model of binge alcohol exposure during the period of brain development comparable to that of the human third trimester has been critical to this research. This model involves exposing neonatal rats to high doses of alcohol over a short period of time via either a chronic  or an acute  intragastric infusion procedure. Either of these procedures allows control of the dose, pattern, and resulting profile of blood alcohol concentrations produced (BACs) while administering alcohol during a stage of brain development that is vulnerable to environmental insults . These are critical factors when cross-species comparisons of the effects of alcohol are made. Research using this model has shown that BACs in excess of 200 mg/dL produce significant loss of Purkinje cells in neonatal rats that increases with increasing BACs . More recent studies have confirmed and extended these findings using unbiased stereological procedures, in which estimates of the total number of cells in a structure are not affected by changes in cell density . Cell loss is greatest during the early stages of Purkinje cell dendritic outgrowth and synaptogenesis (which occurs in rats on postnatal days [PDs] 4 --9). Less Purkinje cell loss occurs with binge exposure during neurogenesis (which occurs in rats on prenatal days 13 --16) , or during later differentiation . PD days 4 --6 appear to be the period of greatest vulnerability, with a dose-related loss of Purkinje cells that can reach 50% --60% of control values . Early binge exposure to ethanol also produces loss of cells in the inferior olive , a brainstem area that is the source of climbing fiber projections to Purkinje cells. We have recently shown that early exposure to ethanol produces loss of cerebellar deep nuclear cells (J.T. Green, T. Tran, J.E. Steinmetz, and C.R. Goodlett, in prep.), the target cells of Purkinje cells and the final relay for the majority of cerebellar output to other brain regions. Rats exposed to binge levels of ethanol as neonates show disrupted performance in motor tasks thought to require an intact cerebellum . However, the precise nature of cerebellar engagement by these tasks is not well defined, making correlations between cell loss and behavioral performance somewhat difficult to interpret. Furthermore, it is difficult to separate learning from performance deficits with these tasks. A task that is particularly well suited to addressing these issues is eyeblink classical conditioning. In eyeblink classical conditioning, a conditioned stimulus (CS), which initially elicits no response, precedes an unconditioned stimulus (US), which elicits a reflexive, or unconditioned response in the form of an eyeblink. Learning is shown by the occurrence of eyeblinks after the CS but before the US (conditioned responses; CRs). An extensive body of research in rabbits, using a variety of approaches, has characterized the brainstem-cerebellar substrates of eyeblink conditioning (for review, see ). The auditory or visual CS is thought to project to cerebellar cortex and deep nuclei via mossy fibers arising from lateral pontine nuclei. The somatosensory US is hypothesized to project to cerebellar cortex and deep nuclei via climbing fibers arising from the dorsal accessory olive. One of the deep nuclei, the interpositus nucleus ipsilateral to the eye that receives the US, appears to be the site of plasticity for learning the CR. Overlying cerebellar cortex seems to play at least a modulatory role in learning eyeblink conditioning, perhaps through control of the amplitude and timing of CRs. These substrates appear to be the same in the rat . In addition to knowledge of the neural circuitry engaged by eyeblink conditioning, control procedures, such as unpaired presentations of the CS and US, allow separation of performance factors from learning. Knowledge of the precise cerebellar substrates of eyeblink conditioning makes it particularly useful for assessing the effects of early exposure to alcohol on the developing cerebellum (for review, see ). Studies have shown that rats exposed to a high dose of alcohol on PDs 4 --9 are impaired in eyeblink conditioning both as weanlings (23 --24 d old)  and as adults (>3 mo old) . Given that the number of deep nuclear neurons is highly correlated with the rate of acquisition of eyeblink conditioning ( J.T. Green, T. Tran, J.E. Steinmetz, and C.R. Goodlett, in prep.), deficits in eyeblink conditioning in rats exposed to binge levels of ethanol as neonates may be directly caused by neuronal depletion in the deep nuclei, particularly in the interpositus nucleus. The purpose of the present study was to assess activity of interpositus nucleus neurons during eyeblink conditioning in adult rats after neonatal exposure to binge levels of ethanol. Although we have confirmed that deep nuclear neurons are lost after neonatal exposure to binge levels of ethanol, we do not know if those that remain show normal activity during eyeblink conditioning. The current study shows that adult interpositus nucleus neurons show a delay in the development conditioning-related activity after neonatal exposure to binge levels of ethanol.
Histology | Electrode tracks and marking lesions were used to confirm electrode placement. Forty-seven rats (29 underwent paired conditioning; 18 underwent unpaired conditioning) had electrode placements in the region of the left interpositus nucleus, distributed throughout the dorsal --ventral extent. Group totals were as follows: Group Paired Ethanol (EtOH; n = 9); Group Paired Sham Intubated (SI; n = 11); Group Paired Unintubated Control (UC; n = 9); Group Unpaired EtOH (n = 5); Group Unpaired SI (n = 6); and Group Unpaired UC (n = 7). An additional 19 rats had placements outside of the interpositus nucleus, most commonly in either white matter just dorsal to the interpositus nucleus or in brainstem areas somewhat ventral to the interpositus nucleus, such as the dorsal cochlear nucleus or the lateral vestibular nucleus. Only data from the 47 rats with placements in the interpositus nucleus are described. Note that because of technical difficulties, data from extinction sessions for one rat from Group EtOH and three rats from Group UC were not available for analysis. Figure  shows a typical electrode placement, along with a sample of spontaneous neural activity recorded from this location during adaptation.  Figure 1 | An example of a microelectrode placement in the ipsilateral interpositus nucleus and corresponding spontaneous unit activity from this site. An example of a microelectrode placement in the ipsilateral interpositus nucleus and corresponding spontaneous unit activity from this site. Blood Alcohol Concentrations | Blood samples were available for 11 of 14 EtOH-treated animals with a confirmed interpositus nucleus electrode placement. The mean BAC of these 11 rats on PD 6 was 344 (+-36 SEM) mg/dL.  Spike Separation | Mean threshold for detecting spikes across all treatment groups was 0.39 mV. There were no differences between treatment groups in threshold for detecting spikes. For paired groups, a total of 19 --26 units were separated per group per session. For unpaired groups, a total of 10 --18 units were separated per group per session. Mean number of units separated per animal per session was approximately two across all treatment and training groups. Given that our previous study established that rats from Group EtOH have about 50% fewer deep nuclear neurons than do control groups (J.T. Green, T. Tran, J.E. Steinmetz, and C.R. Goodlett, in prep.), one might expect that we would have recorded from fewer neurons in this group. However, assuming uniform loss of cells in the interpositus nucleus (which is our working assumption), loss of neurons in the interpositus nucleus in rats from Group EtOH would be expected to result in depressed background activity as well (i.e., the signal-to-noise ratio would be the same in Group EtOH as in the control groups), allowing discrimination of similar numbers of units in Group EtOH and control groups, even though fewer units exist in Group EtOH. In addition, we limited spike separation to no more than the three best units per rat in any one session. It is possible that more than three units would be separable in control groups, whereas three was approaching the limit in Group EtOH.  Adaptation | During adaptation, all rats received 20 presentations of periocular stimulation followed by 20 presentations of the tone CS. Eyeblink responses to the 20 presentations of the tone were analyzed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Adaptation data were available for 46 of 47 rats. There was no difference between treatment groups in either the percentage of eyeblink responses, F(2,43) = 1.72, P > 0.05 or in the amplitude of eyeblink responses, F(2,43) = 1.71, P > 0.05. Average percentage of spontaneous eyeblink responses to the tone (during the 81 --350 msec after the tone in which we measured CRs during acquisition) on these initial exposures was 33.7%. Baseline firing rates (spikes per second) for 350 msec before US onset on the 20 US-alone trials and for 350 msec before CS onset on the 20 CS-alone trials were calculated. A one-way ANOVA revealed no difference between treatments for either baseline firing rate before periocular stimulation onset, F(2,89) = 2.37, P > 0.05 or baseline firing rate before CS onset, F(2,93) = 0.99, P > 0.05. Mean firing rates before periocular stimulation onset were 35.9 (+-6.6 SEM) spikes/sec for Group EtOH, 28.4 (+-6.0 SEM) spikes/sec for Group SI, and 47.4 (+-6.4 SEM) spikes/sec for Group UC. Mean firing rates before CS onset were 46.7 (+-7.7 SEM) spikes/sec for Group EtOH, 38.9 (+-7.2 SEM) spikes/sec for Group SI, and 53.5 (+-7.5 SEM) spikes/sec for Group UC. See Figure  for an example of unit activity during adaptation.  Paired Groups | Acquisition: Behavior | Data from the 29 rats that underwent paired eyeblink conditioning were analyzed. Group EtOH attained a lower asymptote of learning than did control groups, whether measured by percentage of CRs or CR amplitude, that was comparable to our previous study . Groups SI and UC did not attain quite as high an asymptote as in our previous study. These results were confirmed by statistical analyses. Learning for the rats that underwent paired eye-blink conditioning was analyzed with a 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 10 (acquisition session) repeated-measures ANOVA with percentage of CRs as the dependent measure. This analysis revealed a significant effect of session, F(9, 234) = 7.44, P < 0.001. Although the percentage of CRs was consistently lower in Group EtOH compared with control groups, the treatment effect did not quite attain statistical significance (P = .064). A second ANOVA with CR amplitude as the dependent measure revealed a significant effect of session, F(9, 234) = 7.55, P < 0.001, and a significant effect of treatment, F(2,26) = 3.40, P < 0.05. Post hoc Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) tests revealed a significant difference between Group EtOH and Group UC, with Group SI performing intermediate to, but not significantly different from either of them .  Figure 2 | Learning in treatment groups that received paired eyeblink conditioning as a function of acquisition and extinction session. Learning in treatment groups that received paired eyeblink conditioning as a function of acquisition and extinction session. (A) Percentage of conditioned eyeblink responses. (B) Amplitude of eyeblink responses. The lack of a statistically significant difference between Group EtOH and Group SI was surprising, given the results of our previous study . The current results can be attributed to two rats in Group SI who conditioned exceptionally poorly. Without these two rats, there were clear and consistent significant differences between Group EtOH and Group SI in both percentage of CRs and CR amplitude. Comparisons were conducted between paired and unpaired training for each treatment group to assess further the issue of whether Group SI performed differently from Group EtOH and similarly to Group UC. For each treatment group, a 2 (training: paired, unpaired) x 10 (session) ANOVA with percentage of CRs as the dependent measure was conducted. For Group EtOH, this analysis revealed no significant effects. In contrast, for Group SI, this analysis revealed a significant effect of session, F(9,135) = 3.32, P < 0.01, whereas the effect of training just missed attaining significance, F(1,15) = 3.68, P = 0.07. For Group UC, this analysis revealed a significant training x session interaction, F(9, 126) = 1.89, P = 0.05. Post hoc one-way ANOVAs comparing training within each session revealed that rats in Group UC receiving paired training showed a significantly higher percentage of CRs in sessions 4, 6, 7, 9, and 10 (P's = 0.006 to 0.05). A similar set of analyses was conducted with CR amplitude as the dependent measure. For Group EtOH, this analysis revealed a significant training x session interaction effect, F(9,108) = 2.19, P < 0.05. Post hoc one-way ANOVAs comparing training within each session revealed that Group EtOH rats differed significantly in CR amplitude only in session 1, in which rats that received unpaired training actually outperformed those that received paired training. For Group SI, this analysis also revealed a significant training x session interaction effect, F(9,135) = 1.92, P = 0.05. In contrast to Group EtOH, however, post hoc ANOVAs revealed a significantly higher CR amplitude in Group SI rats that underwent paired training compared with those that underwent unpaired training in sessions 4 --7, 9, and 10. Finally, for Group UC, this analysis revealed significant effects of training, F(1,14) = 5.68, P < 0.05 and session, F(9,126) = 3.54, P < 0.01. Group UC rats that underwent paired training showed a significantly higher CR amplitude than did Group UC rats that underwent unpaired training across all sessions.  Acquisition: Unit Activity | Baseline firing rates (spikes per second) were calculated across all paired trials of a session for the 350-msec period before the tone CS onset. Separate one-way ANOVAs for sessions 1, 5, and 10 comparing treatment groups, with baseline firing rate as the dependent measure, revealed no difference in baseline firing rate. Collapsed across sessions, mean baseline firing rate was 38.1 (+-3.2 SEM) spikes/sec for Group EtOH, 47.0 (+-3.1 SEM) spikes/sec for Group SI, and 52.1 (+-3.2 SEM) spikes/sec for Group UC. Figure  shows an example of behavioral and unit activity on a CR trial recorded in session 5 of acquisition in a rat from Group EtOH (Fig. A) and a rat from Group UC (Fig. B).  Figure 3 | Rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace), interpositus nucleus activity (middle trace), and tick marks representing action potentials of a discriminated unit (bottom trace) on a CR trial during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning in a rat from (A) Group EtOH and (B) Group UC. Rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace), interpositus nucleus activity (middle trace), and tick marks representing action potentials of a discriminated unit (bottom trace) on a CR trial during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning in a rat from (A) Group EtOH and (B) Group UC. The analysis of changes in firing from baseline to the CS --US interval can be summarized as follows: (1) when a CR was executed, activity increased during the CS --US interval; in the middle of training, Groups SI and UC showed greater increases between 80 and 280 msec after CS onset than did Group EtOH; and (2) when no CR was executed, changes in activity from baseline to the CS --US interval were minimal and did not differ between treatment groups. To examine changes in firing from baseline to the CS --US interval, we analyzed standard scores of neural activity separately for five 70-msec periods during the CS --US interval for acquisition sessions 1, 5, and 10 with a 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 5 (period) repeated-measures ANOVA with treatment as a between-subjects factors and period as a within-subjects factor. Analyses were conducted separately for CR and non-CR trials. On CR trials, there were no differences between treatment groups at the beginning of acquisition (session 1) or at the end of acquisition (session 10). In contrast, a significant period x treatment interaction was observed in session 5, F (8,256) = 2.26, P = 0.024. Examination of the interaction effect using one-way ANOVAs comparing treatment groups in each period revealed differences between treatment groups in all five periods, P's = 0.03 to 0.003. Post hoc Tukey's HSD tests showed that Group EtOH showed significantly less interpositus nucleus activation on CR trials compared with both Group SI and Group UC in periods 2 --4 and less activation compared with Group UC in period 1 and Group SI in period 5 (Fig. A). Similar analyses of non-CR trials revealed only a significant effect of period in session 10, F (4,224) = 3.88, P < 0.01 caused by a significant linear decrease in activation across periods that was similar in all treatment groups (Fig. B).  Figure 4 | Standard scores for sessions 1, 5, and 10 of paired eyeblink conditioning as a function of the 70-msec period during the CS --US interval for each treatment group on (A) paired trials with a CR; (B) paired trials without a CR. Standard scores for sessions 1, 5, and 10 of paired eyeblink conditioning as a function of the 70-msec period during the CS --US interval for each treatment group on (A) paired trials with a CR; (B) paired trials without a CR. A standard score of approximately 2.0 represents a significant increase in activity above baseline. Representative examples of mean behavioral and summed unit activity across CR trials in session 5 of paired acquisition for a rat from each treatment group are shown in Figures  --.  Figure 5 | Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Ethanol rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Ethanol rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. Figure 6 | Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Sham Intubated rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Sham Intubated rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. Figure 7 | Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Unintubated Control rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. Mean rectified and integrated eyelid EMG activity (top trace) and summed peristimulus time histograms for two separate units recorded from a Group Unintubated Control rat on trials with a CR during session 5 of paired eyeblink conditioning. The analyses of standard scores were supported by calculation of the proportion of neurons showing significant activation in periods 4 and/or 5 on CR trials but not on non-CR trials during the CS --US interval. These neurons are the strongest candidates for conditioning-related units. Fewer of these potential conditioning-related neurons showed significant activation in sessions 5 and 10 in Group EtOH compared with control groups (Fig. A).  Figure 8 | Proportion of neurons showing significant activation in the (A) last 140 msec of the CS --US interval on CR trials but not on non-CR trials, as a function of a paired acquisition session and (B) the equivalent interval on CS-alone trials with an eyeblink but not on trials without an eyeblink, as a function of an unpaired training session. Proportion of neurons showing significant activation in the (A) last 140 msec of the CS --US interval on CR trials but not on non-CR trials, as a function of a paired acquisition session and (B) the equivalent interval on CS-alone trials with an eyeblink but not on trials without an eyeblink, as a function of an unpaired training session.  Acquisition: Relationship Between Behavior and Unit Activity | Cross-correlations between eyelid electromyographic (EMG) activity during eyeblink conditioning and interpositus nucleus activity for each paired acquisition session were calculated across all paired trials that were not discarded because of excessive eyelid activity in the pre-CS period. Separate one-way ANOVAs for sessions 1, 5, and 10 comparing treatment groups were calculated using the maximum correlation coefficient as the dependent measure. This analysis revealed a significant treatment effect in session 5, F(2,63) = 5.77, P < 0.01. Post hoc Tukey's HSD tests showed that Group EtOH had a significantly lower cross-correlation coefficient in session 5 compared with both Group SI (P = 0.006) and Group UC (P = 0.030) but Groups SI and UC did not differ. A similar set of analyses conducted using the lead/lag latency of the cross-correlation coefficient (i.e., the latency by which interpositus nucleus activity preceded or followed eyelid EMG activity) as the dependent measure revealed a difference between treatment groups in session 1, F(2,63) = 3.59, P = 0.033. Post hoc Tukey's HSD tests showed that Group EtOH had a significantly shorter amount of time between behavior onset and unit onset compared with Group UC (P = 0.027) in session 1. Figure  shows a scatterplot of cross-correlations from sessions 1 and 5 of paired acquisition.  Figure 9 | Scatterplot of cross-correlation coefficients and lead/lag latencies during paired eyeblink conditioning in (A) session 1 and (B) session 5. Scatterplot of cross-correlation coefficients and lead/lag latencies during paired eyeblink conditioning in (A) session 1 and (B) session 5.  Extinction: Behavior | A 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 4 (extinction session) ANOVA with percentage of CRs as the dependent measure revealed a significant interaction effect, F(6,60) = 2.38, P = 0.039. Further analysis, using separate one-way ANOVAs comparing treatment groups in each extinction session separately, revealed no significant difference between treatment groups in any individual extinction session, (P's = 0.16 to 0.82). Results were similar with CR amplitude as the dependent measure (see Fig. ).  Extinction: Unit Activity | To examine changes in firing from baseline to the post-CS interval, standard scores of neural activity for five 70-msec periods after CS onset were analyzed separately for extinction session 1 and 4 with a 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 5 (period) repeated-measures ANOVA with treatment as a between-subjects factors and period as a within-subjects factor. Analyses were conducted separately for CR and non-CR trials. On CR trials, there were no differences between treatment groups at the beginning (session 1) or end (session 4) of extinction, but there were significant effects of period for both sessions, P's < 0.01. Standard scores increased linearly across post-CS periods on trials with a CR and this pattern was similar across treatment groups. On trials without a CR, there were no significant effects in session 1 but, in session 4, there was a significant effect of period, F(4,176) = 4.97, P = 0.001 and treatment, F(2,44) = 4.02, P = 0.025. In the last session of extinction, standard scores increased linearly across post-CS periods on trials without a CR and were larger in Group UC compared with Group EtOH.   Unpaired Groups | Training: Behavior | Data from the 18 rats that underwent unpaired training were analyzed. Responses to CS-alone presentations were analyzed with a 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 10 (training session) ANOVA with percentage of eyeblinks as the dependent measure. This analysis revealed no significant effects. A similar analysis with eyeblink amplitude as the dependent measure also revealed no significant effects. These results indicated that nonassociative responses to the tone were no different in the EtOH rats compared with controls. Furthermore, responding to the tone remained stable across sessions. Average percentage of eyeblinks to the tone across groups and sessions was 33.9%, which was almost identical to the average spontaneous percentage of eyeblinks to the tone during adaptation (see Fig. ). Although not statistically significant, we did note that tone-evoked responses were relatively high in the EtOH rats compared with other rats on sessions 1 to 3. The higher level of responding disappeared, however, after the fourth session.  Figure 10 | Eyeblink responses in treatment groups that received unpaired training, as a function of training and extinction session. Eyeblink responses in treatment groups that received unpaired training, as a function of training and extinction session. (A) Percentage of eyeblink responses. (B) Amplitude of eyeblink responses.  Training: Unit Activity | To examine changes in firing from baseline to the post-tone interval for the unpaired groups, standard scores of neural activity for five 70-msec periods during the post tone interval were analyzed separately for training sessions 1, 5, and 10 with a 3 (treatment: EtOH, SI, UC) x 5 (period) repeated-measures ANOVA with treatment as a between-subjects factors and period as a within-subjects factor. Analyses were conducted separately for trials with an eyeblink response and trials without an eyeblink response. For trials with an eyeblink response, this analysis revealed significant period x treatment interaction effects for session 1, F(8,172) = 5.37, P < 0.001, session 5, F(8,160) = 2.20, P = 0.030, and session 10, F(8,164) = 3.01, P < 0.01. For session 1, examination of the interaction effect using one-way ANOVAs comparing treatment groups in each period revealed significant differences between treatment groups for periods 2 --5, P's < 0.02. Post-hoc Tukey's HSD tests showed that Group EtOH showed a significantly higher standard score compared to Group UC in period 2 (P < 0.01), and compared to both Group SI and Group UC in periods 3 --5 (P's < 0.02). For sessions 5 and 10, examination of the interaction effect revealed no difference between treatment groups in any period, although the F-values varied widely and approached significance for period 1 of session 10 (Fig. A).  Figure 11 | Standard scores for sessions 1, 5, and 10 of unpaired eyeblink conditioning as a function of the 70-msec period during the post-CS interval for each treatment group on (A) CS-alone trials with an eyeblink response and (B) CS-alone trials without an eyeblink response. Standard scores for sessions 1, 5, and 10 of unpaired eyeblink conditioning as a function of the 70-msec period during the post-CS interval for each treatment group on (A) CS-alone trials with an eyeblink response and (B) CS-alone trials without an eyeblink response. A standard score of approximately 2.0 represents a significant increase in activity above baseline. The same analyses were performed for tone presentations with no eyeblink response. These analyses revealed no significant effects for session 1 or 5. For session 10, a significant treatment effect was revealed, F(2,41) = 7.54, P < 0.01. Post-hoc Tukey's HSD tests showed that Group EtOH had significantly less change in interpositus nucleus activity from the pre-tone to the post-tone interval compared to Group SI (P = 0.001). (Fig. B). The results of the standard score analysis were supported by the proportion of neurons that showed significant activation in periods 4 and/or 5 on trials with a response but not on trials without a response (see Fig. B).
Learning and Interpositus Nucleus Activity in Ethanol-Exposed Rats | As in our previous study , rats exposed to binge levels of ethanol as neonates were impaired in acquisition of 350-msec delay eyeblink conditioning as adults. Deficits did not appear quite as large in the current study because the control animals did not perform quite as well as previously. In particular, two rats in Group SI performed exceptionally poorly compared with the other nine rats in Group SI in the current study and the eight rats in Group SI in our previous study. Comparisons between rats that received paired training versus those that received unpaired training in each treatment group showed that rats in Group EtOH showed no differences in performance (except for session 1) whether they received paired or unpaired training, whereas rats in Group SI and rats in Group UC that underwent paired training almost always differed from their counterparts that underwent unpaired training in sessions 4 to 10. Overall, in the current study, as in our previous study, there appear to be learning deficits in adult rats exposed to binge levels of ethanol as neonates in that they always learned eyeblink conditioning more poorly than did unintubated controls. Rats that undergo sham intubation usually perform somewhat more poorly than unintubated controls but better than ethanol-exposed rats, indicating that the stress of the intubation procedure may have some long-term effects on eyeblink conditioning. However, the effects of early exposure to binge levels of ethanol on eyeblink conditioning in adult rats are clearly a greater factor than is the stress of the intubation procedure in producing deficits in adult eyeblink conditioning. The learning deficits in Group EtOH rats do not appear to be due to a simple inability to perform an eyeblink, as indicated by (1) similar numbers of spontaneous blinks in ethanol-exposed and control rats ; (2) similar number of startle responses to the tone in ethano