Age-Related Impairment in the 250-Millisecond Delay Eyeblink Classical Conditioning Procedure in C57BL/6 Mice
In this study we tested 4-, 9-, 12-, and 18-month-old C57BL/6 mice in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure to study age-related changes in a form of associative learning. The short life expectancy of mice, complete knowledge about the mouse genome, and the availability of transgenic and knock-out mouse models of age-related impairments make the mouse an excellent species for expanding knowledge on the neurobiologically and behaviorally well-characterized eyeblink classical conditioning paradigm. Based on previous research with delay eyeblink conditioning in rabbits and humans, we predicted that mice would be impaired on this cerebellar-dependent associative learning task in middle-age, at similar9 months. To fully examine age differences in behavior in mice, we used a battery of additional behavioral measures with which to compare young and older mice. These behaviors included the acoustic startle response, prepulse inhibition, rotorod, and the Morris water maze. Mice began to show impairment in cerebellar-dependent tasks such as rotorod and eyeblink conditioning at 9 to 12 months of age. Performance in hippocampally dependent tasks was not impaired in any group, including 18-month-old mice. These results in mice support results in other species, indicating that cerebellar-dependent tasks show age-related deficits earlier in adulthood than do hippocampally dependent tasks.

The eyeblink classical conditioning paradigm is a powerful tool for studying learning and memory because it is well-characterized on a neurobiological and behavioral basis. In addition, the sensitivity, reliability, and generalization across species that eyeblink conditioning has shown is remarkable. There are more published studies on rabbits and humans tested in eyeblink classical conditioning than on any other form of Pavlovian conditioning. Furthermore, dramatic parallels exist between the effects of normal aging in rabbits and humans in eyeblink conditioning. Given the short life expectancy of mice, the fact that the mouse genome is mapped, and the availability of transgenic and knock-out mouse models of neurodegenerative diseases related to aging, the mouse is an excellent species for expanding knowledge on age effects in eyeblink classical conditioning. The delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure is frequently used in conditioning studies. In the delay procedure, a neutral stimulus such as a tone conditioned stimulus (CS) is presented shortly before a blink-eliciting unconditioned stimulus (US), such as a puff of air directed to the eye. The two stimuli then briefly overlap and coterminate. After many pairings, the organism associates the stimuli and learns to blink to the tone CS in anticipation of the airpuff US. This behavior is characterized as a conditioned response (CR). The neural circuitry underlying formation of CRs has been almost entirely delineated, and striking parallels have been observed between several mammalian species (; ; ,). The essential site responsible for acquisition and retention resides in the cerebellum, ipsilateral to the conditioned eye . The cerebellum receives converging CS and US information, and develops learning-related neural activity during conditioning. Lesions of cerebellar cortex disrupt learning . Although not essential for delay eyeblink conditioning, the hippocampus can modulate the rate of learning in delay conditioning, increasing or slowing the rate of learning . Age differences in the cerebellum  and hippocampus  with normal aging are associated with deficits in eyeblink conditioning. Age-related impairments in eyeblink conditioning are documented in humans , rabbits , cats , rats , and mice . Additional serious impairment in eyeblink conditioning, beyond that observed in normal aging, has been observed in older adults with Alzheimer's disease (AD) . Furthermore, the 400-msec delay procedure may detect AD at a preclinical phase . Thus, the eyeblink conditioning paradigm is a fundamental tool for studying age- and neurodegeneration-related changes in the brain. Nonhuman mammalian models of eyeblink conditioning, with life expectancies shorter than the 76.9-year human life expectancy, provide a means to focus and experiment with processes of aging. The rabbit model has been used extensively. However, rabbit life expectancy is 8 years, far exceeding that of rodents. With the rapid evolution of mouse genetics, mouse models have gained increased attention in the neurobiology of aging . The short lifespan of mice and the extensive knowledge base on mouse genetics are among the qualities that make this species an excellent animal model for investigation of learning, memory, and aging. Techniques for testing rats, including neonatal rats, have been recently created , along with techniques to test eyeblink classical conditioning in normal, mutant, and transgenic mouse strains . Thus, the mouse model has recently emerged as a promising direction for future study. If aging mice are to be tested in the eyeblink conditioning paradigm, it is imperative that age parallels also be drawn between mice and other species. Using reproductive capacity as a biomarker, mice aged 2 months can reproduce and are roughly comparable to 4- to 6-month-old rabbits and adolescent humans. Likewise, an 8-month-old mouse begins to show decline in reproductive capacity and is comparable to an 18-month-old rabbit or a middle-aged human. On the basis of results in rabbits and humans, it is likely then that age-related impairments in eyeblink conditioning will begin in mice shortly after 8 mo. In the first published study of eyeblink conditioning in aging C57BL/6 mice,  reported age-related impairment in the 252-msec delay procedure in 20-month-old mice. The result of impairment only in very old mice is not completely parallel with studies in rabbits and humans. Age differences are observed in rabbits in the 750-msec delay eyeblink conditioning procedure by 24 mo ---the age when reproductive capacity begins to decline (for summary, see ). The longer 750-msec CS-US interval is significantly more difficult for both young and older rabbits. Age differences in the delay procedure at the shorter and less difficult CS-US interval, 250 msec, occur at a later age in rabbits ---36 months . Based on life expectancy, a 20-month-old mouse is comparable to an 80-month-old rabbit. However, we observed age-related deficits in the 250-msec delay procedure in 36-month-old rabbits. Extrapolating rabbit life expectancy to mouse life expectancy, data from our laboratory indicate that mice should show age-related impairment in the 250-msec delay eyeblink conditioning procedure around the age of 9 mo. To examine fully age-related impairments in mice, we have developed a test battery to compare young and older mice across multiple behaviors. These behaviors include the acoustic startle response, prepulse inhibition, rotorod, and the Morris water maze. Acoustic startle response is a test that has been used previously to examine hearing abilities in mice . Several studies have pointed out that middle-aged C57BL/6 mice begin to show presbycusis, and that this age-related hearing loss can be profound . The acoustic startle response and prepulse inhibition are measures that we use to ensure that auditory acuity is not a confound in our eyeblink classical conditioning measures of learning and memory that use an auditory CS. Prepulse inhibition is also a measure that provides insight into mechanisms of sensorimotor gating, alertness, information processing, and attention . These processes are affected in normal aging and AD, and prepulse inhibition in aging C57BL/6 mice shows decline around 18 months of age . Rotorod is a motor learning and coordination task for which the cerebellum is essential. Purkinje cell loss with age reduces cerebellar volume. Because deficits in the cerebellar-dependent eyeblink conditioning paradigm begin to appear in middle age, and because these deficits are associated with a reduction in cerebellar volume, it is useful to compare performance decline in these cerebellar-dependent tasks. The Morris water maze is a hippocampally dependent spatial learning task. The hippocampus is affected profoundly in AD, and it is necessary to examine the integrity of the hippocampus in normal aging. We predicted that age differences in the cerebellar-dependent eyeblink conditioning and rotorod tasks would occur at an earlier age than do age differences in the hippocampally dependent Morris water maze task. The prediction for age differences in acoustic startle and prepulse inhibition performance was that they should occur at an intermediate age between the age at which eyeblink conditioning and rotorod deficits appear and the age at which Morris water maze deficits appear. Taken together, these results with eyeblink conditioning and other behavioral tasks will help to integrate eyeblink classical conditioning data into the extensive body of research literature on aging mice.
Age Differences in Eyeblink Classical Conditioning | Paired CS and US data were first collected for 10 days from 9- and 12-month-old groups. These preliminary data were hand-scored by a trained technician who observed the mouse in the conditioning chamber and scored CRs when an eyeblink response to the tone CS occurred before a head twitch response to the shock US. Because the responses were scored by direct visual observation in the short 250-msec CS-US interval, response latencies were not assessed. It was not possible to correct the responses scored as CRs with short-latency responses, and it was also difficult to eliminate all of the bad trials that included eyeblinks before CS onset in the hand-scored analysis. A 2 (age group) x 10 (training session) repeated- measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) determined that age differences in percentage of CRs were not significant (F[1,12] = 3.56, P = 0.083). There was a significant effect of acquisition of CRs over trials (F[9,108] = 8.04, P < 0.0001; Fig. ).  Figure 1 | Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 9 (n = 7) and 12 (n = 7) months over ten 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by hand-scoring of CRs. Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 9 (n = 7) and 12 (n = 7) months over ten 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by hand-scoring of CRs. Hand-scored data indicate that mice aged 9 and 12 months acquire CRs at a similar rate. CRs are hand-scored by observing blinking to a 10-kHz tone conditioned stimulus (CS) just before a head twitch response to the 0.5-mA shock unconditioned stimulus (US). Paired CS and US data were then collected for 10 d from 4- and 18-month-old groups, and for 5 d from a different group of 12-month-old mice. Data in the explicitly unpaired condition in which the CS and US are presented independently were also collected from a 4-month-old group for 5 d. These data were scored by a computer as described in the Materials and Methods section. To determine if our hand-scoring method was comparable to the computer-scoring methods, we compared five sessions of acquisition data in 12-month-old mice tested with the hand- or computer-scoring methods. A 2 (scoring method) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed no significant scoring method, training session, or interaction effect, indicating that our hand-scoring and computer-scoring methods were roughly comparable for assessing percentage of CRs. Rapid acquisition occurred in 4-, 12-, and 18-month-old mice over five training sessions, although the young mice acquired CRs more rapidly than did the older mice. Using the dependent measure of percentage of CRs, a 3 (age group) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. This analysis revealed a significant main effect for training session (F[4,84] = 11.37, P < 0.001), and a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[8,84] = 2.94, P < 0.01; Fig. ). The age group effect was not significant. Using the dependent measure of CR onset latency, a 3 (age group) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. This analysis revealed a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[8,84] = 2.23, P < 0.05), which occurred because CR onset latency declined over sessions in the 12-month-old group but remained relatively stable in the 4- and 18-month-old groups. The main effect for training session approached significance (P = 0.07), and the age group effect was not significant.  Figure 2 | Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 4 (n = 8), 12 (n = 8), and 18 (n = 8) months over five 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 4 (n = 8), 12 (n = 8), and 18 (n = 8) months over five 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. CRs are scored by the computer if electromyography activity in the orbicularis oculi muscle exceeds 5 standard deviations above baseline activity between 80 and 250 msec after the CS onset. Using the dependent measure of percentage of short-latency responses (responses occurring between 0 and 80 msec after CS onset that have traditionally been called alpha or startle responses), a 3 (age group) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. This analysis revealed a significant main effect for training session (F[4,84] = 6.13, P < 0.0001), as well as a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[8,84] = 2.66, P < 0.05). There was not a significant age group effect. Whereas the 4-month-old group showed no difference in short-latency responses across training sessions, both 12- and 18-month-old groups produced significantly more short-latency responses on training session 2 than on training session 1. The number of short-latency responses produced by these groups did not increase significantly beyond training session 2. A 3 (age group) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the number of excluded bad trials. There were no significant age group or training session effects, and no interaction between age group and training session was observed. Except in rare circumstances, the number of excluded trials generally remained <10 (10%), with most training sessions excluding <5% of the trials. For the 4- and 18-month-old mice on which there were data for 10 training sessions, a 2 (age group) x 10 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant training session effect (F[9,126] = 2.98, P < 0.01) and a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[9,126] = 2.31, P < 0.05; Fig. ). The age group effect was not significant. Using the dependent measure of CR onset latency, a 2 (age group) x 10 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. This analysis revealed no significant main effects and no interaction between age group and training session. Nevertheless, mice in both age groups decreased their CR onset latencies numerically from the first to the last training session. CR onset latency for mice in training session 1 was 121.1 and 119.8 msec for young and old mice, respectively. CR onset latency in training session 10 was 115.1 and 111.7 msec for young and old mice, respectively. Using the dependent measure of percentage of short-latency responses, a 2 (age group) x 10 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. This analysis revealed a significant main effect for training session (F[9,126] = 2.67, P < 0.01), as well as a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[9,126] = 2.28, P < 0.05). The age group effect was not significant. Whereas the 4-month-old group showed no difference in short-latency responses across training sessions, 18-month-old mice produced significantly more short-latency responses on training sessions 4, 7, 8, and 9 than on training session 1. A 2 (age group) x 10 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the number of excluded bad trials. Neither the main effects nor the interaction was significant.  Figure 3 | Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 4(n = 8) and 18 (n = 8) months over ten 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) in mice aged 4(n = 8) and 18 (n = 8) months over ten 90-paired trial sessions in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. Data from young and old mice indicate that young mice show ceiling performance on the first day, whereas old mice do not perform at a comparable level until the second day of training. Because young mice produced such a high percentage of CRs in the first training session, the data were analyzed block by block (groups of nine paired trials/block) over the first training session in a 3 (age group) x 10 (block of nine paired trials) repeated-measures ANOVA. There was a significant effect of age (F[2,21] = 21.51, P < 0.0001). A post hoc analysis using the Tukey honestly significant difference test (HSD) indicated that 4-month-old mice significantly outperformed both 12- and 18-month-old mice on the first day of acquisition (Fig. A). There was also a significant effect of training block (F[9,189] = 2.27, P < 0.02) and a significant age group by training session interaction (F[18,189] = 2.70, P < 0.0001). Given this significant interaction, we performed a one-way repeated-measures analysis for the 4-month-old group, comparing percentage of CRs over the 10 training blocks. There was a significant simple main effect of block within the group of 4-month-olds (F[9,63] = 4.19, P < 0.0001), indicating that learning occurred in this group throughout the first 100 trials of training. Block-by block analysis for training session 2 indicated that there were no group differences on this subsequent training day (Fig. B). Percentage of CRs collected in 4-month-old mice in the paired and explicitly unpaired conditions over five training sessions were compared using a 2 (condition) x 5 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA. Group differences were revealed (F[1,14] = 21.37, P < 0.0001), indicating percentage of CRs in the paired CS-US condition were significantly greater than were responses in a CR period in the unpaired condition .  Figure 4 | (A) Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) on session 1 in mice aged 4 (n = 8), 12 (n = 8), and 18 (n = 8) months over 10 nine-paired trial blocks in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. (A) Percentage of conditioned responses (CRs) on session 1 in mice aged 4 (n = 8), 12 (n = 8), and 18 (n = 8) months over 10 nine-paired trial blocks in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. Block-by-block CR acquisition on the first day of training reveals that older mice acquire CRs considerably more slowly than do young mice. (B) Percentage of CRs on session 2 in the same mice over 10 nine-paired trial blocks in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure as assessed by computer scoring of CRs. The second day of acquisition shows that age-related differences in percent CR do not extend beyond the first training session. Figure 5 | Percentage of responses, as assessed by computer scoring, to a 10-kHz tone stimulus in mice aged 4 months (n = 8) who received paired conditioned stimulus (CS)-unconditioned stimulus (US) training in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure, and 4 months (n = 8) who received explicitly unpaired presentations of the CS and US. Percentage of responses, as assessed by computer scoring, to a 10-kHz tone stimulus in mice aged 4 months (n = 8) who received paired conditioned stimulus (CS)-unconditioned stimulus (US) training in the 250-msec delay eyeblink classical conditioning procedure, and 4 months (n = 8) who received explicitly unpaired presentations of the CS and US. Eyeblink data from 4-month-old mice shows that mice in the paired CS-US procedure produce significantly more responses than do mice in the explicitly unpaired procedure. Responses during the CR period decreased from day 1 to day 5 in the explicitly unpaired procedure.  Age Differences in Rotorod | Two dependent measures, taken from the rotorod task that are often examined as indicators of motor coordination and motor learning are walk time and latency to fall. Walk time is a measure of the time that the mouse is actively walking on the rotating beam. Latency to fall is a measure of the amount time the mouse is able to avoid falling. Because mice may have a tendency to grip the rotorod and passively rotate rather than actively locomote, these two dependent measures may differ. Paired samples t tests were conducted between the daily mean for walk time and latency to fall at each rotation speed. The absence of significant differences indicated that mice spent their time on the rotorod actively walking rather than passively rotating. Because no difference was revealed between walk time and latency to fall, the latter measure was used in the present analyses to assess motor abilities. Figure  depicts the rotorod performance of all age groups at both 15 and 25 revolutions per minute (rpm). A 3 (age group) x 3 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA, analyzing the 15-rpm data set, revealed a significant main effect for age group (F[2,80] = 8.17, P < 0.01) and for training session (F[2,160] = 182.18, P < 0.001), as well as a significant interaction between age group and training (F[4,160] = 5.01, P < 0.01). Examining the main effect of training session within each age group, post hoc tests using the Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons indicated that learning occurred in all groups. The 18-month-old group showed a significant difference in latency to fall between the training sessions, showing longer latencies each session. The 4- and 12-month-old groups both showed significant motor learning between the first and second training sessions, and no difference between sessions 2 and 3. This result most likely indicates ceiling performance in the 15-rpm rotorod task by session 2 in young and middle-aged mice. A Tukey HSD post hoc test determined that the 4-month-old group outperformed the 12-month-old group in session 1, as well as the 18-month-old group in sessions 1 and 2 of the 15-rpm rotorod task. There were no differences between 12- and 18-month-old 15-rpm rotorod performance in any training session .  Figure 6 | Rotorod performance of mice aged 4 (n = 28), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months, at 15 or 25 revolutions per minute (rpm), over three test days. Rotorod performance of mice aged 4 (n = 28), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months, at 15 or 25 revolutions per minute (rpm), over three test days. Learning in the cerebellar-dependent rotorod task is impaired in older mice at both 15 and 25 rpm. The 15-rpm procedure is sensitive to deficits found in 18-month-old mice. These mice do not perform similarly to 4 month olds until the third day of training. The 25-rpm procedure is sensitive to deficits found in both 12- and 18-month-old mice. Learning, nonetheless, is expressed by all age groups in both procedures. A 3 (group) x 3 (training session) repeated-measures ANOVA, analyzing the 25-rpm data set, also revealed a significant main effect for age group (F[2,80] = 21.30, P < 0.001) and training session (F[2,160] = 92.81, P < 0.001), as well as a significant interaction between age group and training session (F[4,160] = 2.57, P < 0.05). Examining the main effect of training session within each age group, simple effects tests revealed the degree to which repeated training was effective in improving 25-rpm rotorod performance in each age group. Significant differences were revealed in the 4-month (F[2,79] = 16.78, P < 0.001), 12-month (F[2,79] = 40.23, P < 0.001), and 18-month-old groups (F[2,79] = 23.92, P < 0.001). Post hoc tests using the Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons found that learning occurred in all groups. The 12- and 18-month-old groups showed a significant difference in latency to fall between the training sessions, showing longer latencies each session. The 4-month-old group showed significant motor learning between the first and second test session, and no difference between sessions 2 and 3. This most likely indicates ceiling performance in the 25-rpm rotorod task by session 2 in young mice. A Tukey HSD post hoc test determined that the 4-month-old group outperformed the 12-month-old group on sessions 1 and 2, as well as the 18-month-old group on all training sessions of the 25-rpm rotorod task. There were no differences between 12- and 18-month-old 25-rpm rotorod performance on any training session . A Pearson product-moment correlation was performed between percentage of CRs on the first training day for the 46 mice in the age range of 4 to 18 months that were tested with the 250-msec eyeblink classical conditioning procedure and rotorod. The latency to remain on the rotorod at 25 rpm was positively correlated with percentage of CRs (r = 0.56, P = 0.004). Percentage of CRs was not correlated at significant level with dependent measures from the acoustic startle, prepulse inhibition, or Morris water maze assessments.  Age Differences in Acoustic Startle | The intensity of a startle response is measured according to the amount of stabilimeter deflection that a mouse's body movement causes when it is presented with an auditory stimulus. The deflection is transduced into a congruent electrical pulse, which is read into the computer in millivolts. Response intensity is expressed as Vmax, the measure of maximum voltage transduced when movement occurs in the startle chamber. It is possible that the weight of an animal may contribute to the intensity of the response, and therefore, the effect of weight on response intensity must first be considered. Correlations between weight and Vmax were conducted within the three age groups to determine to what extent an animal's weight has contributed to the response intensity evoked by the startle stimuli. None of the correlations approached significance, indicating that weight had little effect on Vmax. A 3 (age group) x 3 (dB level) ANOVA indicated a significant main effect for age group (F[2,76] = 35.42; P < 0.001) and decibel level (F[1,76] = 196.58; P < 0.001), and a significant interaction between age group and startle decibel level (F[2,79] = 27.41; P < 0.001). Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test revealed differences in responding between groups at all dB levels. The only nonsignificant difference was between the 4- and 12-month-old startle responses to a 110-dB stimulus . Within subjects post hoc analyses using the Bonferroni test revealed that mice in the 4-month-old group showed a significant difference in Vmax between the decibel levels, showing larger responses to louder sounds. In all other age groups, however, response intensity did not necessarily increase as stimulus intensity increased. Although there were large startle responses shown by the 12-month-old group, no significant differences in Vmax were detected between the decibel levels. The 18-month-old group showed no difference in startle between 95 and 110 dB, but a significant increase in Vmax was detected at 125 dB. This indicates a deficit in responding to lower decibel levels in older mice.  Figure 7 | Maximum startle response to a 95-, 110-, or 125-dB stimulus in mice aged 4 (n = 24), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months. Maximum startle response to a 95-, 110-, or 125-dB stimulus in mice aged 4 (n = 24), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months. Young mice produce larger startle responses to louder stimuli. This is not necessarily true for older mice. Although 12-month-old mice show strong reactions to the three dB levels, there is no difference between these reactions. Mice aged 18 months produce small startle responses to 95- and 110-dB stimuli, but a significant increase in startle is not observed until the loudest stimulus is presented. The low Vmax values produced by 18-month old mice at 95 and 110 dB may indicate that the mice were not hearing the stimuli well. To examine the possibility that older mice did not hear the stimulus at 95 and 110 dB, paired samples t tests were used to examine differences in Vmax between no-stimulus trials (which record baseline chamber activity without presenting stimuli) and the lower decibel levels. Significant differences were observed between 95 dB and no-stimulus trials (t[27] = 3.47, P < 0.01) and between 110 dB and no-stimulus trials (t[27] = 3.57, P < 0.01). In each case, the stimulus trials evoked a significantly higher Vmax than the no-stimulus trials, indicating that 18-month-old mice heard the stimuli and produced startle responses.  Age Differences in Prepulse Inhibition | Percentage prepulse inhibition (PPI) was calculated as follows: [100 -(Prepulse + Startle/Startle Alone) x 100], where "Prepulse + Startle" is the average response in the prepulse trials, and "Startle Alone" is the average response in trials without prepulse stimuli . A 3 (age group) x 3 (prepulse decibel level) ANOVA indicated a significant age group effect (F[2,76] = 25.40; P < 0.001) and a prepulse dB level effect (F[2,152] = 59.53; P < 0.001), as well as an interaction between age group and prepulse dB level (F[4,152] = 15.92; P < 0.01; Fig. ). Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test examined differences in percent inhibition between age groups. These analyses revealed significant differences between both the 4- and 12-month-old groups and the 18-month-old group for the 80-dB prepulse stimulus and the 85-dB prepulse stimulus. The 90-dB prepulse stimulus produced significant differences between the 12-month-old and the 18-month-old groups only. There were no differences between the 4- and 12-month-old groups at any decibel level of the prepulse stimulus.  Figure 8 | Percent inhibition of a startle response as a result of an 80-, 85-, or 90-dB prepulse stimulus being presented shortly before a 125-dB startle stimulus in mice aged 4 (n = 24), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months. Percent inhibition of a startle response as a result of an 80-, 85-, or 90-dB prepulse stimulus being presented shortly before a 125-dB startle stimulus in mice aged 4 (n = 24), 12 (n = 27), and 18 (n = 28) months. A high percent PPI indicates that the prepulse inhibited the startle response. Mice aged 4 and 12 months perform at a similar rate, but 18-month-old mice are impaired. Because startle was not inhibited with an 80-dB prepulse stimulus, the hearing threshold for 18-month-old mice is most likely between 80 and 85 dB. Impairment in attention and sensory gating may be to blame for low inhibition at 85 and 90 dB. Examining the main effect of prepulse intensity within each age group, simple effects tests revealed the degree to which the prepulse decibel level is differentially effective at inhibiting the startle response in each age group. Significant differences were observed in the 12- (F[2,75] = 4.87; P < 0.05) and 18-month-old (F[2,75] = 74.89; P < 0.001) groups. Post hoc tests using the Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons revealed significant differences between all prepulse intensities except 85 and 90 dB in 12-month-old mice, and between all prepulse intensities in 18-month-old mice. Although 4-month-old mice showed inhibition of the startle response across all prepulse intensities, there were no significant differences. The change in PPI across prepulse intensities did approach significance, however, and a general trend was that louder prepulse decibel levels produced greater inhibition. This trend was observed across all age groups. The lack of any response inhibition at the 80-dB level in the 18-month-old mice likely indicates that the oldest mice were unable to hear the prepulse stimulus.  Age Differences in Morris Water Task | Hidden PlatformTraining | During acquisition, or hidden platform training, mice were repeatedly introduced to a pool filled with aversively cool water and were required to learn the location of a hidden escape platform using station