Evolutionary and Historical Aspects of the Burden of Malaria
Malaria is among the oldest of diseases. In one form or another, it has infected and affected our ancestors since long before the origin of the human line. During our recent evolution, its influence has probably been greater than that of any other infectious agent. Here we attempt to trace the forms and impacts of malaria from a distant past through historical times to the present. In the last sections, we review the current burdens of malaria across the world and discuss present-day approaches to its management. Only by following, or attempting to follow, malaria throughout its evolution and history can we understand its character and so be better prepared for our future management of this ancient ill.

This article is about the nature and impact of malaria; it is not a review of scientific research on malaria. It explores how, when, and where malaria parasites, their mosquito vectors, and humans, may have interacted and with what effect on ourselves, their human hosts. This is not a straightforward task. It is hampered by difficulties of collecting appropriate and reliable data and by problems of their interpretation. Inferences or conclusions may vary from well-founded and widely accepted to tentative or controversial. But, while the picture remains blurred in a number of places, the many faces and features of malaria and its imprint on the human species emerge, usually clearly and unmistakably. Many published discussions have dealt with the experiences of malaria, its nature, and its effects (see, e.g., references , , , , , -, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ). They are informative and revealing, especially because each is a product of the medical and human health context, general outlook, and knowledge base of its time. Our present times also offer a unique perspective on this subject. It is only within the past half century that we have experienced malaria against a background of human health and health services which are, for the most part, vastly better than in all previous generations. In the same period, we have witnessed both the achievements of the first globally coordinated health delivery programs and also their problems. Within recent decades, and especially the last, biochemical and molecular genetic technologies to investigate distant events in the evolution and coevolution of malaria parasites and humans have become available. The following, therefore, is a brief reconstruction of the evolution and history of malaria and its burdens as we may perceive them at the start of the 21st century.
Malaria is due to blood infection by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium, which are transmitted from one human to another by female Anopheles mosquitoes. Four species of malaria parasite infect humans . The two which almost certainly achieved the widest global distribution are Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium malariae. To the Europeans, these have been known and characterized since historically ancient times  as the "benign tertian" (P. vivax) and "quartan" (P. malariae) periodic fevers. "Benign tertian" fevers were so named because they were not associated with the severe and often fatal manifestations of the "subtertian, malignant" periodic fevers (P. falciparum). "Tertian" and "quartan" refers to their characteristic feature of an acute febrile episode, or paroxysm, that returns respectively every third (P. vivax) or fourth (P. malariae) day. Tertian and quartan fevers are referred to with similar frequency in writings from northern Europe through much of the past millennium and from around the shores of the Mediterranean Sea from about the 5th century B.C. onward . Today, P. malariae has lost whatever predominance it may once have had and P. vivax and P. falciparum are the most commonly encountered malaria parasites . P. vivax is still found sporadically in some temperate regions, where in the past it was widely prevalent. It remains, however, very common throughout much of the tropics and subtropics. Because of the temperature limitations on its transmission by its mosquito vectors, P. falciparum is normally present only in tropical, subtropical, and warm temperate regions. In the tropics today, P. falciparum remains widely prevalent. The fourth human malaria parasite is Plasmodium ovale, which, like P. vivax, is the agent of a tertian malaria and which, also like P. vivax malaria today, carries a very low risk of fatal outcome. P. ovale has the most limited distribution of all the malaria parasites of humans. While it is prevalent throughout most of sub-Saharan Africa, it is otherwise known to be endemic only in New Guinea and the Philippines . TABLE 1 | Some representative distributions of the four recognized species of malaria parasites of humans in the world today
Before we attempt to trace the passage and effects of malaria through evolutionary and historical time, we will review the principles which determine how malaria affects individuals and populations.
The experience of malarial infection has many different forms, which we touch on here in outline. The diseases due to all four species of malaria parasite share the characteristic febrile episodes with their tendency to regular periodic paroxyms with chills, rigors, and sweating. They also have many symptoms in common with other infectious illnesses, including body aches, headache and nausea, general weakness, and prostration. Untreated infections of malaria are characterized by enlargement of the spleen. In P. falciparum malaria, severe and life-threatening conditions commonly arise. These cause dysfunction of vital organs, i.e., the lungs, kidneys, liver, and, most famously, the brain during "cerebral malaria." Severe anaemia can occur. These are the conditions which are associated with most of the mortality of acute malaria. Chronic infection with P. malariae can result in a nephrotic syndrome, and this, too, can eventually be fatal. Repeated attacks of malaria due to any species of the parasites over several to many years severely debilitate body and mind. Cachexia, a wasting of body tissues, takes place, and splenic enlargement becomes a constant feature. Lethargic and with sunken and sallow features, spindly limbs, and hard swollen belly is the general description of the condition. In this state the affected individual succumbs to diseases or other hardships that would scarcely threaten a person in reasonable health. Under the burden of chronic malaria, both the quality and duration of life are greatly reduced. An individual's experience of malaria at a particular time is, however, strongly governed by the type and degree of antimalarial immunity that he or she may have attained.
Protective immunity against malaria can be thought of in different categories. There are two types of clinical immunity, one which reduces the risk of death from malaria and another which reduces the intensity of clinical symptoms. A third type of protective antimalarial immunity is antiparasitic immunity, which directly reduces the numbers of parasites in an infected individual. These are epidemiological definitions of immunity. The actual cellular and molecular mechanisms of immunity may overlap to a considerable degree between these categories. The number of malarial inoculations experienced, and the intervals between them, are all-important to the malaria immune status of an individual. In the case of acute attacks of P. falciparum malaria, it is possible that a degree of immunity to some aspects of severe, life-threatening disease may be achieved after only one or two infections . However, clinical immunity to other, non-life-threatening clinical effects of malaria requires more and frequent inoculations of malaria . Effective antiparasitic immunity is achieved only after very many and frequent infections . Two other forms of acquired immunity to malaria should be mentioned here. One is immunity which could protect against the parasites ever becoming established in a human host, in other words immunity against the stages which are introduced into the human body by a mosquito bite. These are the sporozoites and also the early, nonpathogenic stages as they develop in the liver. While immunity against sporozoites and liver stages may eventually develop following long exposure to intense malaria transmission, it is probably not very significant in the crucial early years of exposure. The other form of nonprotective immunity against malaria parasites is that against the sexual blood stages of the parasites. These are the stages which are infective to mosquitoes. Antibodies against antigens in gametocytes and gametes of malaria parasites develop readily during the course of natural infections and probably have some effect on the transmission dynamics of malaria in certain endemic situations. Anti-sexual-stage immunity, however, has no direct relevance to the status of an individual with respect to his or her experience of a current malarial infection. The attainment of protective immunity against the disease-causing asexual blood stages of malaria parasites is a complex process. Not only is such immunity specific to each parasites species, but also there is certainly a major element of parasite "strain" specificity to antimalarial immunity . Much of the slow acquisition of antiparasitic immunity occurs because an individual is usually subjected to a succession of inoculations of parasites which are genetically and antigenically distinct from each other. Therefore, to combat each infection, a human host must mount a new and "strain"-specific immune response to each antigenically distinct parasite inoculum. Only when a sufficiently wide spectrum of such parasite "strains" has been experienced is effective immunity achieved against all the parasites within a locality where infection is endemic. However, not only are the parasites in different inoculations genetically different but also, during the course of each infection, the parasites from a single inoculation undergo clonal "antigenic variation" . To control an infection, the host must mount a new specific immune response to each new antigenic variant as it arises. Through this process, a single malarial infection can be prolonged over many months to years. Because of the time taken to achieve effective immunity to malaria under conditions of endemic infection, antimalarial immunity is often said to be "age dependent." In the sense intended, however, it would be more accurate to say that it is "duration of exposure dependent." There are, nevertheless, truly age-dependent aspects both to the attainment of immunity and to the pathologic responses to malarial infection. Very young children appear to have a poor capacity to acquire effective protective antimalarial immunity of any sort, while older children and adults may so do more readily . Infants and the very young are more prone to malarial anaemia, while cerebral damage due to P. falciparum malaria predominates in slightly older children. Yet other severe conditions, including renal, hepatic, and pulmonary failure, are most commonly seen in adults . Every individual exposed to endemic malaria thus faces a long and dangerous battle to achieve protective immunity against the diversity of malaria parasites and their antigens to which he or she may become exposed. However, having been achieved at such cost, effective immunity is readily lost again. An interval of perhaps half a year to a year without reinfection appears to be sufficient to leave an individual vulnerable, once more, to the full impact of a malarial infection (, , ; A. Lukas, personal communication). Direct evidence for this statement is admittedly hard to find, yet it has long been attested by anecdote and expert opinion. Loss of protective immunity within a few months without reinfection also appears to hold in relation to infection-induced protective immunity against malaria in animals (R. Carter, unpublished observations). If the above statement is indeed correct, then the number, type, and pattern of delivery of malarial inoculations, in other words the type of malarial endemicity, to which an individual is exposed must profoundly affect his or her immune status and hence disease status, as is now discussed.
Following the approach of MacDonald , malarial endemicity may be categorized into three types . One is stable endemic malaria. Stable malaria occurs when a population is continuously exposed to a fairly constant rate of malarial inoculation. The next category is unstable endemic malaria, under which a population is subjected to more or less permanent malaria transmission but under circumstances in which there are large fluctuations in the rates at which malarial inoculations are delivered to individuals within the population. In terms of disease and immunity, these fluctuations become especially significant when they cause individuals to experience intervals of a year to several years between inoculations of malaria. The third type is epidemic malaria. This is, in effect, an extreme form of unstable malaria. It occurs when a population, or even a small group of individuals, is subjected to an increase in malaria transmission rates above that previously or normally experienced. When P. falcaparum is involved, malaria epidemics can be among the most lethal forces of nature. It should be noted that the mean rates of malarial inoculation or transmission intensity are not included in the definitions of any of these three types of malarial endemicity. High or low transmission rates can, in principle, occur for stable, unstable, and epidemic malaria  . Nevertheless, the highest natural malaria inoculation rates, those of hundreds of infectious bites per individual per year, probably occur only under stable endemic conditions. Inoculation rates of as few as one or two infectious bites per year are characteristic of unstable conditions but can also be encountered under conditions of stable endemic malaria . Malaria epidemics can, and probably often do, occur under conditions of relatively low to moderate malarial inoculation rates . TABLE 2 | Characteristics of the three categories of malaria transmission
Stable malaria. | Under conditions of stable malaria, because of the regularly delivered inoculations, a strong protective immunity against overt illness and risk of death from malaria is acquired, usually by the age of 4 or 5 years. Before this age there is much morbidity and mortality, especially in the presence of P. falciparum malaria. Historically, and still today, such conditions have prevailed mainly in sub-Saharan Africa. The following quotation is characteristic of the historical picture of malaria in tropical Africa. "In East Africa 50% of native children die before the age of 4 years, mostly from malaria" (Brumpt, 1922, quoted in reference ). The so-called age-dependent pattern of immunity to malaria in sub-Saharan Africa is often attributed to the intense malaria transmission rates in this region. However, we suggest that it is the stability of malaria transmission in tropical Africa, due to biological features of the Anopheles gambiae group of vectors of malaria, their ecology, and their environment (discussed below), that is the more important feature of African malaria transmission. Because, individuals rarely go more than a few months without a malaria challenge under conditions of stable transmission, there is little risk that immunity, once attained, will be lost again. This remains true even in the setting of quite low annual malarial inoculation rates . There is, nevertheless, a clear shift from severe malarial disease in younger children (younger than 5 years) toward relatively increased rates of both mild  and severe  disease in older age groups at entomological malarial inoculation rates probably below about 10 to 20 infectious bites per year. However, under conditions of stable malaria in Africa, the lifetime risk of severe disease, and hence of direct malaria mortality, due to P. falciparum seems to remain fairly constant across the spectrum of inoculation rates from very high to very low .
By contrast, where transmission conditions are unstable, low to moderate mean malarial inoculation rates can be highly dangerous. This is because immunity to malaria, while slowly gained, is, as we have suggested, rapidly lost following perhaps half a year to a year without infection. Wherever the rate of delivery of malarial inoculations is both low and highly erratic, extended periods of a year or so without reinfection occur often, while at the same time the risk of eventual reinfection remains high. In these circumstances, individuals are vulnerable throughout life to clinically active malarial infection and are often affected by it. Furthermore, all species of malaria parasite, and not just P. falciparum, become dangerous under these conditions. Recurrent infections with any species of malaria parasite are eventually so debilitating that life expectancy can be reduced to half or less of that in a contemporary malaria-free and otherwise salubrious environment . The situation is illustrated by the following quotation which refers to malarious districts around the shores of the Mediterranean in the early 19th century. "The most fertile portions of (Italy) are a prey to (malaria); the labourer wanders... the ghost of a man, a sufferer from his cradle to his grave; aged even in childhood, and laying down in misery that (brief) life which was but one disease... . Such also is Sicily, such Sardinia and such is classic Greece. To live a living death and to be cut off from even half that life" . Wherever antimalarial immunity has declined, has been lost, or was never achieved in the first place, populations at the margins of malaria transmission zones are vulnerable to epidemic malaria. When P. falciparum is involved in an epidemic, death rates can become very high. A single untreated attack of P. falciparum malaria in a nonimmune individual carries a risk of death that may be anywhere from a few percent to at least 20 to 30% according to circumstances . These higher rates are the kinds of mortality rate that occur during P. falciparum malaria epidemics . The following quotation  is representative of these events. "In each house were... three or four patients who complained of chilling, severe headaches, sweating, pain in back and extremities... After four or five relapses, the headaches and pain became unbearable for many patients who then exhibited a muddling delirium with coma, ending in death. Most... were between the ages of 5 and 20 years. Since they are far away from even the simplest clinic, which means no possibility of saving their lives, they are dying like bees in a smoked hive" (from a Field Report from the 1958 malaria epidemic in Ethiopia ). In a season, this very typical malaria epidemic produced about 3.5 million cases of malaria among which both P. vivax and P. falciparum malaria would have been present; it took about 150,000 lives. Similar and even higher malaria mortality rates were experienced by Europeans entering tropical regions before the introduction of quinine in the mid-19th century (, -, , ). Indeed, the consequence of the introduction of nonimmune persons into a malaria-endemic region is, in effect, a form of epidemic malaria.
The differences in stability of malaria transmission, notably between tropical Africa and most other malarious regions, are due largely to the behaviors and other biological characteristics of the regional species and subspecies of Anopheles vectors and to their environment. The strong human-biting preferences and highly domestic habits of the tropical African vectors  lead to very uniform contact between them and the human blood source in sub-Saharan Africa. The climatic conditions are also highly conducive to malaria transmission, being warm and humid with relatively few fluctuations. This supports longevity of the vector mosquitoes and rapid development of the parasites within them. All of these features combine to a recipe for stable and, indeed, generally intense malaria transmission. Elsewhere, in the tropical, subtropical, and temperate worlds, the females of most Anopheles species have a preference for animal rather than human contact and have less domestic breeding, resting, and dispersal habits than the African vectors. The climates and especially the microclimates experienced by these vector mosquitoes are usually cooler, drier, and more variable than in tropical Africa, leading to more uncertain survival of the mosquitoes and less reliable development of the parasites within them. These are conditions that lead to highly erratic contact between potential vectors of human malaria and the human hosts and to very irregular delivery of malaria inoculations, in other words, to unstable malaria transmission. Epidemic malaria arises in any situation in which new or elevated malaria transmission capacity is suddenly introduced into a population with inadequate levels of immunity with which to absorb it. The circumstances under which this can occur are extremely diverse . Typically they involve nonimmune populations in otherwise malaria-free locations adjacent to regions of endemic malaria. An epidemic occurs when atypical weather, e.g., drought, excess rainfall, and higher than usual temperatures, create conditions that transiently support malaria transmission. However, warfare, pioneering, and malaria control, among other human activities, have all been responsible for the creation of malaria epidemics.
Under whatever condition of endemicity malaria occurs, much, and according to the evidence of a number of analyses, generally most , of the malaria-related mortality has in the past been an indirect result of the effects of malarial infection combined with other infections and conditions. Wherever interventions have been conducted for the reduction of malaria transmission, reductions in total mortality rates have been several times greater than the malaria-related death rates as estimated prior to the interventions . Some of this discrepancy may be due to failures to detect or account for all the deaths in which malaria would have been an apparent cause. However, most of the excess deaths associated with the presence of malaria, but not obviously due to malaria, can be attributed to delayed or indirect causes. These could include the nephropathy of long-term P. malariae infection . However, more generally, the deaths are due to the predisposing effects of malaria to death from other conditions such as respiratory infections  and malnutrition .
In historical times, and as recently as the early to mid-20th century in southern Asia, continual malarial infection and reinfection had devastating effects on the mental, physical, social, and economic conditions of the individuals and communities affected. In addition to its toll in death and general morbidity, there are several features of the burden of malaria that warrant specific mention. Malaria presents particular problems during pregnancy. This is probably due, at least in part, to the "immunosuppressed" status of the pregnant woman. Even in otherwise highly malaria-immune women, the risk of malarial infection in pregnancy is high, with increased risk of low birth weight, miscarriage, infant mortality , and morbidity and mortality in the pregnant woman. "Malaria exerts a considerable influence in reducing the births and increasing the number of still births in a community" (Bentley, 1911, quoted in reference ). Historically, "infantilism" in both sexes and impotence in males were associated with malarious areas . "One of the great evils is the impotency so commonly found in waterlogged villages (and) which results from the deterioration of the health produced by constant attacks of fever and the presence of an enlarged spleen" (Dyson, 1895, quoted in reference ). Together with the problems of malaria in pregnancy and infant mortality, these added up to a large reduction in the fecundity of a population and, in the worst-affected locations, contributed greatly to depopulation under the impact of malaria. "In hyperendemic and severely endemic (for malaria) districts in India the tendency is for the population to decline" . Among the most oppressive and, today, least appreciated of the effects of malaria is that on the mental state of the sufferer. Observers from many different times and places, including Hippocrates , Macculloch , Jones , Anderson , and Sinton , are remarkably consistent in their portrayals of the condition of the inhabitants of malarious regions especially in Europe or Asia. They depict individuals and communities in states of pronounced mental and psychological distress under the influence of endemic and invariably unstable or low-transmission malaria. The following are typical of these. "Anyone who has observed closely cases of malaria cannot fail to have noticed its effects upon the mentality of the sufferer ---mental activity is dulled, irritability of temper is the rule, initiative is lacking, decisions are put off or reached with difficulty, ambition is lost and depression is a prominent symptom" ; "School children in the Transvaal infected with chronic malaria were mentally classed as "feeble-minded"" (Leipoldt et al., 1921, quoted in reference ). In today's much healthier world, situations matching their descriptions are conspicuous by their absence. Nevertheless, and not to be confused with the immediate consequences of malarial infection itself on the mental state, a significant proportion of the survivors of malarial infections still carry mental or neurological deficits .
An adequate discussion of the economic effects of malaria is beyond the scope of this article. Populations exposed to the unremitting impact of malaria must always have lived and died in destitution of one degree or another. In historical times, economic enterprise has been difficult and often impossible in the presence of malaria . Malaria alone has often been sufficient to wreck efforts in pioneering, agriculture, and civil engineering, as illustrated by the following representative quotations. "The hyperendemic areas (for malaria), although sparsely inhabited, are often areas where large plantations and large industrial undertakings are situated and which are, therefore, often the site of a considerable immigrant populations that are quickly mown down." (Malaria Commission of the League of Nations, 1930, quoted in reference ); "While there is good land in the Southern United States as in the North, the land in the North sells at about 12 to 20 times the price, the difference being mainly due to malaria" (Carter, 1922, quoted in reference ); "Railway construction in the tropics is nearly always associated with fulminent epidemics of malaria ---"a death a sleeper" is the generalisation on the happenings" (Senior-White, 1928, quoted in reference ). Throughout history  and to the present day , wherever and however it may have manifested itself, malaria has always imposed one of the severest of impediments to social and economic development.
It can be no surprise, therefore, that malaria parasites should have had a profound impact on recent human evolution . This is the proposition of the "malaria hypothesis," which posits that certain human genetic polymorphisms, especially those affecting red blood cells (RBCs), have been selected to high frequencies because they have protected against the effects of malarial infections. Indeed, a greater number of identified human genetic polymorphisms meet some or all of the expectations of the malaria hypothesis than can be attributed to selection under any other single agent . The first statement of the malaria hypothesis was made in 1948 by J. B. S. Haldane , who proposed it as an explanation for the high frequencies of thalassemia around the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, where malaria had long been endemic. Probably unknown to Haldane at the time, a possible association between another inherited hemoglobinopathy, the sickle cell trait, and protection against malaria had already been noted. In 1946, in a study of inpatients at a regional hospital in Northern Rhodesia, now Zambia, E. A. Beet had recorded lower rates of malarial infection among carriers of the sickle cell trait than amongst nonsicklers . In the following, we discuss the evidence for, and implications which arise from, the main candidate human polymorphisms to fall within the terms of the malaria hypothesis.
The thalassemias are a class of anaemias which are due to abnormalities in the genes coding for hemoglobin. They involve the effective loss of either the alpha (alpha thalassemias) or beta (beta thalassemias) chain of this molecule . Many different specific mutations in the genes for the alpha and beta haemoglobin chains are represented among the known thalassemias . In Europe, high frequencies of thalassemias are found around the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, as Haldane had noted . Elsewhere, thalassemias occur at elevated frequencies in populations through most of Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia, the Arabian peninsula, the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, southern China, and the islands of the Western Pacific from the Philippines in the north to the Timor Sea in the south and to New Guinea and the islands of Melanesia in the east . Up to about 2,000 years ago, these were the probable global limits within which malaria was endemic. The basis of Haldane's original conjecture  has been confirmed and expanded in several studies which show the association of thalassemias with the long-standing exposure of a population to the presence of malaria (see, e.g., references  and ). An approximately 50% reduction in the risk of malarial disease has recently been shown for both heretozygotes and homozygotes for certain alpha+ thalassemias .
6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency : Of broadly similar global distribution to the thalassemias are a group of mutations in the sex-linked gene for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) which give rise to the G6PD deficiencies . G6PD deficiencies were originally recognized as a clinical condition known as favism, so called because of the hemolytic crisis that can be caused in those affected, by the consumption of oxidant foods such as fava beans. Today, G6PD deficiency is a recognised hazard in malarious regions because of the associated risk of oxidant stress from taking antimalarial drugs such as primaquine. In heterozygous and hemizygous combinations, G6PD deficiency has now been shown to be associated with a level of protection of about 50% against severe P. falciparum malaria . Therefore, high rates of G6PD deficiency in many parts of the world can probably be accounted for as the result of selection by malaria. Recent evidence indicates that the alleles for G6PD deficiency were selected in African populations between 4,000 and 12,000 years ago . This period coincides with some estimates for the time of emergence of P. falciparum as a major human pathogen at around 4,000 years ago . Equally, however, the selection for G6PD deficiency may have preceded this event and overlapped a time when P. vivax malaria could still have been a major selective force in Africa (see below). So which parasite could have been responsible for the selection of G6PD deficiency in the African populations? It may often appear that the malaria hypothesis should be taken to apply mainly, or solely, to P. falciparum. However, as we shall further explore, the hypothesis is equally valid for P. vivax and perhaps for other species of human malaria parasites as well. That P. vivax malaria may represent a force for the selection of G6PD deficiency is consistent with the presence of elevated frequencies of G6PD deficiency in a population in northern Holland , where P. vivax malaria, but almost certainly not P. falciparum malaria, was prevalent for at least 500 years. We suggest that either or both of P. falciparum and P. vivax could have supplied the force that first selected for G6PD deficiency in African populations.
Neither the thalassemias nor G6PD deficiency is highly protective against death from P. falciparum malaria, with each appearing to reduce the risk by about 50%. There are, however, human mutations which give at least 90% protection against the mortality of malarial infection. These include the gene for sickle cell hemoglobin, or hemoglobin S. The possible protective effects of the sickle cell trait against P. falciparum malaria were, as mentioned above, first noted by Beet in 1946 . They were next exten