Acute Septic Arthritis
Acute septic arthritis may develop as a result of hematogenous seeding, direct introduction, or extension from a contiguous focus of infection. The pathogenesis of acute septic arthritis is multifactorial and depends on the interaction of the host immune response and the adherence factors, toxins, and immunoavoidance strategies of the invading pathogen. Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Staphylococcus aureus are used in discussing the host-pathogen interaction in the pathogenesis of acute septic arthritis. While diagnosis rests on isolation of the bacterial species from synovial fluid samples, patient history, clinical presentation, laboratory findings, and imaging studies are also important. Acute nongonococcal septic arthritis is a medical emergency that can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. Therefore, prompt recognition, rapid and aggressive antimicrobial therapy, and surgical treatment are critical to ensuring a good prognosis. Even with prompt diagnosis and treatment, high mortality and morbidity rates still occur. In contrast, gonococcal arthritis is often successfully treated with antimicrobial therapy alone and demonstrates a very low rate of complications and an excellent prognosis for full return of normal joint function. In the case of prosthetic joint infections, the hardware must be eventually removed by a two-stage revision in order to cure the infection.

Most septic joints develop as a result of hematogenous seeding of the vascular synovial membrane due to a bacteremic episode . Although a rare cause, acute septic arthritis may also occur as a result of joint aspiration or local corticosteroid joint injection . In addition, bacterial arthritis may arise secondary to penetrating trauma (such as human or animal bite or nail puncture) or after trauma to a joint without an obvious break in the skin. The direct introduction of bacteria during joint surgery has increasingly been a source of bacterial arthritis, particularly in association with knee and hip arthroplasties. When a bone infection breaks through the outer cortex and into the intracapsular region, a joint infection may also result, especially in children . In infants, small capillaries cross the epiphyseal growth plate and permit extension of infection into the epiphysis and joint space . In children older than 1 year, osteomyelitis infection presumably starts in the metaphyseal sinusoidal veins and is usually contained by the growth plate. The joint is spared unless the metaphysis is intracapsular. The infection spreads laterally, where it breaks through the cortex and lifts the loose periosteum to form a subperiosteal abscess. In adults, the growth plate has resorbed and the infection may again extend to the joint spaces.
Virtually every bacterial organism has been reported to cause septic arthritis. The microorganisms responsible for bacterial arthritis are largely dependent on host factors (see "Risk Factors" below). The most common etiological agent of all septic arthritis cases in Europe and all nongonococcal cases in the United States is Staphylococcus aureus . The representation of S. aureus is more pronounced in patients with either rheumatoid arthritis or diabetes. After S. aureus, Streptococcus spp. are the next most commonly isolated bacteria from adult patients with septic arthritis . While one study had a high representation of Streptococcus pneumoniae , Streptococcus pyogenes is usually the most common streptococcal isolate, often associated with autoimmune diseases, chronic skin infections, and trauma . Groups B, G, C, and F, in order of decreasing preponderance, are also isolated, especially in patients with immunocompromise, diabetes mellitus, malignancy, and severe genitourinary or gastrointestinal infections . Gram-negative bacilli account for approximately 10 to 20% of cases . Patients with a history of intravenous drug abuse, extremes of age, or immunocompromise display a higher prevalence of infection by gram-negative organisms. The most common gram-negative organisms are Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli. Anaerobes are also isolated in a small percentage of cases, usually in diabetic patients and patients with prosthetic joints. Approximately 10% of patients with nongonococcal septic arthritis have polymicrobial infections. Historically, Haemophilus influenzae, S. aureus, and group A streptococci were the most common causes of infectious arthritis in children younger than 2 years. However, the overall incidence of H. influenzae as a cause of septic arthritis is decreasing because of the H. influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine now given to children . A recent study of 165 cases of acute hematogenous osteomyelitis or septic arthritis treated in the years before and after the advent of the Hib vaccine demonstrated that musculoskeletal infections due to this bacterial species were reduced to nearly nonexistent levels . Therefore, the coverage of H. influenzae as part of the empiric antibiotic coverage may no longer be needed in the management of acute septic arthritis in Hib-vaccinated children. While H. influenzae has lost its predominance as the most commonly identified gram-negative pathogen in pediatric populations, the normal oropharyngeal resident of young children, Kingella kingae, may have taken its place, specifically in patients younger than 2 year . In fact, a recent study found that the nearly half of the clinical isolates from patients younger than 2 years with acute septic arthritis were K. kingae . However, these results have yet to be repeated in other regions. Clinical data suggest that the organism may gain access to the bloodstream in the course of an upper respiratory infection or stomatitis . In children older than 2 years, S. aureus, streptococci, H. influenzae, and N. gonorrhoea have usually been isolated , although H. influenzae may have also lost its predominance in patients in this age group . Microbiological associations exist with concomitant disease states. Septic arthritis following cases of infectious diarrhea may be caused by Shigella spp., Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., or Yersinia spp. . However, these cases may reflect a form of reactive arthritis. A rare form of migrating polyarthritis may be caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis. In human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients, S. aureus continues to be the most common isolate (approximately 30%) . However, increased numbers of opportunistic pathogens are isolated from this patient subset, including S. pneumoniae, mycobacterial species, and fungal species . While relatively rare in Western Europe, the diplococcus gram-negative bacterial species Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the most common cause of septic arthritis in United States . The number of cases of gonorrhea decreased by 72% between 1975 and 1997, and this decrease was correlated with a reduction in disseminated gonococcal infection and arthritis . However, the reported rate has increased by 9.2% between 1997 and 1999 and now stands at 133.2 cases per 100,000 per year . Specifically, the rate of gonococcal infection in men who have sex with men has demonstrated an alarming increase. These increased incidence rates may also cause larger numbers of observed gonococcal arthritis cases.
The pathogenesis of acute septic arthritis is multifactorial and depends on the interaction of the host immune response and the invading pathogen. By taking into account the steps of bacterial colonization, infection and induction of the host inflammatory response, one may gain a greater understanding of this joint disease.
Since S. aureus has been extensively studied with regard to its role in septic arthritis and causes the majority of cases in most nations (and the majority of nongonococcal cases in the United States), we will use this bacterial species as the "typical" pathogen in the discussion of acute nongonococcal septic arthritis.
The synovial membrane has no limiting basement plate under the well-vascularized synovium; this allows easy hematogenous entry of bacteria. As mentioned above, bacteria may also gain entry into the joint by direct introduction or extension from a contiguous site of infection. Once bacteria are seeded within the closed joint space, the low fluid shear conditions enable bacterial adherence and infection. Colonization may also be aided in cases where the joint has undergone recent injury. In this environment, the production of host-derived extracellular matrix proteins that aid in joint healing (e.g., fibronectin) may promote bacterial attachment and progression to infection. The virulence and tropism of the microorganisms, combined with the resistance or susceptibility of the synovium to microbial invasion, are major determinants of joint infection. S. aureus, Streptococcus spp., and N. gonorrhoeae are examples of bacteria that have a high degree of selectivity for the synovium, probably related to adherence characteristics and toxin production. Aerobic gram-negative bacilli such as Escherichia coli rarely infect the synovium except in the presence of an underlying and compromising condition. The virulence of the organism once inside the joint varies. In rabbits, intra-articular injection of 10 5S. aureus organisms into the knee joint resulted in major joint destruction but identical injections of N. gonorrhoeae or S. epidermidis caused no joint inflammation . S. aureus has a variety of receptors, termed microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs), for host proteins that mediate adherence to the joint extracellular matrix or implanted medical devices . Some of the host matrix proteins include fibronectin and laminin (adherence proteins), elastin (imparts elastic properties), collagen (structural support), and hyaluronic acid (a glycosaminoglycan that is rich in the joints and the matrix and provides cushioning through hydration of its polysaccharides). A number of adhesin genes have been determined and include genes encoding fibrinogen binding proteins (fib, cflA, and fbpA) , fibronectin binding proteins (fnbA and fnbB) , a collagen receptor (cna) , an elastin binding protein (ebpS) , and a broad-specificity adhesin (map) that mediates low-level binding of several proteins including osteopontin, collagen, bone sialoprotein, vitronectin, fibronectin, and fibrinogen . Also, S. aureus possesses a number of other host protein binding receptors whose genes have not yet been determined. These include a laminin binding protein (52 kDa) , a lactoferrin binding protein (450 kDa) , and a transferrin binding protein (42 kDa) . The staphylococcal receptor that binds laminin may be used in extravasation . These receptors specific to S. aureus were absent from the noninvasive pathogen S. epidermidis . The lactoferrin and transferrin receptors bind to host iron acquisition proteins and may be used as adhesins and/or as iron acquisition mechanisms. Increasing evidence supports the importance of staphylococcal surface components as virulence determinants by enabling initial colonization. In a number of studies, mutations in these receptors strongly reduced the ability of staphylococci to produce infection. In a murine septic arthritis model, inoculation of mice with mutants containing mutations of the collagen adhesin gene showed that septic arthritis occurred 43% less often than in the corresponding wild type . Also, vaccination with a recombinant fragment of the S. aureus collagen adhesin was able to reduce the sepsis-induced mortality rate to 13%, compared with 87% in the control group . However, the role of collagen adhesion of S. aureus as a major virulence factor has recently been questioned since approximately 30 to 60% of clinical isolates do not display collagen binding in vitro or the cna-encoded collagen adhesin . Staphyloccal fibronectin binding proteins (FbpA and FbpB) may play a major role in the colonization and virulence of septic arthritis. In a recent study, all of the tested clinical isolates (n = 163) contained one or both of the coding regions for these binding proteins and 95% of these strains had a comparable fibronectin binding capacity to that seen in a staphylococcal reference strain known to efficiently bind fibronectin . In addition, an in vivo study of endocarditis in a rat model showed that mutants deficient for fibronectin binding protein were 250-fold less adherent to traumatized heart valves . Also, S. aureus adherence to miniplates from iliac bones of guinea pigs was three times higher for the wild-type strain than for the adhesin-defective mutant strain . It is likely fibronectin binding proteins play an important role in joint infections, especially those associated with joint trauma or implanted medical devices . These receptors may play an additional role in an intracellular immunoavoidance strategy. S. aureus survives intracellularly after internalization by cultured osteoblasts . Staphylococci have demonstrated internalization into other cultured mammalian cells as well as osteoblasts; these include bovine mammary gland epithelial cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells, and pulmonary epithelial cells isolated from a cystic fibrosis patient . Initial adherence to glandular epithelial cells is mediated by S. aureus fibronectin receptors , possibly using fibronectin as a bridge between the host cell and the bacterial receptors. Following adherence, bacteria may be internalized by host mechanisms involving membrane pseudopod formation (seen in established bovine mammary epithelial cell lines) or through receptor-mediated endocytosis via clathrin-coated pits (seen in mouse osteoblasts and epithelial cells) . In either case, the dependence on the action of host cytoskeletal rearrangements through microfilaments is evident. Following internalization, staphylococci may induce apoptosis (via a host caspase-dependent mechanism) or survive intracellularly . Induced apoptosis may exacerbate the host cell damage seen in septic arthritis. Also, staphylococci may escape clearance by the immune system and antimicrobial therapy by persisting within these host cells. This survival was recently demonstrated in vivo when S. aureus cells were found in the cytoplasm of embryonic chicken osteoblasts and osteocytes in mineralized bone matrix . In another study, S. aureus was found within polymorphonuclear neutrophils in an in vivo infection model, and these infected host cells were able to establish infection in naive animals . Therefore, this pathogen may utilize invasion as an immunoavoidance technique during the host inflammatory response. After the downregulation of the adaptive immune response through T-cell apoptosis (mediated by superantigens, other toxins, and invasion), fulminant and/or persistent infection may result.
Once colonized, bacteria are able to rapidly proliferate and activate an acute inflammatory response. Initially, host inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin 1-beta (IL-1beta) and interleukin 6 (IL-6), are released into the joint fluid by synovial cells . These cytokines activate the release of acute-phase proteins (e.g., C-reactive protein) from the liver that bind to the bacterial cells and thereby promote opsonization and activation of the complement system. In addition, there is an accompanying influx of host inflammatory cells into the synovial membrane early in the infection. Phagocytosis of the bacteria by macrophages, synoviocytes, and polymorphonuclear cells occurs and is associated with the release of other inflammatory cytokines that include tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), IL-8, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, in addition to increasing the levels of IL-1beta and IL-6, which are already present. It was demonstrated in a recent clinical study that IL-6 and TNF-alpha concentrations were persistently high even 7 days after treatment was initiated while IL-1beta levels decreased significantly after 7 days . Many of these cytokines and the associated immune response have been shown in animal models to be required for bacterial clearance and the prevention of mortality due to bacteremia and septic shock . Nitric oxide, a common mediator of inflammatory cytokines, is also required . The T-cell mediated (Th1) and humoral (Th2) adaptive immune responses may also play a role in the clearance and/or pathogenesis of acute septic arthritis. T cells enter the joint within a few days following infection . The role of CD4 + T cells in joint destruction has been demonstrated by showing that their in vivo depletion resulted in a considerably milder course of staphylococcal arthritis . These lymphocytes are specifically activated by bacterial antigens in association with host antigen-presenting cells or nonspecifically in the case of bacterial superantigens (e.g., toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 [TSST-1]). The cytokine, gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), produced by these activated T cells reduced the level of mortality and joint destruction in a mouse model of group B Streptococcus when delivered 18 h after bacterial inoculation . However, when S. aureus was used as the infecting organism in this model, IFN-gamma increased the frequency and severity of septic arthritis while simultaneously protecting mice from septicemia . Also, it has been found in a recent study in mice that a high level of IFN-gamma (a Th1 cytokine) plays a detrimental role in staphylococcal infection and that IL-4 and IL-10, both being Th2 cytokines, are involved in host resistance to infection through regulation of IFN-gamma . However, the necessity of the Th2 response to clear S. aureus infection has lately been questioned in a study utilizing IL-4-deficient mice . It seems that a Th2 response is required for S. aureus infection clearance only in certain mice, depending on their genetic background. Therefore, the exact role of T cells in host tissue damage and infection clearance is still being elucidated.
Under most circumstances, the host is able to mount a protective inflammatory response that contains the invading pathogen and resolves the infection. However, when the infection is not quickly cleared by the host, the potent activation of the immune response with the associated high levels of cytokines and reactive oxygen species leads to joint destruction. High cytokine concentrations increase the release of host matrix metalloproteinases (including stromelysin and gelatinase A/B) and other collagen-degrading enzymes. When monoclonal antibodies or steroids attenuate these cytokines, cartilage degradation is minimized. The joint is further damaged by the release of lysosomal enzymes and bacterial toxins . Host proteoglycans are initially degraded, and this is followed by collagen degradation. In fact, the polymorphonuclear response with subsequent release of these proteolytic enzymes can lead to permanent destruction of intra-articular cartilage and subchondral bone loss in as little as 3 days. Metalloproteinases and the antigen-induced inflammatory response may persist and continue to damage the joint architecture even after the infection has been cleared . The infectious process induces a joint effusion that increases intra-articular pressure, mechanically impeding blood and nutrient supply to the joint. Thus, increased pressure destroys the synovium and cartilage. Because of the proximity of the epiphyseal growth plate to the joint, direct extension of a joint infection to any of the articulating bones may lead to decreased bone growth in infants and children . While bone mineralization is preserved, cartilage destruction causes joint space narrowing and erosive damage to the cartilage and bone if left untreated . In addition, the infection can spread to surrounding soft tissue, form sinus tracts, and disrupt ligaments and tendons in the untreated state .
While bacterial attachment proteins promote colonization and initiate the infectious process, a number of bacterial products activate the host immune response and increase tissue damage in cases of septic arthritis. S. aureus has a large variety of factors that have been implicated in host virulence. Many of these factors have been tested for their ability to increase the morbidity and mortality associated with acute septic arthritis. Most studies evaluating the potential role of these bacterial products have been performed using the murine model of septic arthritis . During acute septic arthritis, the innate immune system responds to the presence of the peptidoglycan wall (via N-formylmethionine proteins and teichoic acids) of S. aureus to produce proinflammatory cytokines (such as IL-1beta, IL-6, and TNF-alpha) and C-reactive protein. Bacterial DNA (specifically unmethylated CpG motifs) also elicits an intense inflammatory response . When bacterial DNA from S. aureus or E. coli or synthetic, unmethylated oligonucleotides containing CpG motifs were injected into the knee joint of mice, arthritis developed quickly and lasted up to 14 days, while methylated DNA had no significant effect. Also, the affected tissue was characterized by monocyte and macrophage influx with the release of their associated cytokines and chemokines and the absence of T cells. It has been noted that bacterial superantigens such as staphylococcal TSST-1 and enterotoxins may play a major role in the potent activation of the host inflammatory response, thereby increasing the mortality rates and exacerbating host inflammatory-cell invasion, cytokine release, and joint degradation . Most animals infected with strains of S. aureus isogenic for TSST-1 or enterotoxins (A through D) developed frequent and severe arthritis . However, most animals (80%) infected with strains devoid of these toxins had no symptoms and the animals with symptoms had only mild or transient arthritis infections . Also, vaccination with a recombinant form of staphylococcal enterotoxin A devoid of superantigenicity was able to generate significant protection from S. aureus sepsis in mice . Superantigens act by binding to the conserved lateral regions of the host major histocompatibility complex class II molecule and T-cell receptor. While only approximately 1 in 10 4 T cells are activated during normal presentation of a nonself antigen, a superantigen may activate 2 to 20% of all T cells . These activated T cells are then able to increase the release of a number of cytokines, such as IL-2 , IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha . This upregulated production of cytokines causes a significant systemic toxicity and suppression of the adaptive immune responses and inhibits plasma cell differentiation. Also, the stimulated T cells proliferate and then rapidly disappear, apparently due to apoptosis . Therefore, immune suppression may be due to generalized immunosuppression and T-cell deletion. Human B cells are also stimulated by these staphylococcal superantigens. Besides the role that superantigens play in the mortality and morbidity associated with septic arthritis, other staphylococcal toxins may also contribute to the disease process. One study was able to demonstrate that alpha-hemolysin was a significant mediator of virulence in arthritis . Alpha-hemolysin is secreted as a monomer that attaches to host membranes and polymerizes into a hexameric ring channel . While this hemolysin binds to human erythrocytes in a nonspecific manner, it can still mediate significant host cell lysis when produced in high concentrations in the infection environment . Also, alpha-hemolysin promotes significant blood coagulation by neutrophil adhesion , platelet aggregation (via a fibrinogen-dependent mechanism) , and its nonlytic attack on human platelets . In addition, this hemolysin can form channels in nucleated cells (e.g., endothelial cells) through which calcium ions freely pass . The calcium influx is responsible for the vasoregulatory process and inflammatory- response disturbances seen in severe infection . Lastly, alpha-hemolysin interferes with lymphocyte DNA replication . These multiple effects of alpha-hemolysin on the host contribute to the vascular disturbances and immunodeficiency seen in staphylococcal infections. The pathogenic properties of alpha-hemolysin were recently found to only occur when another staphylococcal toxin, the leukocyte-specific gamma-toxin, was also present in the infecting strain . Gamma-hemolysin (HlgAB and HlgCB) and a related S. aureus leukocidin (LukSF-PV) specifically lyse leukocytes. Each of these toxins is composed of an interchangeable two-component system. The active toxin is formed by taking one protein from the S-component family (LukS-PV, HlgA, and HlgC) and one from the F-component family (LukF-PV and HlgB) . The S component is most probably responsible for the specific cytopathic effect of each of the toxins, while the F component is responsible for the common leukocyte binding activity. While LukF and HlgA proteins show very strong similarity, they are encoded on different gene loci . Since these cytotoxins specifically interact and lyse leukocytes, they contribute to the inhibition of infection clearance by the host immune system, thereby enabling staphylococcal species to persist. Therefore, it is the combined effects of the hemolysin and leukotoxins that increase the ability of S. aureus to cause acute septic arthritis. These factors enable the host to mount a protective inflammatory response that contains this pathogen and often resolves the infection. However, when the infection is not cleared by the host innate immune system, S. aureus is well equipped to persist by possessing a number of virulence factors and strategies, including but not limited to invading and surviving in mammalian cells, hiding within a biofilm, or producing a thick, antiphagocytic capsule. The difficulty in treating septic arthritis and the ability of the bacteria to evade clearance by the host immune response reside in a number of staphylococcal defense mechanisms. Such characteristics are expressed at both the cellular and matrical levels. As mentioned above, protein A is bound covalently to the outer peptidoglycan layer of their cell walls. This receptor binds to the Fc portion of immunoglobulin G and presents the Fab fragment of the antibody to the external environment. Therefore, the Fc portion is unable to either bind complement or signal polymorphonuclear leukocytes, thereby interfering with staphylococcal opsonization and phagocytosis. This interference has been demonstrated in vitro and in animal models with subcutaneous abscesses and peritonitis. Also, protein A coats the staphylococcal cell in a coat of host Fab fragments, and the ability of the immune system to recognize the pathogen as nonself is hindered. The importance of protein A in S. aureus septic arthritis was demonstrated in a recent study in which strains that obtained this virulence factor caused greater inflammation and cartilage destruction . Capsular polysaccharide may interfere with opsonization and phagocytosis. Among the 11 reported serotypes, capsule types 5 and 8 (microcapsule producers) comprise the vast majority (75 to 94%) of clinical isolates . The capsule of these two serotypes is much smaller than the capsule of other serotypes of S. aureus (such as capsule type 1) or pathogenic species such as Streptococcus pneumoniae. Unencapsulated and microencapsulated strains demonstrated a high rate of serum clearance compared to fully encapsulated strains. Therefore, the role of capsular polysaccharide in opsonization and phagocytosis was questioned . However, the thin capsule may be necessary in early bone infection stages in order to allow the interaction of staphylococcal adhesion factors with host proteins (such as fibrin and fibronectin). In one study, it was shown that a small capsule was necessary for fibroblast attachment by protein A of S. aureus and that a fully encapsulated strain reduced the binding efficiency . In another study, the thin capsule was shown to be necessary for binding to bone collagen type 1, since high capsular expression actually inhibited binding . Once these microorganisms adhere to solid surfaces (such as bone), both in vitro and in vivo, staphylococci produce larger quantities of cell-associated capsule than do those grown in liquid cultures . Specifically, type 5 and type 8 capsule production is strongly upregulated during postexponential growth (i.e., after adhesion and colonization) . This upregulated capsule production makes them resistant to antimicrobial treatment and host immune clearance. Therefore, once staphylococcal adherence proteins establish the infection, the pathogen enters the postexponential growth phase and begins producing a thicker capsule that covers and hides the highly immunogenic adherence proteins. This thicker type 5 and type 8 capsule is serum resistant through inhibition of phagocytosis and opsonization . The effect of the staphylococcal polysaccharide microcapsule in murine arthritis was recently explored. In this study, strains expressing type 5 capsule were shown to cause a higher rate of mortality, a higher frequency of arthritis, and a more severe form of the disease compared to capsule mutants . In a clinical trial, a vaccine (Staph Vax) that consists of isolated type 5 and 8 capsular polysaccharides was able to significantly reduce infection rates (by 57%) in a high-risk population for as long as 10 months . As mentioned above, S. aureus also survives intracellularly after internalization by cultured osteoblasts . Type 5 capsule production by in vivo-grown S. aureus (i.e., internalized in cultured osteoblasts) was recently shown to be upregulated compared to that by S. aureus grown in vitro . Therefore, the capsule may not only resist phagocytosis and opsonization but may also contribute to intracellular survival. In summary, S. aureus infects and elicits a strong native immune response, cytokine release, and high T-cell activation. This pathogen is able to use a number of immunoavoidance strategies during this time while the host immune system simultaneously causes damage to "self" tissues and blood vessels in the area of infection. This damage may cause local circulatory and immune system compromise. The high T-cell activation eventually results in apoptosis and a weakened immune system, enabling the pathogen to effectively produce a sustained and destructive infection. While the bacterial products discussed above have been shown to increase joint damage in acute septic arthritis, many more S. aureus virulence factors have not yet been tested. Therefore, we would expect that number of factors implicated as playing a role in septic arthritis would undoubtedly increase, and their relative roles will be more clearly elucidated in future studies.
The interaction of the bacteria and host is of utmost importance in the initiation and prolongation of infection and cartilage damage. There is a subtle balance between an effective immune response to eliminate the infecting organism from the host and the overactivation of this response that causes the majority of infection-related joint destruction. Therefore, care must be exercised and further studies must be performed in regard to using agents that suppress the inflammatory response in the treatment of septic arthritis.
Gonococcal arthritis occurs in approximately 42 to 85% of patients with disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) and begins with a localized mucosal infection . DGI-producing strains are unusually sensitive to in vitro killing by penicillin G and possess unique nutritional requirements for arginine, hypoxanthine, and uracil. N. gonorrhoeae possesses a number of virulence factors. It is the combined effects of these factors, their phase and antigenic variation, and properties of the host immune response that enable this pathogen to persist and allow the localized infection to become DGI.
N. gonorrhoeae possesses a number of cell surface structures that have been implicated in virulence. Initial attachment to host epithelium is mediated by long, hair-like protein projections called pili Phase variation, i.e., the question of whether this membrane structure is assembled (Pil +) or not (Pil -), is determined by posttranslational proteolytic cleavage, variations in homologous recombination, and slipped-strand DNA replication resulting in frameshift mutations . In addition, the antigenic character of the pili is altered by homologous recombination between coding regions for the various pilin subunits. Protein I is the main protein on the outer membrane. It is a porin that is expressed in two different forms, a protein IA variant that is almost always associated with disseminated infection and a 