Interactions among Strategies Associated with Bacterial Infection: Pathogenicity, Epidemicity, and Antibiotic Resistance
Infections have been the major cause of disease throughout the history of human populations. With the introduction of antibiotics, it was thought that this problem should disappear. However, bacteria have been able to evolve to become antibiotic resistant. Nowadays, a proficient pathogen must be virulent, epidemic, and resistant to antibiotics. Analysis of the interplay among these features of bacterial populations is needed to predict the future of infectious diseases. In this regard, we have reviewed the genetic linkage of antibiotic resistance and bacterial virulence in the same genetic determinants as well as the cross talk between antibiotic resistance and virulence regulatory circuits with the aim of understanding the effect of acquisition of resistance on bacterial virulence. We also discuss the possibility that antibiotic resistance and bacterial virulence might prevail as linked phenotypes in the future. The novel situation brought about by the worldwide use of antibiotics is undoubtedly changing bacterial populations. These changes might alter the properties of not only bacterial pathogens, but also the normal host microbiota. The evolutionary consequences of the release of antibiotics into the environment are largely unknown, but most probably restoration of the microbiota from the preantibiotic era is beyond our current abilities.

The mechanisms involved in the virulence (defined as the relative capacity of a microbe to cause damage in a host [, ]) of pathogenic bacteria as well as those determining antibiotic resistance are important and widely studied topics in clinical microbiology. However, they have rarely been analyzed and integrated as we intend to do in the present review. In terms of evolution and ecology, antibiotic resistance and virulence determinants share some basic characteristics. Since these determinants have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer from other organisms, many are examples of what has been termed "evolution in quantum leaps" . Also, most determinants serve to escape the action of antibacterial defense systems that have developed either by natural (host anti-infectious mechanisms) or cultural (antibiotics) evolution  to prevent infections. Both the natural anti-infective defenses and antibiotic treatments lead to stringent conditions for bacterial growth. In biology, any limiting condition for the majority is a golden opportunity for the minority. Those bacteria that are capable of surviving and multiplying under these conditions will gain access to organic spaces in which competition with other microorganisms is avoided (exclusive environments). We might then assume that both virulence and antibiotic resistance are formally similar adaptive mechanisms selected to survive under stress conditions (either host invasion or antibiotic treatment). From an ecological point of view, both infective conditions and antibiotic treatments are evolutionary bottlenecks that tend to reduce microbial biodiversity, so that only a very specific subset of bacteria are capable of colonizing the host under those conditions . There are several bacterial species that are able to grow at 37C and are tolerant to the oxygen tension present in different parts of the human body. The fact that environmental microorganisms that are unable to produce disease in the healthy host frequently infect immunocompromised patients indicates that many organisms are ecologically compatible with the physicochemical conditions within the human body. The human body and its physicochemical conditions are then an ecological space that can be colonized by several microorganisms , frequently with an environmental origin . In the normal host, this potential for colonization is limited by the immune system, which actively impedes colonization of the human body by opportunistic pathogens. In the immunodepressed host, only antibiotic treatment maintains a small colonizable space in the human body (see below). We want then to go one step beyond. Is there any evolutionary relationship between resistance and virulence? If modern medicine has limited the spread and maybe the evolution of bacterial pathogens, this has been done at the expense of increasing antibiotic resistance. Apparently, a decrease in the size of pathogenic populations and an increase in the number of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms  have characterized the evolution of infectious diseases. In pure theory, when the number of pathogens decrease to a critical value, antibiotics should be less required, and restoration of antibiotic susceptibility could be expected to occur. We know, however, that this is not true. The widespread dissemination of antibiotic resistance among bacterial populations  has maintained or even increased the number of harmful bacteria involved in infections. In fact, and in spite of previous claims, infectious diseases are among the most prominent health problem nowadays , in part as the consequence of the increasing number of antibiotic resistance phenotypes, which make bacterial infections untreatable by current therapeutic protocols . If new antibiotics and protocols are required for fighting infectious diseases, we must first understand the relationship between virulence, transmissibility, and antibiotic resistance. Thus, two essential topics are first reviewed in this work: the effect of acquisition of antibiotic resistance (and antibiotic treatment) on bacterial virulence, and analysis of whether pathogenicity and antibiotic resistance might prevail as linked phenotypes in the world of the future, if pathogens become antibiotic resistant as a consequence of intense antibiotic selective pressure. FIG. 1. | Infection and antibiotic treatment are both stringent growing conditions. Infection and antibiotic treatment are both stringent growing conditions. Several bacteria are able to grow at the temperature and oxygen tension of and using the nutrients present in the human body. However, only some are able to produce infection; this is shownin panel A. Several bacterial species (ovals are pathogens, circles are environmental ones) coexist outside the host. Some species are able to displace the commensal flora, traverse through different epithelia, resist the action of macrophages, antibodies, defensins (with squares), and all the anti-infectious mechanisms of the human body, to finally reach the target cells where the disease is produced. At any of these sequential bottlenecks, only some bacteria are selected, and their population is further amplified, so that, from the high variability of bacteria that could potentially produce the disease, only some are really pathogenic. In panel B, the same situation is analyzed but under antibiotic treatment (spheres). In this case, only a small proportion of the cells belonging to the infectious species (the antibiotic-resistant ones; blue ovals with a red line) are able to produce infection, so that the antibiotic-treated host is a more stringent ecosystem for the growth of bacteria. However, in the case of a debilitated person (panel C), the situation is somewhat different. In these patients, the indigenous microflora might be removed because of antibiotic use, the epithelial integrity may be impaired (intubated patients), the immune system can be abolished (immunocompromised patients), and even the target cells can change. Under these circumstances, some environmental species can produce infection (opportunistic pathogens), because growth conditions are less stringent. However, at least in the developed world, those patients are usually under heavy antibiotic treatment, frequently with a combination of antibiotics (golden and blue spheres), so that only those species with an intrinsically antibiotic-resistant phenotype can produce the infection. Under these circumstances, the main selective force is antibiotics, so that antibiotic treatment becomes a risk factor for some pathogens.
Virulent bacteria have acquired their phenotype through a long evolutionary course in close contact with their natural hosts. Most virulence determinants are either located in chromosomal gene clusters (pathogenicity islands) or harbored in genetic accessory elements such as plasmids and phages. This suggests that evolution from an avirulent way of life to pathogenicity frequently implies the acquisition of foreign pieces of DNA . Nevertheless, for the organism to be a real pathogen, these pathogenicity factors should be inserted in an organism ecologically compatible with the potential host. Moreover, in some cases it is not an acquisition but a deletion (virulence-associated "black holes") which is needed to become a pathogen . Indeed, any change in lifestyle has a biological cost, as functions needed in one habitat may cause a burden in another habitat and could therefore be counterselected. Acquisition of a virulence phenotype might then require the acquisition of some different pathogenicity islands and the loss of some chromosomal DNA regions. Therefore, the construction of a pathogen by the acquisition of specific pathogenic elements in ecologically compatible host-adapted bacterial genomes has probably occurred over a long evolutionary time. In this regard, the record of infectious diseases (mainly epidemic ones) in human history and bioarchaeological analysis of the paleontological record indicate that we have been in contact with pathogens similar to those currently producing infections for a long time. In this way, it has been demonstrated that infectious diseases such as syphilis, tuberculosis, and other infections due to bacteria, viruses, and parasites were common in prehistoric men , particularly in the Neolithic age, when agriculture and farming ensured close contact between humans and between humans and animals. In some cases, however, such evolution has occurred in historical times, as the evolution from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis to Y. pestis, which was shortly followed by the first pandemic plagues . Obviously, the evolutionary outcome of pathogenic organisms tends to be limited in modern times by the anti-infectious repertoire developed by humans that includes hygienic measures, epidemiological controls, vaccines, and, significantly, antibiotics. Conversely, acquisition and further spread of antibiotic resistance genes among pathogenic bacteria is a phenomenon that has occurred just in the last 50 years as a consequence of extensive antibiotic use for human therapy and animal farming. At first glance, pathogenicity and resistance should be unlinked phenomena. However, several examples indicate that this is not the situation for several bacterial pathogens. Antibiotic resistance and virulence genes can be linked (and then coselected) in the same replicon, or eventually a single determinant can be involved in both virulence and resistance. Some examples of these situations will be reviewed.
In this section, we analyze whether a mechanism which has been selected on the basis of a bacterial virulence phenotype might also be relevant for antibiotic resistance and vice versa. Let us first examine the effect of the spatial localization of bacteria in the human body. Several virulent bacteria base their pathogenic characteristics in an intracellular way of life during infection . Internalization may be required for the induction of inflammatory cytokines  and produce tissue damage through the induction of either necrotic  or apoptotic  responses. A remarkable example is the apoptosis of macrophages induced by pathogens such as Shigella, which both avoid the antibacterial effect of those cells and trigger inflammation . In some well-characterized examples, bacteria are able to travel from cell to cell without any significant contact with the extracellular milieu , thus avoiding the immune system as well as contact with antibiotics that do not enter mammalian cells . This provides the first clue as to how well-characterized virulence phenotypes can be related to antibiotic resistance. Mammalian cells are poorly permeable to or easily exclude several families of antibiotics . Even if the antibiotic enters the mammalian cells, intracellular growth might induce a transient antibiotic-resistant phenotype, a situation that has been described for Legionella pneumophila . The location within the host may alter in an unspecific way the susceptibility of the bacterial organism to antibiotics. Haemophilus influenzae grown in animals undergoes modifications in penicillin-binding proteins, as peptidoglycan metabolism is directly affected by the environment , and Salmonella peptidoglycan is dramatically altered for bacteria growing intracellularly . Although the effect of these changes on antibiotic susceptibility has not been analyzed extensively, it is possible that those metabolic changes may alter the activity of antibiotics such as beta-lactams against bacteria growing during infection. It is then possible that intracellular localization may allow bacteria to maintain a phenotype of antibiotic resistance. In this respect, treatment with some antibiotics might select for intracellular clones. This could be the case for species in which some clones are able to invade mammalian cells and others are noninvasive; one such species is Pseudomonas aeruginosa . On the contrary, some antibiotics, such as macrolides and fluoroquinolones, are actively accumulated by human cells . In this case, intracellular bacterial localization might eventually increase the antibiotic effect against bacterial pathogens, leading to better eradication and favoring the less invasive strains. A similar situation of phenotypic antibiotic resistance can be observed for bacteria growing in biofilms. Bacterial biofilms are frequent in persistent infections , such as those associated with cystic fibrosis , chronic bronchitis, osteomyelitis , and foreign-body-associated infections. Bacteria growing in biofilms are more resistant than those under a planktonic way of life to the action of phagocytic cells' antibacterial activity  as well as the action of antibiotics . As in the previous case, antibiotics might select biofilm-forming organisms, thereby increasing the prevalence of chronic infections. Other mechanisms of virulence could prevent the action of antibiotics against bacteria. For instance, toxins leading to local necrosis or abscess formation certainly will decrease the local availability of antibiotics due to reduction in antibiotic arrival to the foci or because of local inactivation of the drugs by altered pH, free proteins, or DNA. In these cases, the mechanisms of pathogenicity may finally serve as mechanisms for antibiotic resistance. A final example of a virulence mechanism with a role in antibiotic resistance is presented by Bordetella pertussis, the etiological agent of whooping cough. The cell wall of the virulent strains of this microorganism is infrequently susceptible to autolysis triggered by beta-lactam antibiotics; only avirulent B. pertussis strains are known to be lysed. It was demonstrated that this phenotypic tolerance and the antibiotic-induced autolytic activity are controlled by the vir locus, which determines phase transition in B. pertussis, a key element in the virulence properties of this bacterial species . In previous examples, we have seen that a "virulent way of life" can contribute to an antibiotic resistance phenotype. Could antibiotic resistance determinants also contribute to bacterial virulence? Some examples suggest that this could be the case. Recently, one area of intense study of antibiotic resistance is the analysis of multidrug resistance (MDR) efflux pumps . These determinants are able to extrude an ample range of substances that include antibiotics, solvents, dyes, and quorum-sensing signals . Extrusion by the same pump of compounds as diverse as erythromycin, quinolones, beta-lactams, and ethidium bromide is a rule more than an exception. Might these MDR determinants extrude compounds involved in the host defense be contributing to bacterial virulence? The answer is yes. For instance, adaptation to growth in the presence of bile salts is a prerequisite for any pathogen to colonize the intestinal tract. It has been reported that Escherichia coli extrudes bile salts  through the acrAB system, which was first characterized as an MDR determinant ; the same occurs in Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium. In fact, it has been suggested that extrusion of bile salts present in the intestinal ecosystem to which these bacteria are adapted is the function for which those MDR determinants were selected . Analysis of S. enterica serotype Typhimurium mutants with high susceptibility to bile salts has demonstrated that this higher susceptibility was a consequence of inactivation of the MDR determinant acrB. This inactivation leads to a reduced ability to colonize the intestinal tract in a murine infection model , which indicates that acrAB is involved in both antibiotic resistance and virulence. Some MDR systems, such as Mtr from Neisseria gonorrhoeae  and SapA  from S. enterica serotype Typhimurium, can actively extrude both defensins and antibiotics, thus contributing to reducing antibiotic susceptibility as well as to increasing the number of virulence determinants of the organisms. In fact, it has been described that resistance to defensins is required for a full virulence phenotype in the case of Salmonella . The mechanisms of action of defensins resemble at least in part that of peptidic antibiotics currently used in clinical practice . Thus, it is conceivable that they might share the same mechanisms for resistance. This situation has been described for polymixin B. The sensitivities to polycationic peptides were compared between two groups of Yersinia enterocolitica isolates, one with an environmental origin and the other from infections . Data indicated that pathogenic strains of Y. enterocolitica were resistant to defensins and also to polymixin B, showing a clear cross-linkage between antibiotic resistance and virulence as a consequence of the expression of a resistance determinant. Not only MDR pumps but also biocide efflux determinants may play a role in bacterial virulence. It has been reported that the QacA pump of Staphylococcus aureus, involved in resistance to several organic cations (biocides included), has a role in resistance to thrombin-induced platelet microbicidal protein . Thus, the presence of the pump contributes to the survival of strains carrying this determinant at sites of endothelial damage as well as in experimental endovascular infections. We want to stress here that the mechanisms of extrusion of antibiotics are similar to those translocating some proteins involved in pathogenicity. The hemolysin export apparatus in Escherichia coli comprises the outer membrane channel trimmer protein TolC that is also involved in the AcrA-B multidrug efflux transport complex . The periplasmic proteins of both systems, AcrA and HlyD, have a similar structure and are able to interact with TolC . In all previously discussed examples, a mechanism selected for bacterial virulence can also produce an antibiotic resistance phenotype. Selection for the most virulent strains might select for antibiotic resistance, and conversely, selection for antibiotic resistance might select the most virulent microorganisms. However, the opposite situation can also be found: antibiotic resistance may decrease bacterial virulence (see below). For instance, the KatG catalase-peroxidase activity is important for the survival of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the host . Mutations that eliminate this activity prevent the activation of isoniazid and are the major cause of resistance to this drug in Mycobacterium spp. . It might then be predicted that isoniazid-resistant Mycobacterium mutants might be less virulent than wild-type isoniazid-susceptible strains, at least in the case of M. tuberculosis  and Mycobacterium bovis . However, when isoniazid-resistant isolates were analyzed, such reduced virulence was not found. It turned out that M. tuberculosis pathogenic isolates accumulate compensatory mutations in the gene encoding the alkyl peroxidase AphC, which can substitute for KatG for survival inside the host .
It is largely assumed that acquisition of novel genetic determinants may have a cost for the bacterial host. That may happen because of partial incompatibility of previous and acquired lifestyles, or because of the extra energy required to maintain the genetic vectors carrying the new genes. The acquisition of plasmids or antibiotic resistance-virulence genes might have an effect on bacterial fitness . As previously stated, pathogenicity islands, acquired through horizontal transfer of large gene arrangements, have a major role in bacterial virulence . Also, large vir plasmids are needed for some pathogens, such as Shigella  and Yersinia , to express a pathogenic phenotype. We might speculate that acquisition of these determinants implied a cost in bacterial fitness when they were included in the genome of the previously nonvirulent bacteria. However, acquisition of resistance genes by pathogenic bacteria has occurred over the last 50 years, but acquisition and further evolution of structures as pathogenicity islands occurred thousands of years ago. Thus, the evolutionary time needed to acquire and optimize compensatory mutations to alleviate the effect on fitness of the acquisition of pathogenicity determinants has been much longer. Also, for plasmids carrying vir determinants, the costs of the acquisition of such determinants might be compensated for by mutations in other loci. Of note, it has been shown that the vir plasmid can be easily lost in vitro in Shigella . However, growth conditions in vivo should preserve the plasmid's presence during infection, otherwise Shigella would not be virulent anymore. Acquisition of vir plasmids ensures the ability to colonize a different biological compartment, thus evading competition with other bacterial species and eventually reducing the potential fitness cost imposed by the new genetic element. The same has probably occurred for enteroinvasive E. coli isolates . Recent work suggests that the invasive ability of those isolates has evolved in different chromosomal backgrounds, probably through the spread of plasmid-borne invasion genes, and the maintenance of invasive phenotypes in separate lineages suggests that this ability confers a selective advantage to invasive strains . Although the Ewald hypothesis  is still controversial, it can be speculated that sanitation procedures, vaccination, and widespread antibiotic use, impeding host-to-host spread of vir plasmid-based pathogens, may reduce the overall pathogenic power of microorganisms. Due to the rapid acquisition and fixation of compensatory mutations by bacteria, experiments to evaluate the biological cost of the expression of novel antibiotic resistance and virulence determinants are difficult to perform. Antibiotic resistance and virulence can be acquired either by horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes  or by mutation . The presence of new plasmids and transposons in the bacterial genome has a relevant cost for the recipient bacteria . However, it has been demonstrated that under these circumstances, the cost is compensated for in few generations as the consequence of genetic change by the host, getting the specific plasmid-bacterial strain association more fit than the previous non-plasmid-containing bacterium . Also, in the case of mutations leading to antibiotic resistance, some examples demonstrate the possibility of fitness reduction, which may also reduce bacterial virulence (see last example in previous section). For instance, current evidence supports the idea that highly fluoroquinolone-resistant Salmonella strains could be counterselected in the field . A substantial reduction of the virulent characteristics has been also described for antibiotic-resistant S. enterica serotype Typhimurium isolates . Although this may occur for some bacteria, it does not mean that it will always occur. In fact, an outbreak of quinolone-resistant S. enterica serotype Typhimurium DT104 has recently been described , and an increase in quinolone-resistant Campylobacter jejuni infections has been reported in Minnesota . The emergence of compensatory mutations rapidly alleviates the biological cost of antibiotic resistance in S. enterica serotype Typhimurium isolates , and this could be the situation for the aforementioned outbreaks of quinolone-resistant bacteria. Noteworthy, the compensatory mutations that are selected in vivo and in vitro are different, reflecting the different growing conditions for bacteria during infection compared with microorganisms growing in vitro . This indicates that the metabolic requirements needed for infection are different from those for surviving in the environment. Therefore, acquisition of the characteristics required for infection and antibiotic resistance might make them less proficient for surviving in the environment and to be transmitted among different hosts. It seems then that acquisition of novel virulence and antibiotic resistance traits has a cost in bacterial fitness, but the cost is rapidly compensated for due to the high plasticity of bacterial genomes and the huge populations of bacteria from which compensatory mutants can be selected . However, this situation may not always occur. Possibly, only those mechanisms that can be compensated for by mutations in other loci are selected because these are the only ones that can avoid fitness reduction. As stated by other authors , the effect of antibiotic resistance (and in a higher grade of virulence determinants) on bacterial fitness has been properly addressed in only a few studies. This topic needs to be investigated so that the biological potential of novel virulent and antibiotic-resistant bacteria may be predicted.
As previously stated, both antibiotic resistance genes and virulence determinants have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer in most cases . One intriguing question that has not been completely resolved resides in the origin of these determinants. It is widely accepted by the plasmids and transposons that carry antibiotic resistance genes may have originated in antibiotic-producing organisms in order to avoid the deleterious effect of the antibiotic on themselves . Eventually, they could have further evolved in organisms in an ecological consortium with antibiotic producers. More recent works indicate that this hypothesis about the origin of resistance is only half true . For instance, it is difficult to believe that chromosomal beta-lactamases  as well as some aminoglycoside-inactivating enzymes  and a plethora of MDR determinants  which are present in all isolates of a given bacterial species originated in the antibiotic producers. In fact, all these determinants must have a functional role other than antibiotic resistance, and this phenotype will only be a consequence of their primary physiological function (see reference  for a review of this concept). In the case of virulence determinants, the current paradigm indicates that pathogenicity islands acquired through horizontal gene transfer are frequently responsible for the pathogenic properties of virulent bacterial species . Different from antibiotic resistance genes, the pathogenicity islands are more difficult to explain, because pathogenic bacterial ancestors carrying such gene clusters have not been detected. It has been proposed that pathogenicity islands might be relevant for the biodegradative properties of microorganisms (including decomposition of dead bodies), to kill living cells (to obtain food and reduce competition), and to live inside eukaryotic cells (such as amoeba, protozoa, plants, and animals) in natural environments . Antibiotic resistance genes and virulence determinants might then play a different role in the original organisms from which they were transferred to pathogenic bacteria. However, once those determinants have been selected in the heterologous host, they confer a selective advantage and are fixed in the pathogenic bacterial populations, where they can evolve further and eventually be transferred to other bacterial species.
Two different processes account for evolution of antibiotic resistance-virulence phenotypes: gene mutation and gene recombination (horizontal gene transfer included). The role of mutation in antibiotic resistance is well known . In the case of virulence, fewer examples of such a role have been described. However, mutational activation-inactivation of intrinsic genes might also contribute to a virulent phenotype in the case of opportunistic pathogens. As an example of cryptic virulence determinants activatable by mutations, laboratory isolates of E. coli are hemolytic  because of mutations in the hns  and fnr  genes. Whether this is just a laboratory curiosity and might actually have a role in the course of nosocomial infections by E. coli is a matter of speculation. Some virulence determinants of P. aeruginosa, such as alginate production  and cytotoxicity, are downregulated. However, mutants in which the expression of such determinants is derepressed are frequently found during infection . This indicates that mutation probably plays a major role in the emergence of the different virulent phenotypes shown by P. aeruginosa clinical isolates. Pathogenic P. aeruginosa isolates can be broadly classified into two groups, those with a cytoinvasive phenotype and those with a cytotoxic phenotype. However, both kinds of isolates contain the genes required for invading epithelial cells. Invasive and cytotoxic strains differ in the expression of the genes under the control of an activator called ExsA . Mutations in the gene exsA, which encodes the activator, lead to not a cytotoxic but only an invasive phenotype . Although both types of bacteria are virulent, they occupy different environments (inside and outside epithelial cells), so that one or the other phenotype might be selected in vivo by, for the moment, unknown processes. Recombination also has an important role in the evolution of antibiotic resistance determinants. Progressive clustering of genes, leading to an operon structure, may have occurred to optimize and regulate the expression of ancient genes producing a resistance (frequently low-level resistance) phenotype . In a similar way, the construction of a pathogenicity island requires the recruitment of different genes that recombine to produce a single genetic element containing several genes with a common role, virulence. In other cases, intragenic recombination is essential to produce a resistant phenotype. The most conspicuous example of recombination in chromosomal DNA leading to antibiotic resistance is beta-lactam resistance produced by recombination of penicillin-binding-protein genes in Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Streptococcus pneumoniae . Similar recombinatorial processes may have influenced the evolution of virulence. However, unlike for antibiotic resistance, few examples of recent evolution of bacteria to a virulent phenotype have been described. One might be recombination between different sets of genes, which causes the rearrangements that can be observed in the capsular antigens of S. pneumoniae (-, ) and can be considered a mechanism of defense against host immunity. Another could be the emergence and further dissemination of enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7 strains . This E. coli serogroup has emerged as a relevant pathogen in the last 20 years. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli isolates contain virulence plasmids and pathogenicity islands similar to those found in Shigella spp. . Although it was a matter of speculation whether these genetic determinants were acquired recently by E. coli, the recent sequencing of the genome of an E. coli O157:H7 strain  demonstrated that it contains as many as 1,387 new genes in comparison with the previously sequenced nonpathogenic laboratory strain E. coli K-12 . We must be aware that acquisition of pathogenicity determinants by previously nonpathogenic organisms might occur in a similar way as it happens with antibiotic resistance determinants. For instance, the acquisition of virulence plasmids by bacteria forming part of the human indigenous flora and thus already well adapted for surviving inside their host (such as E. coli) might lead to the emergence of novel pathogens. In a similar way, the acquisition of virulence determinant