What Happened to the Streptococci: Overview of Taxonomic and Nomenclature Changes
Since the division of the Streptococcus genus into enterococci, lactococci, and streptococci in 1984, many changes in the nomenclature and taxonomy of the Streptococcus genus have taken place. The application of genetic comparisons has improved the proper classification of the different species. The Lancefield system of serogrouping the streptococci by the expression of beta-hemolysis on blood agar plates is still very useful for the identification of streptococci for patient management. The Lancefield grouping system cannot be used in itself for accurate identification of specific beta-hemolytic species, but it can be a useful part of the identification procedure. Except for identification of the "Streptococcus bovis group" of species and Streptococcus suis, Lancefield grouping is of little value in identification of the non-beta-hemolytic streptococci and related genera. In fact, identification of the non-beta-hemolytic species is problematic for conventional as well as commercially available identification procedures. A combination of conventional tests and specific chromogenic tests suggested by several investigators is presented and discussed. Tables are included that suggest tests and procedures to guide investigators attempting to identify all the species.

The purpose of this communication is to outline the changes in taxonomy and nomenclature of the Streptococcus genus that have occurred in the past 15 years. These changes are the result of the application of DNA-DNA reassociation, 16S rDNA gene sequencing, and other molecular techniques that help delineate differences in bacterial genera and species. The 1984 Bergey's Manual of Systemic Bacteriology listed only seven genera of faculatatively anaerobic gram-positive cocci (GPC); Aerococcus, Leuconostoc, Micrococcus, Pediococcus, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Stomatococcus . At present there are 17 different genera of GPC. The discussion is limited to the Streptococcus genus and closely related GPC that are catalase negative and display chains in the Gram stain. Technically, Leuconostoc bacteria fit into this category, but discussions on changes in this genus are not included, because iden-tification procedures and clinical relevance of the leuconostocs can be found in a review written in 1995 . Shortly before the publication of Bergey's Manual in 1986, the genus Streptococcus was split into three genera (Enterococcus, Lactococcus, and Streptococcus) . Changes in the Enterococcus and Lactococcus genera are not detailed, but some changes are included to explain changes in the Streptococcus genus. Many new species of streptococci have been added to the genus, and six new genera of GPC that form chains have been established (Abiotrophia , Granulicatella , Dolosicoccus , Facklamia , Globicatella , and Ignavigranum ). The majority of these genera were split off the Streptococcus genus by genetic and phenotypic information. The earliest attempt at differentiating the streptococci was probably made in 1903 by Shottmuller , who used blood agar to differentiate strains that were beta-hemolytic from those that were not. Before 1933, fermentation and tolerance tests were the only tests used for differentiating many of the streptococci. In 1933 Lancefield reported the technique of demonstrating specific carbohydrate "group" antigens associated with the beta-hemolytic strains . In 1937, Sherman proposed a scheme for placing the streptococci into four categories. These categories were organized by hemolytic reaction, group carbohydrate antigens, and phenotypic tests (primarily fermentation and tolerance tests) . Sherman's four divisions were the pyogenic division, the viridans division, the lactic division, and the enterococci. The pyogenic division included the beta-hemolytic strains with defined group antigens (A, B, C, E, F, and G). This division of the streptococci is not appreciably different from that of today's identification systems based on serogrouping. Sherman's viridans division included streptococcal species that were not beta-hemolytic, were not tolerant to high-pH growth conditions, were not salt tolerant, and did not grow at 10C. This group is still known today as the viridans streptococci, and many more species have been added to this classification. Sherman's lactic division included strains that were associated primarily with the manufacture of dairy products. They were not associated with human infections. This group differed from the pyogenic group by not being beta-hemolytic, by having the capacity to grow at 10C but not at 45C, and by failing to grow in broth containing 6.5% NaCl. Sherman's lactic division was reclassified as the Lactococcus genus in the mid-1980s. Lactococcus species that have recently been isolated from human infections have phenotypic characteristics that are not the same as those described by Sherman . Sherman's fourth division was termed the enterococci and included the four species known at that time. Although some of the enterococci were beta-hemolytic, other characteristics such as the capacity to grow in broths at high pH, high salt concentrations, and a wide temperature range (10 to 45C) differentiated them from the other three divisions. The number of Enterococcus species has increased to more than 20. All of the new species have phenotypic characteristics similar to those described by Sherman . The classification and identification of streptococci was severely hampered by a hierarchical dichotomous approach relying on a very limited number of complex characters (colony size, hemolysis, and group carbohydrate antigens) that resulted in species definitions that are often qualified by a number of exceptions. Moreover, because these organisms grow slowly and may require additional factors for isolation and characterization, as well as the somewhat cumbersome classification system, identification of streptococci to the species level is rarely performed in time to be relevant to the treatment of the patient from whom the organism was isolated. One of the most useful tools applied to the revision of the classification system for the Streptococcus genus is the application of 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Figure  depicts a phylogenetic tree of the currently available sequences for the species included in the Streptococcus genus. I have chosen to present the identification schemes listed in the following tables based strictly on phenotypic characteristics because I feel that the clinical microbiologist can easily place the species into groups that are phenotypically related with only a few microbiologic tests. These phenotypic groups do not necessarily correlate with the groups shown in the genetic tree in Fig. . FIG. 1. | Phylogenetic relationship among 55 Streptococcus species based on analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences. Phylogenetic relationship among 55 Streptococcus species based on analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences. The dendrogram was constructed by the clustal method using the DNASTAR program. The units at the bottom of the tree indicate distance between sequence pairs.
HEMOLYTIC STREPTOCOCCI : For clinical laboratories as well as taxonomists, one of the most useful phenotypic characteristics of streptococci is the reaction of the bacteria on blood agar plates. Hemolysis is used as a guide for managing patients as well as an aid in classification of the bacterium to the species level. J. H. Brown in 1919 first defined the reactions of streptococci on blood agar plates . This monograph is no longer available, but Brown's definitions are accurately shown in reference . It is very important that clinical and physician office laboratories accurately identify the beta-hemolytic reactions of the streptococci. Table  lists all beta-hemolytic streptococci known to date. There is one exception included in this table; S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae is not beta-hemolytic but is included for taxonomic reasons. Column 1 in Table  lists all the species and subspecies of beta-hemolytic streptococci. Column 2 lists the Lancefield group antigens that are associated with each species. Columns 3 to 12 list 10 phenotypic characteristics that can be used to help identify the streptococci to the species level when hemolysis and identification of group carbohydrate antigen fail to do so. The last column gives the most common natural host of the species. With the exception of S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae, S. equi subsp. equi, and two recently described species, S. phocae  and S. didelphis , all the species listed in Table  have been isolated from human infections. Table  was constructed based on the molecular and phenotypic characteristics described by Schleifer and Kilpper-Balz , Vandamme et al. , Vieira et al. , and our own unpublished results of testing all reference strains for each of the species. Investigators used a variety of techniques including DNA-DNA reassociation, 16S rDNA sequencing, whole-cell protein analysis, multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, and phenotypic characteristics to help establish the species and subspecies included in this table. Streptococcus pyogenes | S. pyogenes is also known as beta-hemolytic group A streptococcus or Lancefield's group A strep (GAS). It is the most pathogenic bacterium in the genus Streptococcus. All clinicians should be aware that GAS is the agent that causes bacterial pharyngitis, impetigo, and a host of other infections including severe invasive diseases. The recent review by Cunningham is an excellent source of information for interested investigators to familiarize themselves with the severity and diversity of diseases caused by this bacterium . The major (but not exclusive) virulence factor associated with GAS is the M-protein antigen. This surface antigen is the antigen that allows the GAS to avoid phagocytosis and to survive in the human host. The hypervariable N-terminal portion of this protein dictates the type specificity of each antigen. Lancefield prepared type-specific antisera to many of these antigens and used the antisera in a capillary precipitin test to subtype the GAS . This system is still in use in some laboratories after more than 60 years. In recent years, an alternative system called emm typing has been developed, which uses the sequence of the gene that encodes the M-protein hyperviable region. Correlation between the serologic and emm typing systems is very good, and in most cases the emm type reflects the M-protein serologic type. The emm typing system can be accessed through the CDC web site . Methods for emm typing and the sequences of more than 120 emm-types of GAS are described in references  and . From Table  the reader can determine that S. pyogenes is not the only Streptococcus that may possess the group A antigen. The true incidence of non-S. pyogenes GAS strains found in human infections is unknown, but from the information available to us at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Streptococcus laboratory, these strains are not common. More information regarding the two species S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis and S. anginosus is given below where these two species are discussed. S. pyogenes is best identified by demonstration of the group A antigen on the cell. Presumptive identification can be made by bacitracin susceptibility or pyrrolidonylarylamidase activity. S. pyogenes strains are the only beta-hemolytic streptococci that are positive in both of these tests. Some of the other beta-hemolytic streptococci can also be positive in one or the other, but not both, of these tests; therefore, these tests alone are not 100% specific for S. pyogenes .  Streptococcus agalactiae | S. agalactiae, or Lancefield's group B streptococcus (GBS) is the most common cause of neonatal sepsis . Reference  is an excellent starting point for those interested in learning more about the epidemiology and types of diseases caused by this organism. Two major avenues of investigation have been explored for the prevention of GBS disease: the development of vaccines  and the screening procedures for the presence of GBS in anal, cervical or vaginal carriers and subsequent antimicrobial management . S. agalactiae is the only Streptococcus species that has the group B antigen. Some other streptococcal species have recently been identified however, that cross-react with commercial slide agglutination tests (see the discussion of S. porcinus, below). GBS can also be presumptively identified by the CAMP and hippurate reactions. Together with the unique hemolytic reaction (very small zone of lysis), these two presumptive tests are very accurate in the identification.  Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae | The exact composition of the taxon Streptococcus dysgalactiae has been in a state of flux for the past few years. S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae is the only species listed on Table  that is not beta-hemolytic. This species is included because of the other subspecies included in this discussion. Isolation of this bacterium from human infections has not been documented. The organism has virulence factors similar to those of S. pyogenes, including M-like proteins . Identification by determining the characteristics in Table  should be considered presumptive. Determining that an alpha-hemolytic streptococcus has group C antigen is insufficient for identification; other non-beta-hemolytic streptococci, e.g., viridans streptococal species, may also have group C antigen . Additional phenotypic or genetic characteristics should be used to identify this bacterium .  Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis | S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis is the revised taxonomic epithet for what was previously termed S. equisimilis or Lancefield's group C Streptococcus. Genetic investigations indicated that Lancefield's group C strain (also known as group C human strain or S. equisimilis), Lancefield's group G and L strains, and the species known as S. dysgalactiae were all genetically similar and should be included in one taxon. Since S. dysgalactiae was the oldest officially recognized species, all of these entities were placed in the S. dysgalactiae classification . Later investigations  indicated that Lancefield group C strain (S. equisimilis) and Lancefield's group G and L strains should be grouped into one category and that S. dysgalactiae should be placed in different category, thus creating two separate subspecies, S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae and S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis. More recently, investigators have shown that some strains of S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis possess the group A antigen . Group A, C, G, and L S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis strains are found in human infections. The true incidence figures are difficult to estimate but in our experience at the CDC, group C and G strains are found much more commonly in human infections than are group A and L strains of this species. Like S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae, the strains possessing different group antigens of S. dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis also have virulence factors similar to S. pyogenes, including emm gene homologs  (see the CDC web site above). The group antigen can be used only as an aid in species identification. The phenotypic tests in Table  should be used, together with hemolytic reaction and group antigen, to identify the species possessing Lancefield's group C antigen. A total of six different beta-hemolytic streptococcal species or subspecies can have the group C antigen.  Streptococcus equi subsp. equi | Streptococcus equi subsp. equi is a beta-hemolytic group C Streptococcus that causes strangles in horses. To my knowledge, this species has not been isolated from humans. S. equi subsp. equi has a protein that induces opsonic antibodies in horses and is thought to be involved in the organism's virulence . Identification of this subspecies is based on the hemolytic reaction, demonstration of the group C antigen, differences in hydrolysis of esculin and starch, and fermentation of sorbitol and trehalose .  Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus | Unlike S. equi subsp. equi, S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus is found in human infections. Most recently, this organism was associated with a large outbreak of nephritis in Brazil . The publication by Nicholson et al.  provides references to previous nephritis outbreaks and other infections caused by this bacterium. Most human infections can be traced back to the consumption of contaminated dairy products. This organism is a frequent cause of bovine mastitis. S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus has a surface-exposed protein (Szp) that is antigenically variable, stimulates opsonic protective antibodies, and shares certain structural features with the S. pyogenes M protein . Although this protein does not have significant sequence homology to the M protein, it is tempting to speculate that Szp also plays an antiphagocytic role. S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus is identified by beta-hemolysis, group C antigen presence, hydrolysis of esculin (70% of strains) and starch, fermentation of sorbitol, and occasional fermentation of trehalose.  Streptococcus canis | S. canis is an organism that was described in 1986 as having the Lancefield group G antigen and was isolated from animals, most frequently dogs (hence the name "canis") . Extensive phenotypic testing of isolates from dogs was described in 1994 , and the isolation of S. canis from a human with sepsis was reported in 1997 . It is not possible to estimate how frequently S. canis is isolated from humans, because most clinical laboratories do not perform phenotypic tests on group G streptococci other than the hemolytic reaction and group determination. The phenotypic profile given in Table  for the identification of S. canis is that of nonhuman strains. It is not known whether human strains will have the same phenotypic characteristics.  Streptococcus anginosus Group | None of the beta-hemolytic streptococci has caused more confusion about terminology and classification than the group of organisms listed as S. anginosus . There is no doubt that this group includes three distinct species and more subspecies. S. anginosus, S. constellatus, and S. intermedius were all collectively known as either S. anginosus or S. milleri at one time. The problem with the term "S. milleri" was that it was never accepted by the taxonomist as a confirmed taxonomic entity. DNA-DNA reassociation studies clearly show that the aforementioned species are distinct taxons . There are beta-hemolytic strains of each of the three species, and the strains may possess one of four different Lancefield group antigens or no group antigen. Adding to the confusion is the fact that non-beta-hemolytic strains of the three species are more common than beta-hemolytic strains. Non-beta-hemolytic varieties of each of the three species are grouped into the general classification of viridans streptococci. Whiley et al. have proposed an identification scheme based on degradation of chromogenic substrates for the differentiation of the three species . In addition, although these authors state that hemolysis and group antigens are of little value in differentiation of the species, more isolates of S. constellatus tend to be beta-hemolytic than of either S. anginosus or S. intermedius. Isolates of S. intermedius are rarely beta-hemolytic . These authors also state that there tends to be an association between the clinical sources and the three species. S. anginosus isolates are commonly isolated from urogenital and gastrointestinal sources, S. constellatus is often isolated from respiratory and many other sources, while S. intermedius strains are commonly identified from brain and liver abscesses. The distribution of the group antigens also shows some association with the species. Isolates of S. intermedius rarely have group antigens, while isolates of S. anginosus and S. constellatus often have group F, C, A, and G antigens (in order of frequency). Other investigators have also found similar distributions of the three species using Whiley's scheme and DNA reassociation as reference identification procedures . Very little is known about virulence factors produced by this group of bacteria. Two enzymes that may be considered virulence factors are alpha-N-acetylneuramidase (sialidase) and hyaluronidase; S. intermedius produces both of these enzymes, S. constellatus produces only hyaluronidase, and S. anginosus produces neither. The production of these enzymes is part of the identification scheme proposed by Whiley et al. . Identification of the beta-hemolytic as well as non-beta-hemolytic species are given in Table . Whiley's scheme  is considered a standard for phenotypic identification of the three species and potential subspecies. Table  has been constructed from the data presented in references , , , , , , , , , , and . The hemolytic reaction and Lancefield group antigens that are commonly associated with the three species are also included. Subspecies are also included. Column 2 under each of the species listed in Table  represents the original Whiley description of the species; column 1 under each of the species represents a beta-hemolytic variant of each species; and column 3 represents an official or unofficial subspecies designation of that particular species. This table should be used as a guide for identification of the species, and confirmation of subspecies may require additional molecular documentation. All the species and subspecies listed in this table should have the phenotypic characteristics of the S. anginosus group listed in Table . Column 1 under S. anginosus is the description of the group of strains identified but not proposed for subspecies status by Whiley et al. . Column 3 under S. anginosus is the description of the "motile S. milleri" strains . Additional variants of S. anginosus have been described based on ribotypes, some of which correlate with the entities listed in Table  . Commercial identification systems that have three of the seven chromogenic substrates suggested by Whiley et al. are available. The Fluo-Card Milleri (Key Scientific, Round Rock, Tex.) includes beta-d-fucosidase, beta-glucosidase, and alpha-glucosidase . Compared to the Whiley scheme, this system identified 98% of S. anginosus strains, 97% of S. constellatus strains, and 88% of S. intermedius strains. The Rapid ID-32 Strep system (Bio-Merieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France) (not available for clinical microbiology use in the United States) includes N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase, beta-glucosidase, and beta-galactosidase . These authors did not use a reference method to compare their identification, and so all 70 strains in their study were placed into one of the three species. Limia et al.  evaluated the Rapid ID-32 Strep system as well as the Whiley system against a line blot hybridization assay. There was an 80% agreement between the genotypic method and Whiley's method. The agreement between the genotypic method and the Rapid ID-32 Strep system was 76%. The latter system was particularly inaccurate, with identification of only 57% of the S. intermedius strains. There have been reports that some of the problems with the Rapid ID-32 system is with preparation of the inoculum density and growth conditions . A third commercial system available for identification of the three species is the Becton Dickinson Microbiology Crystal Gram-Positive system . This system has beta-N-fucosidase, beta-glucosidase, and alpha-glucosidase. Very little information is available about the utility of this system. Molecular technology for specific identification of these species has been described. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis , sequencing of specific genes  and 16S rRNA genes , and species-specific probes  have all been described. In summary, we know that beta-hemolytic strains of all species have been isolated from human infections (with and without various Lancefield antigens), but we know very little about the incidence and clinical significance of each of the redefined species and subspecies.  Streptococcus constellatus subsp. pharyngis | Whiley et al. have recently described a subspecies of S. constellatus that is beta-hemolytic and carries Lancefield's group C antigen . These beta-hemolytic group C streptococci have a predeliction for the human throat and cause pharyngitis. Although still within the parameters of the criteria for inclusion in the species, the DNA-DNA reassociation percentages are different for the subspecies. Phenotypic differences in the chromogenic substrate degradation are also different for S. constellatus subspp. pharyngis and constellatus. A second group of beta-hemolytic group C and one strain of group G streptococci were also described in this report but not formally proposed as a subspecies (see column 1 of Table  under S. anginosus). This group was closely related to S. anginosus and was not necessarily associated with pharyngeal infections. The reactions listed in Table  in column 3 under S. constellatus subsp. pharyngis lists the tests to identify the subspecies.  Streptococcus porcinus | The beta-hemolytic streptococci that carry Lancefield group E, P, U, and V and four new antigens were included in a description of S. porcinus . S. porcinus has been isolated from the human genitourinary tracts of female patients of reproductive age . The incidence and the importance of this finding are inconclusive and are complicated by the fact that most human isolates of S. porcinus react with commercially prepared GBS grouping antisera . Slide agglutination group B reagent has also been reported to react with nonhuman strains . Lancefield extracts of these strains generally do not react with CDC group B antiserum . Most strains isolated from human sources react with antiserum prepared against one of the new group antigens. Careful observation of the hemolytic reaction can be a useful indicator of S. porcinus, and clinical microbiologists should be aware of the potential for misidentification of these isolates as S. agalactiae. Typical strains of S. agalactiae lyse red blood cells weakly, and colonies of GBS are surrounded by a small zone of lysis. On the other hand, typical strains of S. porcinus lyse red blood cells in an agar plate in a much larger area around colony growth .  Streptococcus iniae | The original cultures of S. iniae were isolated from freshwater dolphins. S. iniae is also found in aquacultures of fish and can be transmitted to humans via the fish . An outbreak of bacteremic disease in humans who handle contaminated fish has been reported , but sporadic reports of this organism have been rare at the CDC. Beta-hemolytic streptococci without group antigen should be tested for the phenotypic characteristics listed in Table  for definitive identification.  Streptococcus phocae and Streptococcus didelphis | As noted above, S. phocae and S. didelphis have not been confirmed as being isolated from humans. S. phocae has been isolated from seals , and S. didelphis has been isolated from opossums . The data for identification of these two beta-hemolytic streptococci were obtained from these published reports and our own testing of the type strains for these two species .  TABLE 1 | Identification of the beta-hemolytic streptococci TABLE 2 | Identification of the S. anginosus group
BETA-HEMOLYTIC STREPTOCOCCI : As stated above, the determination of hemolysis is one of the most useful characteristics for the identification of streptococci. Nonhemolytic variants of S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, and members of the S. anginosus group are well documented. Whether there are nonhemolytic variants of the other streptococcal species that are normally beta-hemolytic remains to be determined. It is not useful to try to distinguish between alpha-hemolysis and no hemolysis on blood agar plates. The composition of the medium including the type of blood and incubation atmospheres can influence whether "alpha" hemolysis occurs. There is no documented enzyme or toxin that affects red blood cells to produce alpha-hemolysis by streptococci. The greening or partial destruction of red blood cells is produced primarily by the production of hydrogen peroxide by the streptococci. The peroxide destroys some of the red blood cells and releases hemoglobin into the medium surrounding the streptococcal colony that appears green-like. If oxygen is removed from the growth atmosphere, peroxide is not formed, and cultures that appeared "alpha-hemolytic" will be nonhemolytic. The value of identification of Lancefield antigens on non-beta-hemolytic streptococci is also limited. While determination of the group D antigen for identification of S. bovis and determination of group R or other type antigens for S. suis are useful, determination of Lancefield antigens of all other non-beta-hemolytic streptococcal species, including the viridans streptococci, is of very little value for identification . Streptococcus pneumoniae | No changes in the classification have been made in the past few years for S. pneumoniae. This organism is still the leading cause of community-acquired pneumoniae, and the increasing prevalence of multidrug resistance is of great concern . Major developments in the formulation of vaccines for adults  and children  are encouraging for control of pneumococcal infections. Isolation and identification of S. pneumoniae is still problematic since conventional culture techniques are far from perfect and identification of some strains is refractory. Phenotypic physiologic tests place S. pneumoniae in the viridans Streptococcus, S. mitis group. Ideally, S. pneumoniae is identified by a serologic technique such as omni serum or a slide agglutination test  or typing serum . Under most circumstances, if serologic techniques are not used, identification can be accomplished by determining susceptibility to optochin and/or bile solubility. Recent molecular techniques, such as PCR tests for targeted proteins, pneumolysin , and penicillin binding protein genes , have been shown to improve the identification of culture-negative cases of pneumonia and identification of strains.  Streptococcus bovis Group: S. bovis, S. equinus, S. gallolyticus, S. infantarius, S. pasteurianus, S. lutetiensis | Table  lists the streptococcal species included in this section. DNA-DNA reassociation experiments have clarified the taxonomic classification of this group of streptococci, but the nomenclature of these species is confusing and subject to debate. The reasons for the changes listed in Table  for the S. bovis group begin with a report published in 1984 . These investigators examined a collection of strains, most of which were nonhuman isolates, and reported that the phenotypically described type strains of S. bovis and S. equinus were a single DNA group, i.e., the same species. Farrow et al.  identified seven different DNA groups in their study. These DNA groups are referred to throughout this section. Other investigators performed DNA reassociation studies on human isolates termed S. bovis biotype I and biotype II (the latter is sometimes referred to as S. bovis variant) and discovered that neither biotype I nor biotype II of human origin was sufficiently closely related to the reference type strains of the S. bovis-S. equinus DNA group to be included in the newly described species . These investigators reported that the S. bovis biotype II isolates of human origin could be divided into two groups based on phenotypic characteristics determined in the Rapid Strep system. These two groups were called S. bovis II/1 and S. bovis II/2. The investigators also reported that the human isolates of S. bovis II/2 were closely related to the S. bovis I strains by DNA reassociation studies. Osawa et al.  demonstrated that strains isolated from koalas, dogs, cows, and other animals belonged to the Farrow et al. DNA group 2  and proposed that these strains be called S. gallolyticus based on gallate-degrading capacity. These investigators also included isolates of S. bovis I and II from human infections in their studies. The human isolates of S. bovis I and II/2 joined the S. gallolyticus species based on DNA reassociation studies. Further studies  confirmed that no human strains called S. bovis by current identification procedures did in fact join the S. bovis-S. equinus group described by Farrow et al. . All the human isolates of S. bovis I and II/2 were suggested to be officially identified as S. gallolyticus. These experiments were done primarily by whole-cell protein analysis, which correlates with DNA reassoci