Tularemia
Francisella tularensis is the etiological agent of tularemia, a serious and occasionally fatal disease of humans and animals. In humans, ulceroglandular tularemia is the most common form of the disease and is usually a consequence of a bite from an arthropod vector which has previously fed on an infected animal. The pneumonic form of the disease occurs rarely but is the likely form of the disease should this bacterium be used as a bioterrorism agent. The diagnosis of disease is not straightforward. F. tularensis is difficult to culture, and the handling of this bacterium poses a significant risk of infection to laboratory personnel. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay- and PCR-based methods have been used to detect bacteria in clinical samples, but these methods have not been adequately evaluated for the diagnosis of pneumonic tularemia. Little is known about the virulence mechanisms of F. tularensis, though there is a large body of evidence indicating that it is an intracellular pathogen, surviving mainly in macrophages. An unlicensed live attenuated vaccine is available, which does appear to offer protection against ulceroglandular and pneumonic tularemia. Although an improved vaccine against tularemia is highly desirable, attempts to devise such a vaccine have been limited by the inability to construct defined allelic replacement mutants and by the lack of information on the mechanisms of virulence of F. tularensis. In the absence of a licensed vaccine, aminoglycoside antibiotics play a key role in the prevention and treatment of tularemia.

In 1911, an outbreak of a plague-like disease in rodents in Tulare County, California, provided the first isolation of a small gram-negative bacterium which was named Bacterium tularensis . Subsequently, natural infections with Francisella tularensis have been reported in a range of vertebrates including mammals, birds, amphibians, and fish, and even in invertebrates . Tularemia occurs only in the northern hemisphere and most frequently in Scandinavia, northern America, Japan, and Russia . However, tularemia has recently been reported from Turkey, Yugoslavia, Spain, Kosovo, and Switzerland , indicating that tularemia is even more widely distributed than was previously thought . In many parts of the world, colloquial names such as rabbit fever, hare fever, deerfly fever, and lemming fever have been used to describe the disease . Tularemia is not a disease which is notifiable to the World Health Organization, and the worldwide incidence of disease is not known. Nevertheless, some data on the incidence of disease are available. In Sweden, the annual number of reported cases of disease in humans over the period from 1973 to 1985 ranged from less than 5 cases to over 500 . In Japan 1,355 cases of tularemia were reported over the period 1924 to 1987 . In Turkey, 205 cases were reported over the period 1988 to 1998 , while in Slovakia 126 cases of disease were reported during the period 1985 to 1994 . In some parts of the world, the number of cases of tularemia has declined markedly during the twentieth century: in the United States, the annual number of reported cases of tularemia declined from several thousand in the 1930s to several hundred in the 1980s . It is likely that these figures are a gross underrepresentation of the true incidence of tularemia, because many infections are not diagnosed as a consequence of the relatively benign nature of disease caused by some strains of F. tularensis and by some difficulties in laboratory testing. F. tularensis has been an organism of concern as a biological threat agent since the large state-funded biological weapons programs of the 1950s, when the United States first evaluated the organism as a biological weapon, and it was subsequently incorporated into weapons by the U.S.S.R. (reviewed in reference ). Now that the emphasis has shifted towards defending against biological terrorism, public health and medical management protocols following a release of tularemia have been reviewed . FIG. 1. | World map showing areas where F. tularensis World map showing areas where F. tularensis is endemic (shaded).
F. tularensis is thought to be maintained in the environment principally by various terrestrial and aquatic mammals such as ground squirrels, rabbits, hares, voles, muskrats, water rats, and other rodents . In regions where tularemia is endemic, antibodies to F. tularensis are frequently detected in the sera of trapped wild animals . Outbreaks of disease in humans often parallel outbreaks of tularemia in wild animals. For example, in Sweden a clear correlation between peaks in vole and hare populations and outbreaks of tularemia in humans have been reported , and outbreaks of tularemia in humans in the former Soviet Union have been linked to epizootics of disease in ground voles . However, it is not clear whether these animal species are the true reservoir of the bacterium in the environment. A wide range of arthropod vectors have also been implicated in the transmission of tularemia between mammalian hosts. In central Europe, the ticks Dermacentor reticulatus and Ixodes ricinus are important vectors. In areas of the Czech Republic and Austria where natural foci of tularemia occur, between 2.1 and 2.8% of D. reticulatus ticks analyzed contained F. tularensis . In the United States, biting flies are the most common vectors in Utah, Nevada, and California , while ticks are the most important vectors east of the Rocky Mountains. In the former Soviet Union, the bacterium is transmitted by both mosquitoes (Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles species) and the Ixodes species of tick . Such arthropod vectors play a role both in the transmission of the disease within wild animal populations and in the transmission of disease to humans. It therefore follows that rural populations, especially individuals who spend time in endemic areas such as farmers, hunters, walkers, and forest workers, are most at risk of contracting tularemia . There is evidence that the bacterium can persist in watercourses, possibly in association with amoebae . Beavers and muskrats in North America and lemmings and beavers in Scandinavia might also play a role in the maintenance of the bacterium in watercourses . During a prolonged period in water (140 days in the study reported), the number of directly culturable bacterial cells declined to below detectable levels . However, on the basis of rhodamine 123 staining, which is indicative of metabolic activity, at least 30% of these cells were judged to be viable. Although this finding suggests that F. tularensis can persist in a viable but nonculturable form in water, the bacteria were not able to cause disease when injected into mice . These findings might have implications for techniques which rely on the direct culture of F. tularensis to identify bacteria in watercourses.
The taxonomic position of F. tularensis is complex and has changed frequently. F. tularensis was originally included in the genus Bacterium, later in the Pasteurella genus, and subsequently provisionally placed in the Brucella genus . In 1947, the proposal was made that the bacterium should be the sole member of a new genus called Francisella . The most recent issue of Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology  indicates that F. tularensis and F. novicida are the two species in the genus Francisella. F. novicida has been differentiated on the basis of inability to produce acid from sucrose, the relative ease of culture, and the lack of virulence for humans and rabbits . However, several workers have since questioned whether F. novicida should be considered a separate species. F. novicida is now known to be capable of causing a tularemia-like illness in humans, and on the basis of DNA hybridization, F. novicida was not distinguishable from F. tularensis . More recently, the 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences of F. tularensis and F. novicida have been shown to have a high degree of sequence similarity (99.6%) . On the basis of these studies, both Hollis et al.  and Forsman et al.  proposed that F. novicida should be considered a subspecies of F. tularensis. More recently, a detailed analysis of several strains of Yersinia philomiragia revealed their fatty acid compositions to be typical of the genus Francisella . In addition, the DNA from these strains showed a high degree of relatedness to F. tularensis DNA . These observations indicated that Y. philomiragia should be included in the Francisella genus and renamed Francisellaphilomiragia . This proposal is supported by the finding that the 16S rDNA sequences of F. tularensis and F. philomiragia confirm both its placement in the Francisella genus and its identity as a separate species . F. philomiragia strains can also be distinguished from F. tularensis because the former are oxidase positive in the Kovacs modification of this test, are often able to hydrolyze gelatin, and are relatively easily cultured. In addition, F. philomiragia is considered virulent only in immunocompromised individuals or in those who have recently had a near-drowning experience . Therefore, the current consensus position appears to be that F. tularensis and F. philomiragia are the sole members of the Francisella genus within the Francisellaceae family. The 16S rDNA sequences of the members of this family contain the consensus sequence for members of the gamma-subclass of Proteobacteria . This family also includes Wolbachia persica , a parasite of arthropods and worms, the Dermacentor andersoni symbiont, which was originally isolated from Rocky Mountain wood ticks , and Ornithodorous moubata symbiont B . Most of these arthropod endosymbionts are poorly characterized. However, W. persica is known to exist in the Malpighian tubules of the soft tick Argas arboreus  and is not considered a pathogen of mammals. For F. tularensis, several subspecies other than novicida have been proposed . Originally, F. tularensis strains were identified as belonging to either subsp. tularensis (also known as type A or subspecies nearctica) or subspecies palaearctica (also know as type B or subspecies holarctica) principally on the basis of virulence, citrulline ureidase activity (conversion of l-citrulline to ornithine), and acid production from glycerol . Subspecies holarctica is now the most widely used terminology in place of subspecies palaearctica . A more detailed description of the properties of subsp. tularensis and subspecies holarctica can be found in Olsufjev and Mesheryakova . Three biovars of F. tularensis subspecies holarctica have been suggested ; biovar I (erythromycin sensitive) , biovar II (erythromycin resistant) , and biovar japonica . Strains of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis are considered the most virulent for humans, with an infectious dose of less than 10 CFU and a mortality of 5 to 6% in untreated cases of cutaneous disease . F. tularensis strain Schu S4 is the proposed subsp. tularensis type strain . Strains of subspecies holarctica do not cause disease in rabbits, and the mortality rate associated with cutaneous disease in humans is less than 0.5% . Until recently, F. tularensis subsp. tularensis was thought to be found only in North America. However, the recent isolation of this subspecies in Europe suggests that it may be more widely distributed than was previously thought . F. tularensis subspecies holarctica is found mainly in North America and in Eurasia . A fourth subspecies, F. tularensis subsp. mediaasiatica, is found predominantly in the central Asian republics of the former USSR . These strains possess citrulline ureidase activity and are able to ferment glycerol, but are less virulent than strains of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis in rabbits . FIG. 2. | Evolutionary distance tree, based on 16S rDNA sequences, showing the relationship of F. tularensis Evolutionary distance tree, based on 16S rDNA sequences, showing the relationship of F. tularensis with other putative members of the Francisellaceae and with other closely related members of the gamma subclass of the Proteobacteria. Agrobacterium tumefaciens was included as an outgroup. Reproduced from Forsman et al.  with the kind permission of the International Union of Microbiological Societies. TABLE 1 | Taxonomy and characteristics of the subspecies of F. tularensis
The genetic makeup of F. tularensis is poorly understood, with sequences of only 34 genes deposited with GenBank. Two different cryptic plasmids (pOM1 and pNFL10) are reportedly found in the live vaccine strain (LVS) and in F. novicida, respectively  (GenBank accession AFO55345). This paucity of information has prompted two projects to sequence the F. tularensis genome. The genome sequence of a strain of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis (strain Schu S4) is currently being determined by a consortium of laboratories in Europe and the United States . A project to sequence the genome of LVS, originally derived from a virulent F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain, has recently commenced in the United States. Preliminary results from the strain Schu S4 genome sequencing project suggest a total genome size of <2 Mbp, making this one of the smaller bacterial genomes . Strain Schu S4 does not appear to possess either plasmid pOM1 or pNFL10 . The G+C content of the genome is approximately 34% . A preliminary annotation has identified 1,804 candidate open reading frames which are characterized by a slight shift in G+C content. Of these, 1,289 are thought to encode proteins, of which 413 had no database match , meaning that in comparison with many other bacterial genomes, F. tularensis contains a high proportion of unique genes . On the basis of database matches with known proteins, genes encoding putative transport/binding, gene regulation, energy metabolism, and cellular processes appeared to be underrepresented in the F. tularensis genome  . FIG. 3. | Preliminary annotation of the F. tularensis Preliminary annotation of the F. tularensis strain Schu S4 genome sequence; comparison of the number of F. tularensis genes in 15 functional categories (solid bars). The mean number of genes in these categories in 20 other bacterial species is shown as open bars, with error bars indicating the lowest and highest numbers of genes in each category. Reproduced from Prior et al.  with the kind permission of Blackwell Scientific Limited.
F. tularensis is a fastidious organism which requires enriched medium for growth. Traditionally, cysteine glucose blood agar has been the growth medium of choice. However, enriched chocolate agar (cysteine heart agar supplemented with 9% heated sheep red blood cells [CHAB]) and nonselective buffered charcoal yeast extract agar also support the growth of the organism and may be used for isolation . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines recommend the use of CHAB once growth on the general microbiological agars, such as sheep blood agar, chocolate agar, and Thayer-Martin agar, which are routinely used in U.S. laboratories for the isolation of bacteria from clinical specimens, indicates the pathogen to be present . A heavy inoculum on appropriate medium will yield visible growth in 18 h, but the appearance of individual colonies may require 2 to 4 days of incubation . F. tularensis grows slowly at 37C and poorly at 28C, and this can be exploited to distinguish F. tularensis from Yersinia pestis, F. philomiragia, and F. tularensis subsp. novicida, all of which grow well at 28C . On CHAB, colonies are 2 to 4 mm in size, greenish-white, round, smooth, and slightly mucoid, while on media containing whole blood there is usually a small zone of alpha-hemolysis surrounding colonies . Gram staining of cultured material reveals small (0.2 to 0.5 mum by 0.7 to 1.0 mum), mainly single gram-negative coccobacilli which stain weakly. Chemically defined media capable of supporting the growth of F. tularensis do exist, but growth on such media is slower and the colonies are smaller than on traditional rich agars. F. tularensis does not grow well in liquid media even when the medium is supplemented with cysteine and requires a large inoculum to obtain visible growth within 24 h. Clinical laboratories routinely inoculate clinical specimens into broth, usually brain heart infusion or Trypticase soy broth, for the recovery of bacteria. However, F. tularensis requires enriched media for growth, supplemented with cysteine. The organism has been cultivated in modified Mueller-Hinton broth and thioglycollate broth. In Mueller-Hinton broth, the addition of 0.025% ferric pyrophosphate appeared to enhance the growth of F. tularensis. Growth in liquid media is slow, requiring up 3 to 7 days of incubation if the broth is shaken or a minimum of 10 days in unshaken broth to produce visible growth. In static thioglycollate broth, growth is seen first as a dense band near the top which diffuses throughout the broth as growth progresses . The most widely used synthetic medium used for the growth of tularemia was devised by Chamberlain . However, defined media are not used for routine diagnosis of tularemia. Direct isolation of bacteria is frequently achieved from ulcer scrapings, lymph node biopsies, or sputum . The organism is rarely cultured directly from blood, although this is becoming feasible with the development of sensitive blood culture systems . The isolation of bacteria from urine or feces is not frequently done , but antigen detection in urine and RNA hybridization of wound specimens have been reported . In stained tissue sections, bacteria may be found both intra- and extracellularly . Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based tests can also be used to detect the bacteria in clinical samples. For example, a capture ELISA using monoclonal antibodies against F. tularensis lipopolysaccharide (LPS) recognized all strains of F. tularensis tested other than those of subspecies novicida, with no cross-reactivity with other bacterial species tested. The sensitivity was 103 CFU/ml in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 104 CFU/ml in spiked human sera . An immunochromatographic hand-held assay has also been developed based on a polyclonal and a monoclonal antibody to LPS of F. tularensis LVS; the detection limits of this assay were 106 CFU/ml PBS and 106 to 107 CFU/ml in spiked human sera. This assay is principally designed for field use, being compact and easy to use and giving results in 15 min, but the relatively low sensitivity means that a negative result does not exclude tularemia . Because of the difficulty in culturing F. tularensis, most cases of tularemia are diagnosed on the basis of clinical picture and/or serology . Serological tests for the diagnosis of F. tularensis infection are attractive because diagnostic work involving culture procedures carries a risk of infection for nonvaccinated laboratory staff . The diagnosis of human cases of tularemia is usually confirmed by the demonstration of an antibody response to F. tularensis, which occurs about 2 weeks after the onset of the disease . The detection of serum antibodies is most frequently achieved by agglutination or an ELISA . A latex agglutination test commercially available from BBL (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, N.J.) has been used by some workers to identify individuals with antibodies to F. tularensis: reactions at dilutions greater than 1:20 are considered specific and significant. Using this test, 2% of trappers in Quebec were found to be seropositive (at serum dilutions of 1:20 to 1:2,048) for F. tularensis . The only association between this population and the development of antibodies appeared to be the trapping of muskrats. Commercially available antigens can also be used with standard tube agglutination tests. A fourfold increase during illness or a single titer of 1:160 or greater is considered diagnostic . However, while serological tests are frequently used for diagnosis, strains of F. tularensis have occasionally been isolated which fail to agglutinate commercially available F. tularensis antigens . A range of PCR-based assays have been reported for the detection of F. tularensis or for the diagnosis of tularemia. These PCR assays have all used primers directed against genes encoding outer membrane proteins such as fopA  or the 17-kDa outer membrane lipoprotein . These PCR assays offer high specificity, failing to generate an amplicon using template DNA from a range of other bacterial pathogens . When used with pure cultures of F. tularensis as the source of template DNA, the assays also offer high levels of sensitivity. The PCR assay reported by Grunow et al. allowed the detection of 102 CFU/ml in PBS , and the use of a nested PCR assay allowed the detection of 1 CFU of F. tularensis . However, samples such as blood contain compounds capable of inhibiting the PCR, making detection of such low levels of bacteria in clinical samples impossible. In addition, blood samples invariably require some form of processing to allow high-sensitivity PCR tests to be carried out . Nevertheless, the PCR assay reported by Grunow et al. was shown to detect 103 to 104 CFU/ml of spiked serum , while the nested PCR assay reported by Fulop et al. was able to detect 102 CFU/ml of spiked blood . Even in their current forms, these assays do appear to offer advantages over the direct culture of bacteria. In mice, 83% of blood samples taken 24 h after experimental infection were positive by PCR, while bacteria could be cultured from only 48% of the samples . This advantage appears to extend to clinical samples: in a study with swab samples taken from the lesion site in 40 human cases of ulceroglandular tularemia, a PCR assay was positive for 73% of the samples, whereas bacteria were cultured from only 25% of the samples . Moreover, PCR identified F. tularensis in one sample which had not been identified by culture or serology in a parallel study . Subsequently, a number of other workers have reported the use of PCR assays for the diagnosis of tularemia  or for the analysis of environmental samples . These PCR-based tests might also be safer than tests which involve the culture of bacteria . Improved methods for the isolation and processing of tissue or blood samples and for the transport of samples to the laboratory might further improve the sensitivity and utility of the PCR test . Indeed, a specially formulated filter paper designed for sample collection has been proposed for the rapid preparation of template DNA from clinical or field-collected tick vectors . When linked with a TaqMan 5' nuclease assay or a PCR-enzyme immunoassay, sensitivities of <100 CFU were reported . While PCR assays have allowed the rapid detection of a range of F. tularensis strains, other workers have developed molecular methods to discriminate between Francisella strains . PCR-based methods have been evaluated for their potential to identify F. tularensis and discriminate between the different subspecies. Long random sequence oligonucleotide primers and primers specific for repetitive extragenic palindromic (REP) sequences and enterobacterial repetitive intragenic consensus (ERIC) sequences were evaluated . REP-PCR has been applied to specifically identifying strains of F. tularensis subsp. novicida, but patterns from subspecies holarctica and tularensis were found to be similar . A one-base difference in the 16S rRNA sequences of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis and F. tularensis subsp. holarctica has been demonstrated, and on this basis a PCR has been developed which can differentiate the two subspecies . In one study, PCR analyses based on the use of ERIC, REP or long random sequence primers yielded reproducible banding patterns of similar complexity and allowed differentiation of strains at the subspecies level, but the methods investigated do not meet the criteria for typing of individual isolates . More recent studies suggest that PCR amplification of tandem repeat regions may be highly discriminatory and a useful tool in strain typing . A specific PCR has been developed which produces amplicons of different lengths (target unknown), which has been used in combination with the 17-kDa lipoprotein PCR and can distinguish F. tularensis subsp. holarctica from strains of other F. tularensis subspecies .
Tularemia in humans can occur in several forms, depending to a large extent on the route of entry of the bacterium into the body. Although tularemia can be a severely debilitating disease, especially when caused by F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, many cases of disease caused by lower-virulence strains are undiagnosed. The most common form of the disease is ulceroglandular tularemia, which usually occurs as a consequence of a bite from an arthropod vector which has previously fed on an infected animal . Some cases of ulceroglandular tularemia occur in hunters and trappers as a consequence of the handling of infected meat, with infection via cuts or abrasions. After an incubation period of typically 3 to 6 days , the patient experiences the sudden onset of flu-like symptoms, especially chills, fever, headache, and generalized aches . An ulcer, which can persist for several months, forms at the site of infection, usually on the lower limbs in the cases of tick-borne disease (a disease with similar symptoms but without the appearance of an ulcer is termed glandular tularemia). Bacteria are disseminated from this site via the lymphatic system to regional lymph nodes. The enlargement of these lymph nodes  often resembles the classical bubo associated with bubonic plague. From this site, bacteria may be disseminated to other tissues such as the spleen, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestine, central nervous system, and skeletal muscles. However, the bacteremic phase of the infection is transient and occurs relatively early in the infection process. Recovery from the disease can be protracted, but the ulceroglandular form of tularemia is rarely fatal (the mortality rate from ulceroglandular tularemia is typically less than 3% ). Even without treatment, ulceroglandular and glandular tularemia are rarely fatal, but may take a significant length of time to resolve. On the other hand, an acute form of the disease produced by F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, typhoidal tularemia, is typified as a septicemia without lymphadenopathy or the appearance of an ulcer and carries a mortality rate of 30 to 60% . In addition to the symptoms described above, the patient may be delirious and shock may develop. A rare variation of ulceroglandular disease is oculoglandular tularemia, where the conjunctiva is the initial site of infection, usually as a result of the transfer of bacteria on the fingertips . The disease is marked by the appearance of ulcers and nodules on the conjunctiva, and without treatment the infection spreads to the local lymph nodes The ingestion of infected foodstuffs  or of bacteria in drinking water  can result in oropharyngeal or gastrointestinal tularemia, depending on the site of colonization of host tissues. The former is often described as a painful sore throat with enlargement of the tonsils and the formation of a yellow-white pseudomembrane. This is most often accompanied by swollen cervical lymph nodes . Depending on the infecting dose, gastrointestinal tularemia ranges from mild but persistent diarrhea to an acute fatal disease with extensive ulceration of the bowel. Probably the most acute form is disease is associated with the inhalation of bacteria, although pneumonic disease can also occur as a complication of ulceroglandular, glandular, oculoglandular, or oropharyngeal tularemia . The clinical and roentgenographic features of pneumonic tularemia are quite variable, making diagnosis difficult . On occasion, pneumonic tularemia may even occur without any overt signs of pneumonia. The occasional naturally occurring cases of inhalation tularemia often arise from farming activities which involve the handling (and the subsequent generation of dusts) of hay which has previously been the site of residence of infected rodents. . FIG. 4. | Enlarged lymph node in a tularemia patient. Enlarged lymph node in a tularemia patient.
The pathogenesis of the LVS strain in mice has been used as a model to study the behavior of intracellular pathogens. A study published in 1946 compared the sensitivities of various animal models to strain Schu S4. It was shown that Schu S4 was fully virulent in the mouse, guinea pig, rabbit, hamster, and cotton rat. The last was shown to have a high degree of individual variation in response to Schu S4, and accordingly this model has received little attention. Strains from all of the subspecies of F. tularensis are reported to be virulent in the murine and guinea pig models of disease, but only strains of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis are considered virulent in the rabbit model of disease . Most studies on the behavior of F. tularensis in vivo rely on the infection of inbred mice, and this murine tularemia system has become a model to study the behavior of intracellular pathogens. There is some evidence that strains with differing virulence can be differentiated by using this model. For example, strain Schu S4 is fully virulent regardless of the route of administration. However, the virulence of LVS has been shown to be dependent on the route of delivery; LVS is fully virulent in the mouse, with a median lethal dose of <10 CFU when delivered intraperitoneally, but is attenuated in the mouse when delivered intradermally . TABLE 2 | Virulence of F. tularensis biotypes
In typical human ulceroglandular tularemia, a skin lesion first appears at the site of infection 3 to 5 days after infective exposure . During this initial phase, T cells appear to play little role in combating infection. The systemic administration of tumor necrosis factor or gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) is capable of reducing the severity of tularemia , indicating the key role these cytokines play in response to infection . During the early stages of disease, studies with other pathogens have suggested that keratinocytes are a likely source of tumor necrosis factor, while natural killer (NK) cells may produce IFN-gamma . A transient bacteremia occurs, during which the pathogen must resist lysis by complement. Protection appears to be due to the presence of capsule, as a nonencapsulated mutant was susceptible to killing by nonimmune serum . The bacteremic phase allows the organism to be seeded throughout the body, infecting all reticuloendothelial tissues. Within days, a wide range of cytokines are expressed in the reticuloendothelial tissues. In the liver, for example, the bacteria are able to invade and multiply within hepatocytes , and tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-10, interleukin-12, and IFN-gamma are produced within 48 h . However, although this cytokine response, assumed to evoke the expansion of a protective Th1 response, was capable of mounting a defense against the LVS strain, it was unable to prevent a more virulent strain from mounting a lethal infection in mice . Infection also induces a stress response in infected host cells; hsp72 was induced in peritoneal exudate cells of infected mice which were susceptible to tularemia for 3 days following infection . Later during infection, T cells appear to play a major role in protection. Mice depleted of CD4+ and/or CD8+ T cells were capable of controlling a primary LVS infection, but were not able to resolve it , indicating a scenario of complex interactions of different cell types in primary infection. Studies with knockout mice infected with strain LVS confirm these observations, but CD4-, beta2-microglobulin-deficient/CD8-, and gammadelta T-cell receptor-negative mice were all able to resolve an infection . However, alphabeta T-cell receptor-negative knockout mice succumbed to infection, indicating that while either CD4 or CD8 T cells are individually sufficient to resolve infection with strain LVS, alphabeta T-cell receptor cells are required for protection. In mice challenged with a high-virulence strain (Schu S4), both CD4 and CD8 T cells appeared to play key roles in controlling disease . Circulating gammadelta T cells are well known for controlling bacterial intracellular infections; for example, they are essential in controlling Listeria monocytogenes infections . A significant expansion in the Vgamma9Vdelta2 T-cell subpopulation was observed in a Japanese patient with tularemia . This effect was subsequently shown to occur within a week of infection, but could persist for over a year . This response appears to be due to exposure to phosphoantigens expressed by F. tularensis in vivo . Phosphoantigens are powerful stimu