Effects of Global Climate on Infectious Disease: the Cholera Model
Recently, the role of the environment and climate in disease dynamics has become a subject of increasing interest to microbiologists, clinicians, epidemiologists, and ecologists. Much of the interest has been stimulated by the growing problems of antibiotic resistance among pathogens, emergence and/or reemergence of infectious diseases worldwide, the potential of bioterrorism, and the debate concerning climate change. Cholera, caused by Vibrio cholerae, lends itself to analyses of the role of climate in infectious disease, coupled to population dynamics of pathogenic microorganisms, for several reasons. First, the disease has a historical context linking it to specific seasons and biogeographical zones. In addition, the population dynamics of V. cholerae in the environment are strongly controlled by environmental factors, such as water temperature, salinity, and the presence of copepods, which are, in turn, controlled by larger-scale climate variability. In this review, the association between plankton and V. cholerae that has been documented over the last 20 years is discussed in support of the hypothesis that cholera shares properties of a vector-borne disease. In addition, a model for environmental transmission of cholera to humans in the context of climate variability is presented. The cholera model provides a template for future research on climate-sensitive diseases, allowing definition of critical parameters and offering a means of developing more sophisticated methods for prediction of disease outbreaks.

The relationship between human health and climate is not a new concept, nor is it a new subject. In fact at least as far back as Hippocrates, many believed that human health was intricately linked to the seasons, local weather patterns, and other environmental factors . While preceding the advent of Pasteur's germ theory in the mid-1800s, these notions described certain patterns of disease, and often therapies were based directly on changes in the environment. Proponents of miasma, i.e., a poisonous atmosphere arising from swamps and putrid matters, as a source of disease noted that fevers and intestinal ailments were common in warm seasons and were often associated with wet, poorly drained, and humid areas, such as swamps . This association motivated draining of swamps in rural areas and the installation of the first central sewer systems in urban areas in North America . Of course, the therapeutic benefits of these practices had little to do with ridding the environment of miasma, but these practices did reduce the size and number of habitats breeding mosquitoes (disease vectors) and removed raw waste (hence, waterborne pathogens) from immediate contact with humans. In spite of the developments in the mid- to late 1800s demonstrating the role of microorganisms in disease, the theory of weather-borne diseases held firm in early medicine until the late 1800s . Clearly, the relationship between climate and health has been a subject of study for a very long time. However, during the past 2 decades, development of modern tools and technologies has led to fascinating observations sparking new interest in the role of the environment, including weather and climate, in infectious disease dynamics. Scientific interest has been further stimulated by the growing problems of antibiotic resistance among pathogens, emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases worldwide, the potential threat of bioterrorism, and the debate concerning climate change. During the past few years, scientists and several agencies, including the World Health Organization, American Academy of Microbiology, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and U.S. Global Change Research Program, among others, have published papers and issued reports highlighting the topic of climate and health (e.g., see references , , , , , , , , and ). Concerns over the impact of anthropogenic alterations to both terrestrial and aquatic habitats, coupled with a changing global climate, have helped to spawn an expanding cross-disciplinary effort to understand how such changes might affect human health. Progress is under way in using climate factors in predictive models for certain diseases, notably cholera.
Part of the growing interest in the effects of climate on health is due to concerns about global climate change and variability. In concurrently appearing papers in Science, Barnett et al.  and Levitus et al.  independently reported warming in the top 3,000 m of the global ocean since 1950. Furthermore, models incorporating anthropogenic forces (e.g., gases) match the observed changes in oceanic heat content . These studies provide more evidence of human-induced climate change than those models that rely on near-surface temperatures, largely because the heat capacity of the oceans gives a more stable parameter than the surface temperatures . Superimposed on global trends or long-term changes in climate are periodic signals in the ocean-atmosphere that result in climate variability at interannual to interdecadal scales. In particular, the El Nino-southern oscillation (ENSO) has been the focus of much attention in the popular press and scientific communities. This phenomenon originates in the eastern equatorial Pacific, offshore from Peru, where every few years near Christmastime (hence, "El Nino," the Christ child) the normally cool waters of this region are suppressed by a layer of warm water arriving from the west. This event triggers changes in weather patterns across the globe and is considered to be among the most-important factors in global climate variability . Climatologists have also begun to look at global impacts of other modes of atmospheric variability associated with large ocean basins, e.g., the North Atlantic oscillation (NAO), where decadal oscillations in the atmospheric pressure difference between Iceland and the Azores affect wintertime weather in Europe and the Atlantic coast of the United States. Research is under way to improve prediction of such climate signals, which is poor in comparison to the better-understood ENSO (J. Marshall, Y. Kushnir, D. Battisti, P. Change, J. Hurrell, M. McCartney, and M. Visbeck, unpublished data ). Although controversy remains over how human activities might be driving climate variability and change, most scientists in the field agree that our climate is changing and there is an increasing need to understand the potential outcomes of such changes on human health.
Vector Borne | Vector-borne diseases are those that require a host (most often arthropods or rodents) to transmit a pathogen. Variability in climate and weather can affect both the vector population and the amplification of the pathogen within the host. Malaria and dengue fever continue to be the most-important vector-borne diseases worldwide . Unlike yellow fever and rift valley fever, which affect humans only incidentally, malaria and dengue are transmitted directly by infected mosquitoes that commonly bite humans. Other mosquito-borne infections, including rift valley fever, yellow fever, and encephalitis, are transmitted between the mosquito vector and a nonhuman animal host under normal circumstances and affect humans only incidentally. Plague and Lyme disease, among others, are transmitted to animals by fleas and ticks, respectively, and hantavirus is transmitted by rodents . While humans are not a normal host for some of these agents, they can all pose a threat when the pathogen uses a vector that bites or cohabitates with humans. Vector-borne diseases remain the most-studied group of diseases in the context of climate variability. The geographical range of the vector population is indicative of ecological and climatic conditions that limit the distribution of both the host and the pathogen. Often, ecological disturbances, including weather-related events, can cause a shift in host vectors or change in habitat that results in a greater likelihood of the pathogen coming in contact with humans, thus increasing the risk of human infection . In border areas where conditions are not optimal for the pathogen and/or vector, small ecological disturbances or changes in weather may also alter conditions for disease transmission by creating a more favorable environment . It is often in such border regions that the most-dramatic results of climate change and/or variability are recognized. In the recent literature, many researchers have documented relationships between changes in weather due to the ENSO and certain vector-borne disease outbreaks (e.g., see references , , , and ). In this review, we have adopted a more inclusive definition of vector-borne disease that encompasses pathogens that do not require an obligate host (vector) for transmission but which are likely to be transmitted to humans by such a route. Below we present how this definition applies to Vibrio cholerae.  Airborne | As a whole, little is known about airborne infectious diseases and how they are affected by climate. While there is a growing body of work focused on health impacts associated with air pollution and climate change, these studies largely focus on noninfectious agents (ozone and particulate matter, etc.) or allergens . Influenza- and rhinoviruses, which cause flu and colds, respectively, are recognized as infectious airborne pathogens. Indeed, there does seem to be a regular season for flu and colds, and climatic factors are suspected to contribute in part to these cycles. In the Northern Hemisphere, flu cases peak in the late fall and winter, but there is no significant correlation with mean temperature . Humidity, however, may affect survival of aerosolized virus particles . In the southwestern United States, Coccidioides immitis, a soil fungus responsible for valley fever, causes higher infection rates during dry periods that follow a rainy season, when wind can distribute the pathogen . Dust-borne agents distributed in the air are also affected by large atmospheric phenomena. Relative to normal conditions, large numbers of viable microorganisms have been isolated in Caribbean air samples during "African dust events" . Periodically, massive plumes of dust are transported across the tropical Atlantic from the sub-Saharan region of Africa. Such events have been exacerbated by drought in the Sahel region, overgrazing, and the drying of Lake Chad and may be related to the NAO (Marshall et al., unpublished data ). To date, microorganisms found in the dust particles include Aspergillus spp., Pseudomonas spp., and Sphingomonas spp., among others ; however, it remains unknown if any human infections can be related to the African dust events. Similar phenomena are associated with the Gobi Desert and wind-swept dust from this region of the world.  Waterborne | The quality and quantity of drinking water, irrigation water, and environmental and/or recreational waters can be associated with changes in environmental conditions including weather- or climate-related variables. Floods may cause the overflow of wastewater treatment plants, failure of septic systems, or combined sewer overflows, which could contaminate nearby surface waters or wells. Furthermore, there is increasing concern about pathogens in storm water runoff . Maintaining sanitary water conditions is also an issue during drought conditions, when contaminants may become concentrated in available water. Additionally, the likelihood of multiple uses in a water body may increase (e.g., for cleaning, bathing, and drinking) during droughts and consequently enhance the risk of contamination and exposure. Increasingly, the importance of the effect that weather and climate have on water quality, and not simply quantity, is being realized. Severe weather events appear to be correlated with enteric diseases, such as outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis related to excessive demand placed on sewage treatment plants from heavy rains and flooding . A retrospective study of drinking-water-related outbreaks of acute gastrointestinal illness in the United States by Rose et al.  revealed that 20 and 40% of groundwater and surface water outbreaks, respectively, between 1971 and 1994 were statistically associated with extreme precipitation. Other work has also demonstrated an ENSO connection to rates of enteric illness  in South America, levels of enteric microorganisms in coastal areas of south Florida (United States) , and cholera in Bangladesh . In addition to enteric pathogens, climate also influences the abundance and ecology of nonenteric and other pathogens which are naturally present in the environment. The best examples of this include the pathogenic Vibrio spp., which are autochthonous in estuarine ecosystems. Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus are responsible for a majority of the nonviral infections related to shellfish consumption in the United States  and also result in infections of open wounds during recreational exposure, such as swimming and fishing. Along with V. cholerae, these bacteria thrive in warm waters of moderate salinity  and are closely associated with aquatic invertebrates . Therefore, with a changing climate, the geographic range of these pathogens may also change, potentially resulting in increased exposure and risk of infection for humans. Furthermore, changes in plankton populations, and other hosts for which vibrios are commensals or symbionts, would similarly alter the ecology of these pathogens that are autochthonous to the aquatic environment.
RELATED INFECTIOUS DISEASE : Cholera, caused by V. cholerae, lends itself to the study of the role of climate in infectious disease. This disease has a historical context linking it to specific seasons and biogeographical zones. Although cholera is an ancient disease and had disappeared from most of the developed world during the second half of the 20th century, it persists in many parts of the world with serious epidemics, most often centered in tropical areas. The association between the disease and water has been long held in folk tradition but was first established epidemiologically in the 1850s when John Snow made the link between the disease and a shallow well in London, United Kingdom . Subsequently, extensive studies demonstrated that V. cholerae is, in fact, native to coastal ecosystems . Vibrios, including V. cholerae, can be found in virtually any coastal water body, especially in the tropics and subtropics, when appropriate techniques are used. Recently, ecologically based models have been developed which define the role of environmentally, weather-, and climate-related variables in outbreaks of the disease . Data on the association between plankton and V. cholerae have been gathered over the last 20 years and strongly support the hypothesis of a commensal or symbiotic relationship between zooplankton and this bacterium. Because V. cholerae is highly concentrated on zooplankton carapaces and in their gut, the risk of ingesting an infectious dose increases when untreated surface waters are used for consumption. In this way, cholera shares some properties of a vector-borne disease. This hypothesis is currently under study in our laboratory at the Center of Marine Biotechnology and elsewhere (E. Whitcomb, personal communication, 2001). Cholera and V. cholerae offer an excellent example of the effect of climate and weather on infectious diseases and pathogens. Here we discuss some of the recent research on the subjects of V. cholerae, climate, and health and describe a framework for future studies using the cholera model.
During a cholera epidemic in 1854 in Florence, Italy, Pacini  first described the comma-shaped gram-negative Vibrio, the "comma bacillus," responsible for cholera, which was subsequently named V. cholerae by Robert Koch. Pacini carried out detailed studies on the etiology of the disease. Pacini studied cholera for about 20 years and published several articles  in which he described the destruction of the intestinal mucosa during cholera, ascribing it to the bacterium. Furthermore, Pacini clearly stated that the Vibrio was the "specific" causative agent of the disease and insisted the disease was contagious. However, at this time, the idea that cholera was contagious was under dispute. His data were ignored, and the etiological agent of cholera was rediscovered by Robert Koch in May 1884 (30 years after Pacini's description and 1 year after Pacini's death). Microscope slides from Pacini's studies on cholera are on exhibit in the Department of Anatomy and Histology of the University of Florence . During the same period of time that Pacini did his research, cholera ravaged Western Europe, and John Snow made the link between cholera and a drinking water source in London, establishing cholera as a waterborne disease. Although V. cholerae is the cause of a devastating diarrheal disease, it is also a natural member of the aquatic microbial community, a finding not clearly understood until more than 100 years later . Vibrio, a diverse genus, is the most intensely studied of the Vibrionaceae family and has engendered a great deal of interest in the taxonomy and systematics of Vibrio spp. . Taxonomic debates aside, Vibrio spp. are among the most commonly isolated bacteria in marine and estuarine waters . They significantly affect nutrient cycling in these habitats and often comprise a major portion of the natural flora. Furthermore, several of the members of the genus are pathogenic either for humans or marine animals. To date, ca. 200 serogroups of V. cholerae have been recorded, of which only two (O1 and O139) have been associated with major epidemics. Furthermore, genes for cholera toxin (CT) production are rarely found in serogroups other than O1 or O139. Prior to the seventh pandemic, which started in 1961, outbreaks were traced to the classical biotype of V. cholerae O1. V. cholerae O1 El Tor strains largely replaced the classical biotype by 1961 . Toxigenic V. cholerae O139 first emerged as a pandemic threat in southeastern India and the Bay of Bengal in 1992 and appears to have arisen by genetic exchange with V. cholerae O1 El Tor . Recent evidence also suggests that O139 isolates may have arisen by genetic exchange with non-O1 V. cholerae strains as well as clinical strains of O1 (; S. M. Faruque, M. S. Islam, G. B. Nair, and R. R. Colwell, unpublished data). Before the seventh pandemic, V. cholerae O1 El Tor was considered to be a different species, referred to as Vibrio eltor . Similarly, V. cholerae isolated from the environment and clinical strains that did not agglutinate with O1 antiserum were designated nonagglutinating vibrios and were believed to be a different species from clinical isolates of V. cholerae O1 . Over the last 30 years, biochemical and molecular tests and polyphasic numerical taxonomy have proven that O1 and non-O1 strains of V. cholerae are the same species . Recent work using 16S rRNA gene sequencing has also shown no differences at the species level between V. cholerae O1 El Tor and classical strains or between V. cholerae O1 and non-O1 strains. While environmental and clinical strains of V. cholerae are now known to represent a single species, there is significant genetic diversity among environmental and non-O1, non-O139 strains of V. cholerae . Molecular tools have been used to fingerprint and track toxigenic strains of V. cholerae . These types of analyses have demonstrated that O1 and O139 isolates group closely with one another, forming a tight cluster, while environmental non-O1, non-O139 isolates are generally diverse , as would be expected, given that ca. 200 serotypes have been described. Detailed investigation of the V. cholerae genome and of specific housekeeping genes revealed that recombination may be the major source of this variability, a common feature in the evolution of V. cholerae . Furthermore, the three main pathogenic clones of V. cholerae O1 (sixth pandemic [classical], seventh pandemic [El Tor], and U.S. Gulf Coast isolates) appear to have evolved independently . Evidence indicates that toxigenic strains may arise from environmental, nontoxigenic progenitors in coastal areas . The emergence of toxigenic O139 strains may have a similar history, with confirming evidence now being developed (S. M. Faruque, M. S. Islam, R. R. Colwell, and G. B. Nair, personal communication, 2002). Most V. cholerae strains, especially those from the environment, lack the genes required to produce CT, but the possibility of genetic exchange in the environment allows the potential emergence of new toxigenic clones. While horizontal gene transfer is common among V. cholerae, as well as between and among other bacteria, the significance of this phenomenon was not recognized until widespread patterns of antibiotic resistance in bacteria began to emerge in the 1950s . Since then, similar rapid evolution by acquisition of "foreign" DNA has also been implicated in the transfer of metabolic properties and virulence genes . In particular, horizontal transfer and genetic reassortment have been a key mechanism for the emergence of new toxigenic strains of V. cholerae as well as clonal diversity . The best example of horizontal gene transfer in V. cholerae is the transduction of the elements that code for CT, the CTX genetic element, and the V. cholerae pathogenicity island (VPI). The CTX element includes six genes in its core region: ctxAB, zot, ace, cep, and orfU. The VPI codes for 15 separate open reading frames, including the tcp (toxin-coregulated pilus) gene . Evidence now indicates that the CTX element is actually the genome of a distinct filamentous phage that lysogenizes V. cholerae . VPI may also be part of a phage genome, but the evidence is not as clear. The presence of tcp (part of the VPI) is required as a receptor for CTXPhi. Furthermore, this phage-mediated transfer occurs not only among strains of V. cholerae but also with the very closely related V. mimicus, an occasional source of diarrheal disease in humans . In addition to acquiring toxin-encoding genes, V. cholerae and other gram-negative bacteria have a selective advantage in their ability to enter a dormant stage, termed viable but nonculturable (VBNC), when environmental conditions are unfavorable for active growth and cell division. In 1982, Xu et al.  first demonstrated this phenomenon in Escherichia coli and V. cholerae using direct viable count and fluorescent-antibody staining methods. In V. cholerae and other vibrios, this state, in which metabolically active cells cannot be cultured on microbiological media, is induced by changes in environmental conditions, including temperature (reduction) and salinity . Microcosm studies demonstrated that these cells could remain viable in the environment for years  and continue to be capable of causing disease . The existence of VBNC cells continues to be debated in the scientific community, as the definition of living, as opposed to dead, bacteria is complex and difficult to articulate. Some maintain that bacterial cells not growing on culture plates are dead. Yet, Gonzalez et al.  suggested bacterial cells should be considered dead only when they lose both culturability and cellular integrity. Early studies by Valentine and Bradfield , Postgate , Jannasch , Stevenson , Kurath and Morita , and others provide a framework for the concept of a resting stage for nonsporulating bacteria. Xu et al.  concluded that cells that were unable to grow on conventional culture media but that responded to nalidixic acid treatment were VBNC. This phenomenon represents a state of dormancy and allows survival and persistence of bacterial cells in the natural or host environment. To date, at least 18 species undergoing a VBNC-type shift have been documented , and more-sophisticated methods are being employed that confirm continued viability . The ability to adapt to unfavorable conditions may be a key factor in the success of V. cholerae as an opportunistic pathogen and is most likely explained by its commensal existence with zooplankton, which themselves undergo diapause.
Seasonality | Analysis of the frequency of specific disease cases throughout the year is a logical first-order assessment of the potential role of climate in disease transmission. For many diseases (vector-, air-, and waterborne) there is a clear seasonal trend in the detection or isolation of a pathogen and prevalence of disease. For cholera, a distinct seasonal pattern is evident, particularly in regions of endemicity. In the following sections we discuss environmental and climatic factors that drive the seasonality and occurrence of V. cholerae and the disease cholera. Endemicity. | For most of its known history, V. cholerae was believed by physicians and clinical workers to be only coincidentally associated with environmental waters and detectable only if there was contamination by an infected individual. While we now know that V. cholerae is autochthonous in riverine, estuarine, and coastal waters, as first proposed in 1977 by Colwell et al. , Cockburn and Cassanos  reported that as early as the 1800s there was discussion about environmental connections of the disease. By the late 1800s, areas of endemicity had been defined, along with relevant descriptions of the environment, and an association of cholera with monsoons had been noted . V. cholerae was shown to withstand high-pH conditions, and the notion that ponds may be a potential source of infection had been put forward . In retrospective studies of cholera in India during the 19th century, there is clearly a series of epidemic years associated with monsoons and other weather events (Whitcomb, personal communication, 2001). Today, geographical areas once known to have experienced cholera epidemics can be characterized into three levels. Cholera-free communities are defined as having no locally acquired infections. In areas of cholera epidemicity, the disease diminishes after an outbreak. In regions of cholera endemicity, the disease does not disappear after an epidemic peak and returns in successive waves . Of particular interest and relevance to identifying environmental or climate factors that may promote epidemics is the understanding of dynamics of the disease in areas of endemicity. For example, what causes periodic oscillations in cholera outbreaks, and why are some areas more prone to endemism? Torres Codeco  incorporated seasonality into a model of endemic cholera and showed that cholera infections occurred 2 to 4 months after the onset of V. cholerae growth in the environment; however, this predictive model was influenced by population size and rate of contact. Furthermore, only transient environmental reservoirs of V. cholerae were required to maintain endemism in poor communities .  (i) Ecology and biogeography of V. cholerae. | Detection of V. cholerae, both non-O1 and O1 strains, has been reported from almost every part of the world where there are rivers and coastal regions . In regions no longer with endemic Asiatic cholera in North America, V. cholerae has been isolated from estuarine and coastal water collected along the Pacific, Atlantic, and Gulf coasts of the United States (e.g., see references  and ), and it has also been isolated in Australia , Southeast Asia, the island nations of the South Pacific, Africa, Asia, and throughout Europe. V. cholerae has been similarly isolated in areas of endemicity (India, Bangladesh, and Central and South America) . Despite the prevalence of the causative organism worldwide, only certain regions of the world, mainly in the tropics and subtropics, maintain endemicity for the disease. The nature of this phenomenon is not entirely understood but is most likely related to both environmental and socioeconomic factors. Following the sixth pandemic (similar1950), areas with endemic cholera had been reduced to southeastern India and Bangladesh, a significantly narrower geographic region, historically . During the current seventh pandemic, the range of endemicity has expanded and includes areas of Africa and South and Central America . Where cholera is endemic, cases tend to demonstrate distinct seasonal trends. These patterns are strongly related to the ecology of V. cholerae in the environment, where high numbers are observed during times of warm water temperatures and zooplankton blooms . Over the last 25 years, the major cholera epidemics, including the first outbreak of O139 disease, have originated in coastal areas (; T. Ramamurthy et al., Letter, Lancet 341:703-704, 1993). Currently, the main regions of cholera endemicity include the coasts surrounding the Bay of Bengal, both Bangladesh and the Indian subcontinent, and coastal Latin America. In each of these three geographical regions, patterns of disease frequency follow similar trends and are most likely explained by the same physical or environmental drivers (see "Hierarchy in the cholera model" below). In Bangladesh, there is a bimodal distribution in the frequency of cases over an annual cycle. The first, and smaller, peak occurs in the spring. The larger peak, however, follows the monsoon season in the fall. The onset of epidemics coincides with dry weather and the warmest water temperatures of the year (August or September) . The frequency of cases is reduced to background levels of a few cases as the temperature decreases in winter . In Calcutta, India, cholera cases tend to peak in April, May, and June . In South America, where the disease has become endemic since its reemergence in 1991, cases are concentrated in the austral summer months (January and February) . The geographic limits of endemicity are also consistent and suggest a biogeographical pattern of endemic disease that follows the environmental habitat of the causative organism. Although inland countries report cases of cholera  and freshwater plankton species harbor vibrios, case frequency and location of regions of endemicity increase near coastlines. Along the Indian subcontinent, there is a distinct boundary approximately 150 miles inland and to the northern part of the peninsula where the frequency of cholera cases rapidly diminishes . In South America, outbreaks start along the coast , and epidemiological studies in Mexico demonstrate that people living in coastal states are at a high risk of contracting the disease (; M. L. Lizarraga-Partida, I. Wong-Chang, G. Barrera-Escorcia, A. V. Botello, A. Flisser, L. Gutierrez, A. Huq, and R. R. Colwell, unpublished data). V. cholerae O1 is also endemic in regions where there are now only sporadic cases of cholera. Such endemic clones are found along the U.S. Gulf Coast and in Australia and are unique, although closely related, based on phage typing and gene sequence analyses . In these regions, sanitation practices are well developed and the waterborne disease occurs rarely, although V. cholerae is often detected in estuaries and shellfish . Consumption of raw or improperly cooked shellfish harboring V. cholerae, and not contaminated drinking water, causes the sporadic cases of diarrhea and occasional septicemia that do occur . Yet, as in the case of the range of areas of cholera endemicity, the geographic distribution of these endemic strains tends to be limited to the subtropical and subtemperate climates. Similarly, along the U.S. Gulf Coast and in Australia, the frequency of isolation of V. cholerae from both the environment and patients peaks during the warmer months of the year . Non-O1 isolates also follow this pattern, with sporadic cases occurring mostly in the late summer in the United States and in the early summer in Bangladesh (prior to the annual fall epidemic) . Europe also reports detection of V. cholerae during the summer and early fall . Seasonality in detection of the presence of V. cholerae in water and sediment in the Chesapeake Bay of the east coast of the United States, a cholera-free region, has been abundantly demonstrated (, , ; V. Louis et al., submitted for publication).  (ii) Emergence of toxigenic strains from the environment. | When cholera reemerged in South America during the seventh pandemic in 1991, a new focus of endemicity was initiated. Many investigators have speculated on the reemergence of cholera in South America after its hundred-year absence, and several hypotheses have been put forth. One theory was that an isolated event led to the epidemics ---that is, an exchange of ballast water by a ship previously traveling through areas of cholera endemicity. It has also been proposed that given the similarity between strains isolated in Latin American and Asia (O1 El Tor)