History of Human Parasitology
Humans are hosts to nearly 300 species of parasitic worms and over 70 species of protozoa, some derived from our primate ancestors and some acquired from the animals we have domesticated or come in contact with during our relatively short history on Earth. Our knowledge of parasitic infections extends into antiquity, and descriptions of parasites and parasitic infections are found in the earliest writings and have been confirmed by the finding of parasites in archaeological material. The systematic study of parasites began with the rejection of the theory of spontaneous generation and the promulgation of the germ theory. Thereafter, the history of human parasitology proceeded along two lines, the discovery of a parasite and its subsequent association with disease and the recognition of a disease and the subsequent discovery that it was caused by a parasite. This review is concerned with the major helminth and protozoan infections of humans: ascariasis, trichinosis, strongyloidiasis, dracunculiasis, lymphatic filariasis, loasis, onchocerciasis, schistosomiasis, cestodiasis, paragonimiasis, clonorchiasis, opisthorchiasis, amoebiasis, giardiasis, African trypanosomiasis, South American trypanosomiasis, leishmaniasis, malaria, toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, cyclosporiasis, and microsporidiosis.

During our relatively short history on Earth, humans have acquired an amazing number of parasites, about 300 species of helminth worms and over 70 species of protozoa . Many of these are rare and accidental parasites, but we still harbor about 90 relatively common species, of which a small proportion cause some of the most important diseases in the world, inevitably, these are the ones that have received the most attention. Since most of these parasitic diseases occur mainly in the tropics, the field of parasitology has tended to overlap with that of tropical medicine, and thus the histories of these two fields are intertwined. There is, however, much more to the history of human parasitology than this, and our understanding of parasites and parasitic infections cannot be separated from our knowledge of the history of the human race. In particular, the spread and present distribution of many parasites throughout the world has largely been the result of human activities, and the advent of AIDS has added a new chapter to the history of parasitology.
Human evolution and parasitic infections have run hand in hand, and thanks to the spinoffs from the Human Genome Project, we now know much more about the origins of the human race than ever before . Sometime, about 150,000 years ago, Homo sapiens emerged in eastern Africa  and spread throughout the world, possibly in several waves , until 15,000 years ago at the end of the Ice Age humans had migrated to and inhabited virtually the whole of the face of the Earth, bringing some parasites with them and collecting others on the way. For the purpose of this review, the parasites that infect humans can be classified as heirlooms or souvenirs. Heirlooms are the parasites inherited from our primate ancestors in Africa, and souvenirs are those that we have acquired from the animals with which we have come in contact during our evolution, migrations, and agricultural practices. The development of settlements and cities facilitated the transmission of infections between humans, and the opening up of trade routes resulted in the wider dissemination of parasitic infections. The slave trade, which flourished for three and a half centuries from about 1500, brought new parasites to the New World from the Old World ; in more recent times, the spread of human immunodeficiency virus HIV and AIDS and the immunodepression associated with these conditions has resulted in the establishment of a number of new opportunistic parasitic infections throughout the world . We are beginning to learn a lot about the past history of parasitic infections from studies of archaeological artifacts, such as the presence of helminth eggs or protozoan cysts in coprolites (fossilized or desiccated feces) and naturally or artificially preserved bodies; from such studies has emerged a new science, palaeoparasitology. Examples of some of these discoveries will be discussed later. So vast is the field of human parasitology, and so many and far-reaching the discoveries made, that it is not possible to do justice to the whole subject. Therefore; only the most significant aspects and the most important parasites are considered under two major headings, the helminth worms and the protozoa.
The first written records of what are almost certainly parasitic infections come from a period of Egyptian medicine from 3000 to 400 BC, particularly the Ebers papyrus of 1500 BC discovered at Thebes . Later, there were many detailed descriptions of various diseases that might or might not be caused by parasites, specifically fevers, in the writings of Greek physicians between 800 to 300 BC, such as the collected works of Hippocrates, known as the Corpus Hippocratorum, and from physicians from other civilizations including China from 3000 to 300 BC, India from 2500 to 200 BC, Rome from 700 BC to 400 AD, and the Arab Empire in the latter part of the first millennium. As time passed, the descriptions of infections became more accurate and Arabic physicians, particularly Rhazes (AD 850 to 923)  and Avicenna (AD 980 to 1037) , wrote important medical works that contain a great deal of information about diseases clearly caused by parasites. In Europe, the Dark and Middle Ages, characterized by religious and superstitious beliefs, held back medical progress until the Renaissance, which released a flurry of activity that eventually led to the great discoveries that characterized the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th. These discoveries included the demolition of the theory of spontaneous generation and the evolution of the germ theory by Louis Pasteur, the demonstration by Pasteur that diseases could be caused by bacteria, the discovery of viruses by Pierre-Paul Emile Roux, the introduction by Robert Koch of methods of preventing diseases caused by microorganisms, and the incrimination by Patrick Manson of vectors in the transmission of parasites. The great personalities of this period made discoveries in a number of fields, and their findings and ideas fed off one another. The names of Pasteur, Koch, Roux, and Manson occur time and time again in the history of parasitology and microbiology.
Because of the large size of some helminths, such as the roundworm Ascaris and the tapeworms, it is practically certain that our earliest ancestors must have been aware of these common worms. There is some evidence for this assumption based on contemporary studies of primitive tribes in Sarawak and North Borneo, where Hoeppli found that most people are aware of their intestinal roundworms and tapeworms . Some historians have identified references to helminth worms and their diseases in the Bible, but the relevant passages are open to several interpretations. Among the Egyptian medical papyri, the Ebers papyrus refers to intestinal worms, and these records can be confirmed by the discovery of calcified helminth eggs in mummies dating from 1200 BC. The Greeks, particularly Hippocrates (460 to 375 BC) , knew about worms from fishes, domesticated animals, and humans. Roman physicians including Celsus (25 BC to AD 50)  and Galen (Galenus of Pergamon, AD 129 to 200)  were familiar with the human roundworms Ascaris lumbricoides and Enterobius vermicularis and tapeworms belonging to the genus Taenia. Somewhat later, Paulus Aegineta (AD 625 to 690) clearly described Ascaris, Enterobius, and tapeworms and gave good clinical descriptions of the infections they caused . Following the decline of the Roman Empire, the study of medicine switched to Arabic physicians, including Avicenna, who recognized not only Ascaris, Enterobius, and tapeworms but also the guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis, which had been recorded in parts of the Arab world, particularly around the Red Sea, for over 1,000 years. The medical literature of the Middle Ages is very limited, but there are many references to parasitic worms. In some cases, they were recognized as the possible causes of disease but in general, the writings of the period reflect the culture, beliefs, and ignorance of the time. The science of helminthology really took off in the 17th and 18th centuries following the reemergence of science and scholarship during the Renaissance period. Linnaeus described and named six helminth worms, Ascaris lumbricoides, Ascaris vermicularis (= Enterobius vermicularis), Gordius medinensis (= Dracunculus medinensis), Fasciola hepatica, Taenia solium, and Taenia lata (= Diphyllobothrium latum) . Thereafter, more species were described until at the beginning of the 20th century, 28 species had been recorded in humans, a number that has now grown to about 300 species, including accidental and very rare records . Even if some of these are doubtful, at least 280 species are recognized by Ashford and Crewe in their annotated checklist . Ascaris and Ascariasis | Ascaris lumbricoides, the large roundworm, is one of six worms listed and named by Linnaeus; its name has remained unchanged ever since. One billion people are now estimated to be infected with this worm. The adult worm lives in the intestine, and the female produces eggs that pass out with the feces, and the larvae within the eggs develop to the infective stage in soil. Humans become infected when food contaminated with infective eggs is eaten and the larvae emerge in the intestine. The worms do not mature immediately but migrate around the body, reaching the lungs, from which they are coughed up and swallowed and then develop into adults in the intestine. Ascariasis is an ancient infection, and A. lumbricoides eggs have been found in human coprolites from Peru dating from 2277 BC  and Brazil from about 1660 to 1420 BC . In the Old World, there are records of A. lumbricoides in a Middle Kingdom Egyptian mummy dating from 1938 to 1600 BC  and from China in the Ming Dynasty between AD 1368 and 1644 . The presence of this large worm, which reaches a length of 15 to 35 cm and is often voided in the feces or sometimes emerges from the anus, is very obvious. There are extensive written records including the Egyptian medical papyri, the works of Hippocrates in the fifth century BC, Chinese writings from the second and third centuries BC , and texts of Roman and Arabic physicians . Surprisingly, it was not until the late 17th century that the detailed anatomy of the worm was described, first by Edward Tyson, an English physician , and shortly afterward by the Italian Francesco Redi, who described the worms in his book Osservazioni Intorno Agli Animali Viventi che si Trovano Negli Animali Viventi, one of the first books on parasitology . These two publications, together with that of Tyson on the tapeworms of humans , can be considered to mark the beginnings of the subdiscipline of helminthology, which reached a peak in the 19th century. It was also during this period that the first real attempts were made to understand the infections caused by Ascaris and other worms and how they might be treated . In the meantime, the problem for those studying Ascaris and other parasitic nematodes was how the parasite's eggs infected a new host after leaving the original host. It was not until 1862 that transmission by ingesting eggs was demonstrated by the French medical scientist Casimir Joseph Davaine  and later by the Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Grassi, who infected himself with the eggs of A. lumbricoides and subsequently found eggs in his feces . The life cycle in humans, including the migration of the larval stages around the body, was discovered only in 1922 by a Japanese pediatrician, Shimesu Koino, who infected both a volunteer and himself and realized what was happening when he found large numbers of larvae in his sputum . There are good accounts of the history of ascariasis by Grove  and Goodwin .  Hookworms and Hookworm Disease | Human hookworm infections are caused by two species, Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus, the former originating in Asia and the latter originating in Africa. The life cycles of the two worms are similar. Adult male and female worms live in the small intestine, where they can cause massive blood loss. Eggs pass out with the feces to contaminate the soil, where larvae emerge and molt to become infectious larvae that bore through the skin of a new host. In humans the larvae migrate to the lungs and trachea, from which they are swallowed before maturing into adults in the small intestine. Human hookworm infections have been associated with humans in the Old World for over 5,000 years . The presence of hookworm infections in pre-Columbian America is a fiercely disputed topic. Robert Desowitz has little doubt that hookworms were present before the arrival of Europeans , but Kathleen Fuller suggests that hookworms were introduced into the Americas after 1492 . Palaeoparasitological evidence appears to back Desowitz's ideas since ova identified as Ancylostoma sp. have been found in a human coprolite dated from somewhere between 3350 BC and AD 480 . Larval nematodes, possibly hookworms, have been found in fecal samples dated to about 200 BC from the Colorado Plateau . The introduction of hookworms into the Americas is discussed in more detail elsewhere . The classical signs of hookworm disease are anemia, greenish yellow pallor, and lassitude. None of these symptoms is obvious or unambiguous, and the one distinctive feature exhibited by some individuals, geophagy, is not necessarily associated with disease. Although worms must have been present in many civilizations, most infections have gone unnoticed such that early accounts of the disease interpreted in retrospect must be treated with caution. The greenish pallor called Egyptian chlorosis, first associated with hookworm infections by 19th century scientists, is not recorded in the early Egyptian papyri. It has been suggested that the enigmatic condition aaa that occurs in many papyri including the Ebers papyrus might refer to hookworms , but there is no real evidence for this . This subject is discussed when considering schistosomiasis below. There are references to yellowish pallor and geophagy in the works of Hippocrates and Lucretius, who noted the pallor seen in miners in about 50 BC. There are also references from the third century BC in China to laziness and a yellow disease . During the 18th and 19th centuries, there were increasing numbers of records from the West Indies and South and Central America . Worms were found in a human in 1838 by the Italian physician Angelo Dubini , and the connection between the worms and disease was finally established by Wilhelm Griesinger in 1854 . Although the association between pallor and working in mines had been made by Lucretius, it was not until 1879 that the Italian veterinarian Edoardo Perroncito established the real connection while investigating the diseases of miners in the St. Gothard tunnel . Conditions in mines favor the development of larval hookworms that require warmth and damp. The fact that hookworm larvae enter the body by boring through the skin was not discovered until the end of the 19th century, when Arthur Looss accidentally infected himself . In the early part of the 20th century, hookworm disease was such a serious problem in the United States that the Rockefeller Foundation took on the task of controlling the disease, an activity that subsequently led to the establishment of a number of Schools of Public Health and the creation of the World Health Organization . There are good accounts of the history of hookworm disease by Ball , Foster , and Grove .  Trichinella and Trichinosis | Trichinosis, also known as trichinellosis and trichina infection, is caused by the intestinal nematode worm Trichinella spiralis, which requires two hosts in its life cycle. The female worms produce larvae that encyst in muscle, and a new host becomes infected when muscle is eaten. Because human infections are usually acquired by eating pork infected with the encysted larvae, this might have given rise to the Mosaic and Islamic traditions of avoiding pork, a practice that has also been attributed to tapeworm infection (see below). The association between trichina infections and pigs has been long recognized, but the encysted larvae in the muscle were not seen until 1821 and even then were not associated with disease in humans . The discovery of the worm in humans in 1835 was made by James Paget, then a medical student at St. Bartholomew's Hospital in London and later knighted as a distinguished physician, but the definitive report was written by Richard Owen, who played down Paget's role  and did not realize that the worm in human muscle was a larval stage of a nematode. The adult worms were discovered by Rudolf Virchow in 1859  and Friedrich Zenker in 1860, and it was Zenker who finally recognised the clinical significance of the infection and concluded that humans became infected by eating raw pork . The importance of these studies lies not only in the field of human parasitology but also in the more general field of parasitology concerned with the transmission of parasites between different animal species and the importance of predator-prey relationships in such transmission. There are good accounts of the history of trichinosis by Bundy and Michael , Foster , and Grove .  Strongyloides and Strongyloidiasis | Humans are hosts to two species of Strongyloides, S. stercoralis and S. fuelleborni, of which there are two subspecies, S. f. fuelleborni in Africa and S. f. kellyi in Papua New Guinea. As far as human disease is concerned, S. stercoralis is the more common and important species. Its life cycle is more complex than that of any of the other nematodes discussed so far and involves both parasitic and free-living generations. Adult parthenogenic female worms in the small intestine lay eggs that hatch within the host to produce first-stage larvae, which are passed out in the feces and adopt a free living existence in the soil. Here they molt to produce infective larvae that penetrate the skin and are carried around the body to the lungs and are swallowed and reach the gut in the same way as hookworms. Sometimes the larvae mature to the infective stage in feces on the skin and reinfect the host through the skin (autoinfection), or the larvae may mature to the infective stage without leaving the gut and penetrate the gut wall. Thereafter, in both cases, the infection proceeds as described above. In immunosuppressed individuals, larval stages can be found throughout the viscera. S. stercoralis also has an alternative free-living life cycle in the soil. Given the absence of eggs and the small size of the larvae, combined with confusion with other free living species of nematodes, it is not surprising that S. stercoralis was not recognized until 1876, when the larvae and the disease strongyloidiasis were both discovered by Louis Alexis Normand, a physician to the French naval hospital at Toulon . Normond later found adult worms and, not knowing what they were, sent them to Professor Arthur Rene Jean Baptiste Bavay at the French Conseil Superieur de Sante, who realised that they were the adult worms of the larvae that were found in the feces . In 1883 the distinguished German parasitologist Karl Georg Friedrich Rudolf Leuckart discovered the alternation of generations involving parasitic and free-living phases . The discovery that infection occurred through the skin was made by a Belgian physician, Paul Van Durme, whose studies were based on the work of Looss, mentioned above, who had shown that A. duodenale infects its host in this way . It is now thought that Van Durme was probably working with A. fuelleborni , but the correct mode of infection had been established, and it was Looss who later succeeded in infecting himself by putting larvae of S. stercoralis on his skin and finding larvae in his feces 64 days later . Friedrich Fulleborn, working with dogs in Hamburg, described the phenomenon of autoinfection and discovered how S. stercoralis (and also Ancylostoma spp.) migrates around the body before ending up in the intestine . For over half a century, S. stercoralis received little attention until detailed studies on infections in prisoners of war who had acquired their infections in the Far East in the 1940s revealed disseminated infections in immunosuppressed patients . It was later found that Strongloides infections were more severe in patients infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 and were at one time, but are no longer, regarded as major concomitants of AIDS . Strongyloides infections and strongyloidiasis are not well covered in the literature, but there is a good account by Grove .  Dracunculus and Dracunculiasis (Guinea Worm Disease) | The best-documented parasitic disease known from the earliest times is undoubtedly that caused by the nematode worm Dracunculus medinensis. Adult worms live in subcutaneous connective tissue, from which the female worm emerges to release thousands of larvae into water, where they are eaten by intermediate hosts, cyclopodid crustaceans, in which they mature into infective larvae that infect humans when the crustaceans are accidentally swallowed with drinking water. The large female worm, up to 80 cm in length, protrudes from the skin, usually of the leg, and causes intense inflammation and irritation, signs that are so unusual and unambiguous that ancient texts can be interpreted with some certainty. The earliest descriptions are from the Ebers papyrus from 1500 BC and include instructions for treating aat swelling in the limbs; they appear to refer to both the nature of the infection and techniques for removing the worm. This interpretation is widely accepted by most parasitologists , but there are difficulties in interpreting this particular text since the word aat may simply mean a swelling . Nevertheless, confirmation of the presence of this worm in ancient Egypt comes from the finding of a well-preserved female worm and a calcified worm in Egyptian mummies . Dracunculiasis is one of the few diseases unambiguously described in the Bible, and most parasitologists accept that the "fiery serpents" that struck down the Israelites in the region of the Red Sea after the Exodus from Egypt somewhere about 1250 to 1200 BC were actually Guinea worms . The most authoritative interpretation of this biblical text, thought to have been written in the eighth century BC, is that by Gottlob Friedrich Heinrich Kuchenmeister, a parasitologist, theologian, and Hebrew scholar, in his 1855 textbook translated into English as Animal and Vegetable Parasites . Assyrian texts in the library of King Ashurbanipal from the 7th century BC also refer to conditions that are obviously dracunculiasis, and later descriptions of dracunculiasis occur in all the major Greek and Roman texts and works by the Arab physicians the 10th and 11th centuries . Because there is reference to "Medina vein" in the Arab literature, some historians have suggested that the Arab physicians may have thought that the worm was actually a rotten vein, but most informed observers now agree that the Arab physicians were fully aware of the worm-like nature of dracunculiasis but not necessarily the actual cause of the disease . Interest in dracunculiasis reemerged when the condition began to be recognized by European travelers visiting Africa (hence the common name, Guinea worm) and Asia. In 1674, Georgius Hieronymus Velschius initiated the scientific study of the worm and the disease it caused , and in 1819, Carl Asmund Rudolphi discovered adult female worms containing larvae , a discovery that was followed up in 1834 by a Dane known only as Jacobson . In 1836, D. Forbes, a British army officer serving in India, found and described the larvae of D. medinensis in water , and over the next few years several parasitologists, including George Busk , pursued the idea that humans became infected through the skin. It was not until 1870 that the whole life cycle, including the stages in the crustacean intermediate host, was elaborated by the Russian Alekej Pavlovitch Fedchenko . Fedchenko's observations gained wide acceptance after they were confirmed by Manson in 1894 , and the whole life cycle was finally elaborated in 1913 by the Indian bacteriologist Dyneshvar Atmaran Turkhud, who succeeded in infecting human volunteers with infected Cyclops . There are more detailed accounts of the history of Dracunculus by Foster , Grove , and Tayeh .  Filarial Worms and Lymphatic Filariasis (Elephantiasis) | Lymphatic filariasis is caused by infection with the nematode worms Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and B. timori, which are transmitted by mosquitoes. The discovery of the life cycle by Patrick Manson in 1877 is regarded as one of the most significant discoveries in tropical medicine, but in the context of the history of parasitology it is better perceived as a logical extension of much that had gone before. Like Dracunculus, the adult filarial worms live in subcutaneous tissues, but unlike Dracunculus, the larvae, called microfilariae, produced by the female worm pass into the blood and are taken up by a blood-sucking mosquito when it feeds. After development in the mosquito, the microfilariae are injected into a new host when the mosquito feeds again. One particular form of the disease that must have attracted the attention of our ancestors is elephantiasis, which is characterized by grotesque swellings of the limbs, breasts, and genitals. These deformities appear to have been described and depicted in drawings from the earliest times, but the interpretation of the early records must be viewed with caution . Lymphatic filariasis was, and is, common along the Nile and, although there are no written records, the swollen limbs of a statue of the Egyptian Pharaoh Mentuhotep II from about 2000 BC suggest that he was suffering from elephantiasis, and small statuettes and gold weights from the Nok culture in West Africa from about AD 500 depict the enlarged scrota characteristic of elephantiasis . Greek and Roman writers were aware of the differential diagnosis of the condition and used the term "elephantiasis graecorum" to describe leprosy and the term "elephantiasis arabum" to describe lymphatic filariasis; the Arabic physicians, including Avicenna, were also aware of the differences between leprosy and lymphatic filariasis . The first definitive reports of lymphatic filariasis only began to appear in the 16th century. Lymphatic filariasis is also known as "the curse of St. Thomas" , and on a visit to Goa between 1588 and 1592, the Dutch explorer Jan Huygen Linschoten recorded that the descendants of those that killed St. Thomas were "all born with one of their legs and one foot from the knee downwards as thick as an elephants leg" . Thereafter, there are numerous references to elephantiasis, especially in Africa but also in Asia, including China, where Manson was later to discover the life cycle of the parasite. Another pathological condition associated with lymphatic filariasis is chyluria, in which the urine appears milky. This condition was recorded by William Prout in his 1849 book On the Nature and Treatment of Stomach and Renal Diseases . The larval microfilariae were first seen in hydroceel fluid by the French surgeon Jean-Nicolas Demarquay in 1863  and, independently, in urine by Otto Henry Wucherer in Brazil in 1866 . It remained for Timothy Lewis, a Scottish physician working in Calcutta, to confirm the finding of microfilariae in urine and blood and to recognize their significance in elephantiasis . The adult worm was described by Joseph Bancroft in 1876  and named Filaria bancrofti in his honour by the British helminthologist Thomas Spencer Cobbold . The elucidation of the life cycle, one of the triumphs of parasitological research, was the work of Patrick Manson in 1877 . This is widely regarded as the most significant discovery in tropical medicine, with implications that went far beyond helminthology into such diverse areas as malaria and the arboviruses. The story of Manson's discoveries has been told many times , but what is often omitted from the history of Manson's discoveries is the fact that he was aware of Fedchenko's earlier studies on the life cycle of D. medinensis and its transmission using an intermediate cyclopodid host (see above). Fedchenko's observations stimulated Manson to seek an intermediate host but also led him astray when he tried to demonstrate that infection was caused by drinking contaminated water. Manson, then working in Amoy in China, found microfilariae in the blood of dogs and humans and hypothesized that these parasites in the blood might be transmitted by blood-sucking insects. Accordingly, he fed mosquitoes on the blood of his gardener, who was harboring the parasites, and found larval stages in the mosquitoes . However, Manson thought that the parasite escaped from the mosquito into water and that humans acquired infection from this contaminated water by drinking the parasi water or via penetration of the skin. The actual mode of transmission was not established until suggestions made by the Australian parasitologist Thomas Bancroft were followed up by Manson's assistant George Carmichael Low, who demonstrated the presence of microfilariae in the mouthparts of mosquitoes in 1900 . The history of lymphatic filariasis is well described in the works already cited in this section .  Loa and Loiasis (Eye Worm) and Onchocerca and Onchocerciasis (River Blindness) | Both loiasis, caused by infection with Loa loa, and onchocerciasis, caused by infection with Onchocerca volvulus, are filarial worms with life cycles similar to those described above. It is logical to consider these two conditions together because both affect the eyes and must have attracted the attention of early observers interested in sight and blindness. Surprisingly, there are no reliable early records. In loiasis the adult worm moves across the eye under the conjunctiva, an alarming experience that must have attracted attention of both sufferers and observers. An engraving by J. and T. de Bry made in 1598 was at one time thought to depict the extraction of a worm from the eye, but this has been hotly disputed, and it is now thought that this particular engraving represents a punishment for some offense rather than a treatment . The first definitive record is that of a French surgeon, Mongin, who, in 1770, described the worm passing across the eye of a woman in Santa Domingo, in the Caribbean, and recounts how he tried unsuccessfully to remove it . There are, however, less detailed earlier records of similar cases in 1768 and 1777 in an account of the history of French Guyane and Cayenne by Bertrand Bajon . In 1778, a French ship's surgeon, Francois Guyot, noticed that slaves in transit from West Africa to America suffered from recurrent ophthalmia and successfully removed a worm from one of them . The first English account of the removal of worms from the eye is that by William Loney in 1848; thereafter, there are increasing numbers of similar records . The microfilariae were discovered in 1890 by the ophthalmologist Stephen McKenzie and were sent for identification to Patrick Manson, who speculated that these might be the larvae of Loa loa . Loa infections are not confined to the eye, and there are also sometimes swellings on the arms and legs caused by the worm in its wanderings. These swellings, now known as Calabar swellings, were first recorded by a Scottish ophthalmic surgeon, Douglas Argyll-Robertson, in Old Calabar in Nigeria in 1895 , but it was not until 1910 that Manson suggested that they might be associated with infections by Loa loa , an opinion shared by his colleague George Low . The transmission by biting flies, Chrysops spp., was unraveled by the British helminthologist Robert Thompson Leiper in 1912 . There is an excellent account of Loa and loasis by Grove . Onchocerciasis, caused by the filarial worm Onchocerca volvulus, is found mainly in Africa and in parts of South America and the Arabian peninsula, where it was introduced from Africa, and it was only when these regions were opened up by explorers that the disease was recognized. The most important signs are blindness, an unexceptional condition that might have been due to a number of causes, and scaly, itchy, nodular skin, which was