Atopic Dermatitis and Fungi
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, itching, inflammatory skin disease which is associated with asthma and/or hay fever and a familial occurrence of these conditions. Genetic factors are important in the development of AD, but the exact hereditary pathway is still unknown. Dry skin and the weakened barrier function in patients with AD is very important for the patient's reactions to irritants and other external trigger factors including microorganisms. The standard treatments are topical corticosteroids, topical immunomodulating agents, and emollients. If AD cannot be controlled by this type of treatment, systemic immunomodulating agents may be used. UVB, UVA, or psoralen-UVA may also be used for widespread severe lesions. However, some patients do not respond to these standard treatment, and then it is important to consider the role of microorganisms, house dust mites or food. The role of the Malassezia yeasts in AD, especially AD located to the head and neck region, is now documented in several papers. There are also several papers indicating the role of Candida as an aggravating factor in AD. Patients with AD also develop chronic dermatophyte infections more easily, and patients with AD and chronic dermatophyte infections may show improvement in their AD when treated with antifungal drugs.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, itching, inflammatory skin disease which is associated with asthma and/or hay fever and a familial occurrence of these conditions . AD is the most common chronic skin disease in children . Approximately 18% of 7-year-old children have or have had AD. In 90% of patients the disease starts before 7 years of age, and usually it starts before 1 year of age. The majority of the patients improve before or around puberty, and it is estimated that approximately 2% of the adult population has AD . However, AD may start in adult life, although this is rare. There is a documented increase in the incidence of AD in all countries with an Western life-style, but the exact reason for this is unclear (the frequency of AD in 7-year-old children is 2 to 3% for those born before 1960, 4 to 8% for those born between 1960 and 1970, 9 to 12% for those born between 1970 and 1980, and 15 to 20% for those born after 1980) . Genetic factors are important in the development of AD, but the exact hereditary pathway is still unknown . If both parents have had AD, the risk for the children is approximately 70%. Infiltrates of activated T-helper cells are found in the skin of patients with AD . There is an imbalance between Th1 and Th2 cells toward an increase in cells of the Th2 type. Th2 cells have a cytokine profile with an increased production of interleukin 4 (IL-4), which stimulates the plasma cells to an increased production of immunoglobulin E (IgE) . Another interesting observation in the skin of AD patients is the presence of a dendritic epidermal cell population (Langerhans' cells and mast cells) that carry IgE receptors and specific IgE . Antigen presented by these cells may stimulate Th2 cells to synthesize IgE and hence contribute to the inflammatory changes in the skin . When the skin of patients with AD is examined, it is often drier than the skin of an individual without AD . It also reacts differently in response to stimulation. The white dermography appears when the skin is lightly scratched and is characterized by blood vessel constriction instead of dilation . The threshold for itch is also lower than in healthy individuals. Dry skin and the weakened barrier function in patients with AD are very important in the reactions of the patients to irritants and other external trigger factors including microorganisms . The pathophysiology and etiology of AD have been reviewed and discussed in a supplement of the American Journal of Dermatology . Staphylococcus aureus can be cultured from both involved and uninvolved skin in 85 to 90% of patients with AD . S. aureus may aggravate AD due to a secondary infection . However, of greater importance is probably the presence of exotoxins and other substances from S. aureus that may act as allergens or, more importantly, as superantigens . Viral infections, especially with herpes simplex virus, may also aggravate AD . The yeasts Malassezia and Candida may aggravate AD due to an allergic reaction . In particular, the role of the Malassezia yeasts is now documented in several papers . Malassezia species are members of the normal human cutaneous flora, and a defect in the skin barrier may facilitate the contact of these yeasts with the immune system . Candida yeasts are members of the normal flora of mucous membranes, and the major contact with the immune system is through the gastrointestinal tract and, in women, even through the vagina . Chronic dermatophyte infections are more common in patients with AD, and dermatophytes, especially Trichophyton rubrum, may act as allergens . The role of other hyphomycetes in AD has not been studied in detail . Other important factors are food, house dust mites, topically applied irritants, psychological factors, and climate . The diagnosis of AD is usually based on many variables, including history and clinical and laboratory findings. Rajka was the first to make a diagnostic list consisting of major and minor criteria . These criteria were later revised and are known as the Hanifin and Rajka criteria . These criteria have been scientifically evaluated and found to work fairly well in the clinical situation even though many of the criteria have no precise definition, some are nonspecific, and some are uncommon. However, Williams et al. developed a minimum list of reliable criteria for the diagnosis of AD that could be used in clinical as well as in epidemiological studies. The obligatory criteria are an itching skin condition or report from parents that a young child itches or scratches as if itching. Thereafter, at least three of the following criteria should be fulfilled: history of involvement of the skin folds on the flexor sides of the elbows and knees, anteriorly on the ankles, on the throat, and on the cheeks in children younger than 10 years; history of asthma or hay fever in the patient or of atopic disease in the immediate family of children younger than 4 years; history of general skin dryness during the last year; visible eczema present on the flexor sides of the elbows and knees, anteriorly on the ankles, and on the throat (or cheeks, forehead, and extensor side of the extremities in children younger than 4 years); and onset before the age of 2 years (this criterion should not be used if the child is younger than 4 years) . The clinical picture varies with age and may be described in 3 different phases: infant phase (younger than 2 years), childhood phase (2 to 12 years), and adolescent/adult phase . Important differential diagnoses are seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, rosacea and perioral dermatitis, fungal infections, ichtyosis vulgaris, scabies and contact dermatitis. Accurate assessment of the extent and severity of AD is essential for quantitating the baseline clinical disease burden and the effectiveness of treatment regimens being tested . One assessment system that is videly used is the SCORAD method , and another method is the EASI . It is beyond the scope of this article to discuss which one may be superior. Treatment of AD is topical with emollients, corticosteroids, or immunomodulating agents . The use of topical tacrolimus is a new approach to the treatment of AD . In severe AD, systemic treatment with corticosteroids and immunomodulating drugs is needed . UV treatment is also an effective alternative . Topical and systemic antibacterial treatment is used in patients with signs of bacterial infections. Antifungal therapy is used in patients with signs of a fungal infection. However, a more widespread use of antimycotics based on the role of the most yeasts as common allergens is still not commonly recommended. The prognosis of AD is good; 60 to 70% of patients recover during childhood . The prognosis is less positive in women, in patients who had severe AD as children, and in those with concurrent allergic rhinitis and/or asthma or a positive family history of AD.
Not only bacteria, especially S. aureus, but also fungi may play an important role as aggravating factors in AD. The majority of studies in AD and fungi deal with the Malassezia yeasts, probably because these yeasts are the most important fungi in AD.
Historical. | The earliest report of Malassezia-like yeasts was made by Eichstedt in 1846 . In 1853, Robin described round cells on the skin of patients with dandruff . In 1873, Rivolta described the presence of round double-contoured budding cells in a patient with psoriasis . In 1874, Malassez noticed budding cells of various shapes in the stratum corneum of patients with various skin diseases, and the name Malassezia furfur was proposed by Bailon in 1889 . However, Malassez was never able to culture the microorganism. Von Sehlen  and Unna  were probably the first to culture the organism. The genus name Pityrosporum was proposed by Sabouraud in 1904 . In 1913, Castellani and Chalmers were able to culture the organism and characterize the growth properties . They introduced the name Pityrosporum ovale, and their description of the organism is based on the characteristics of the fungus both in skin scales and in the laboratory . The name P. pachydermatis was introduced by Veidman in 1925 for a nonlipophilic species of the genus Pityrosporum isolated primarily from animals . In 1951, Gordon isolated a round, double-contoured yeast that produced spherical to oval buds from both pityriasis versicolor scales and normal skin . The name he gave the organism, P. orbicualre, is based primarily on the micromorphology. However, later studies have shown that the round and oval forms of the organism are not stable  and that the two forms can change from one to the other on special culture media or under special culture conditions  and when experimental infections are induced in rabbits . The genus Malassezia has in a taxonomic revision been placed in the kingdom Fungi, division Basidiomycota, class Hymenomycetes, order Tremellales and family Filobasidium uniguttulatum . Molecular biology using rRNA sequence analysis and nDNA comparisons, as well as G+C content in extracted DNA, has clearly divided the genus Malassezia into seven different species . Today this genus consists of M. furfur , M. pachydermatis , M. sympodialis , M. globosa, M. slooffiae, M. restricta, and M. obtusa .
The seven Malassezia species exhibit typical morphological and physiological features . They reproduce by unilateral budding, leaving prominent scars on the mother cells . The yeast cells may be bottle-shaped, globose, ovoid, or cylindrical. Buds may be formed on a narrow or wide base. The most interesting feature of the genus Malassezia is the presence of a thick multilayered cell wall whose inner surface is corrugated. The protoplasmic membrane is firmly attached to the inside of the cell wall. The major components of the cell wall are mannoproteins (75 to 80%), lipids (15 to 20%), and chitin (1 to 2%) . It is thought that the immunomodulatory capacity of the Malassezia yeasts are related to cell wall lipids. Using various physical, chemical and metabolic characteristics, the Malassezia species can be identified . We have recently developed a modification of previous identification systems by which the seven different Malassezia species easily can be identified . The advantages of this system are that it is easier and faster and that Tween reaction, which is often difficult to read, is not necessary. We always isolate the Malassezia yeast using the media described by Leeming and Notman . This medium contains, among other ingredients, ox bile, glycerol, glycerol monostearate, Tween 60, and whole-fat cow's milk. Compared to other culture media, this was the most effective for isolation of the Malassezia yeasts . Various morphological and physiological criteria can be used to characterize the Malassezia yeasts  . M. pachydermatis is nonlipophilic and can be cultured on lipid-free culture media. Cells are small and ovoid with a very broad base, and they never produce filaments. M. furfur can vary in micromorphology, producing cells that are long cylindrical ovoid or even globose. A few strains may produce filaments spontaneously or during special culture conditions. M. furfur is catalase positive, does not split esculin, grows on Dixon agar at 38C, and is capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. M. sympodialis has small ovoid cells. It is catalase positive, splits esculin, grows on Dixon agar at 38C, and is not capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. M. slooffiae has short cylindrical cells appearing ovoid under the light microscope with buds formed on a broad base. It is catalase positive, does not split esculin, grows on Dixon agar at 38C, and is not capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. M. obtusa has large cylindrical cells with a broad base. It is catalase positive, splits esculin, does not grow on Dixon agar at 38C, and is not capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. M. globosa has stable spherical cells. Buds are formed on a narrow base and might elongate to form germination tubes or even short filaments. It is catalase positive, does not split esculin, does not grow on Dixon agar at 38C, and is not capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. M. restricta has small spherical or ovoid cells with a relatively narrow base. It is catalase negative, does not split esculin, does not grow on Dixon agar at 38C, and is not capable of growing in the presence of Cremophor. FIG. 1. | Typing system for the Malassezia yeasts. Typing system for the Malassezia yeasts.
The Malassezia yeasts are members of the normal human cutaneous flora . However, there is great variation in the density and presence in various skin locations , in children compared to adults , and in normal skin compared to diseased skin . The Malassezia yeasts are also associated with several skin diseases such as pityriasis (tinea) versicolor, Malassezia folliculitis, seborrheic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and some forms of confluent and reticulate papillomatosis (Gougerot-Carteaud syndrome) . They may even be involved in systemic diseases . In 1951, Gordon isolated lipophilic yeasts from both normal healthy volunteers and patients with pityriasis versicolor . Using direct microscopy or culture, Roberts found what he called P. ovale on the scalp and on the chest of 97% and 92 to 100% normal healthy adults, respectively . He also isolated the yeast in large numbers from patients with pityriasis versicolor . In a quantitative culture study, using a modification of the Williamson-Kligman scrub technique, Malassezia yeasts were cultured from clinically normal skin of the on the chest, back, upper arm, lower leg, and dorsal aspect of the hand . The highest count was found on the back, and the lowest was found on the hand. An easy semiquantitative method is to use contact plates . This was first described in detail in 1987 . However, better results have later been obtained using a modification of the culture medium developed by Leeming and Notman . Leeming et al. were able to culture the Malassezia yeasts from 20 different body sites, with the largest numbers being found on the scalp and upper trunk . We found in a culture study of adults that the density of the Malassezia yeasts decreased with increasing age . Although the number of yeast cells is larger in adults, the yeasts can also be cultured from children . Several studies have demonstrated that the Malassezia yeasts can be cultured in newborns. The Malassezia yeasts can be cultured not only from healthy skin but also from patients with various skin diseases . The number of yeasts is not always increased, but other mechanisms may be important in the pathogenesis. The yeast may induce immunological changes or behave as irritants, and then a reduction even of a relatively small number of yeast cells will result in an improvement. Quantitative or semiquantitative cultures can therefore be used to monitor the effect of treatment or changes in predisposing factors. Only a few culture studies have been done using the new classification of the Malassezia yeasts . However, it is important to look at the distribution of the various Malassezia species not only on healthy skin but also on the skin of patients with Malassezia-associated skin diseases. Nakabayashi et al. isolated various Malassezia species from the skin of healthy individuals and from patients with pityriasis versicolor, seborrheic dermatitis, and atopic dermatitis in Japan . The yeasts were cultured qualitatively using swabs and Dixon's agar medium, and specimens for culture were taken from the scalp, face and trunk. Cultures were negative in 14% (pityrasis versicolor) to 50% (healthy individuals) of cases. M. globosa was the most commonly isolated species from healthy volunteers, patients with pityriasis versicolor, and nonlesional skin of patients with AD. M. furfur was the most commonly isolated species from patients with seborrheic dermatitis and lesional skin of patients with AD. In a study by Kim and Kim, the Malassezia yeasts were isolated qualitatively from various body regions in normal healthy volunteers from South Korea . All six lipophilic species were cultured. However, there was a great variation in the incidence of these yeasts, with M. restricta being the most commonly isolated species from the scalp and forehead and M. globosa being the most commonly species isolated from the chest and the back. In two reports from Canada, Gupta et al. have isolated the various Malassezia yeasts from both healthy individuals and patients with various Malassezia-related skin diseases . In the first study, the Malassezia yeasts were isolated qualitatively, in patients with pityriasis versicolor, by scraping skin flakes into a paper bag, and later the flakes were transferred to Leeming and Notman agar and to Littman agar supplemented with olive oil . A total of 111 samples were obtained from patients in Ontario, Canada, and 18 were from patients in other countries (South Africa, Hong Kong, Portugal, Brazil, and Hawaii). In the patients from Canada, M. sympodialis was isolated in 59%, M. globosa was isolated in 25%, and M. furfur was isolated in 11%. In patients from other countries, M. globosa was the dominating species, being cultured in 62%. In the other study, the Malassezia yeasts were isolated semiquantitatively, using contact plates with the Leeming and Notman agar , from both healthy volunteers and patients with pityriasis versicolor, seborrheic dermatitis, AD, and psoriasis. All the lipophilic Malassezia species were isolated. M. sympodialis was the dominant organism in healthy controls and in patients with pityriasis versicolor and AD, while M. globosa was the dominant species in patients with seborrheic dermatitis and psoriasis. The number of yeast colonies was largest in lesional skin from patients with pityriasis versicolor but was not statistically significantly larger than in nonlesional skin or in skin from healthy individuals. However, the number of colonies of Malassezia was statistically significantly larger in both healthy individuals and patients with pityriasis versicolor than in patients with seborrheic dermatitis, AD, and psoriasis. Erchiga et al, cultured the various Malassezia species qualitatively using Dixon agar from both lesional and nonlesional skin of patients with pityriasis versicolor in Spain . Cultures were positive in all patients. M. globosa, either alone or in combination with M. sympodialis, was the dominant species, being cultured in 97% of patients; M. sympodialis was cultured in 32%, either together with M. globosa or alone (only three patients). In nonlesional skin from the shoulders, Malassezia species were cultured in 47% of the patients and M. sympodialis was the dominant species, being cultured in 42% of all cultures. According to these five reports, M. sympodialis, M. globosa, and M. furfur were the most commonly isolated Malassezia species. However, there were differences in the species that was most commonly isolated, not only between healthy individuals and patients with various diseases but also between results from different countries .
As mentioned above, the Malassezia yeasts are opportunistic pathogens, and under the influence of various predisposing factors, they are involved in several diseases . In pityriasis versicolor, under the influence of exogenous or endogenous predisposing factors, the yeast changes from the blastospore form to the mycelial form . Pityriasis versicolor is a chronic superficial disease that usually affects the upper trunk, neck, or upper arms. It has a worldwide distribution. In tropical areas, it has been found in 30 to 40% of the population. However, the incidence is much lower in temperate climates. The diagnosis is based primarily on a typical clinical picture in combination with bright yellow fluorescence under Wood's light examination and direct microscopy. Direct microscopy is of major importance, and the round or oval budding cells and hyphae can easily be identified. There are numerous ways of treating pityriasis versicolor, both topically and with systemic drugs . However, the high rate of recurrence, affecting 60% of patients after 1 year and 80% after 2 years, is an outstanding problem. Consequently, a prophylactic treatment regimen is necessary to avoid recurrence. Malassezia folliculitis is a chronic disease characterized by pruritic follicular papules and pustules located primarily on the upper trunk, neck, and upper arms . Under the influence of predisposing factors, Malassezia folliculitis may be explained by an extensive growth of Malassezia in the hair follicle. The inflammation may be due both to products of the yeast and free fatty acids produced as a result of the lipase activity of the yeast . The diagnosis is based on a typical clinical picture of itchy papules and pustules as the predominant symptoms, direct microscopy, and the effect of antimycotic treatment . The effect of antimycotic treatment is often dramatic. Most cases responds well to topical treatment, but systemic treatment with e.g. itraconazole or fluconazole has been used in difficult cases . Lesions and itching recur in most patients if treatment is not maintained intermittently. Therefore, a prophylactic treatment schedule, such as topical treatment once or twice a week, is recommended. Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by red scaly lesions located predominantly on the scalp, face, and upper trunk. There are now many studies indicating that the Malassezia yeasts play an important role in seborrheic dermatitis . Many of these are treatment studies which describe the effectiveness of antimycotics, paralleled by a reduction in number of the Malassezia yeasts, whereas recolonization leads to a recurrence of seborrheic dermatitis. The increased incidence of seborrheic dermatitis in patients with immunosuppressive disorders suggests that the relationship between Malassezia and the immune system is important, but the exact mechanism involved is still unknown. Studies designed to investigate this mechanism in patients with seborrheic dermatitis fall into four areas : the humoral response to Malassezia, lymphocyte transformation response to Malassezia extract, T helper (CD4)/T suppressor (CD8) cell ratios, and cytokine responses. However, studies in all of these areas have given inconsistent results, and the local reaction in the skin may give a better answer. In a recent study, the number and type of inflammatory cells and mediators from lesional and healthy skin in patients with seborrheic dermatitis were been studied . Staining was often more intense when Malassezia yeasts cells were present. An increase in NK- and CD16-positive cells in combination with complement activation indicates that an irritant or nonimmunogenic stimulation of the immune system is important. With the interleukins, an increase in the production of inflammatory interleukins and an increase in the regulatory interleukins for both Th1 and Th2 cells were seen. The immune response described for cutaneous C. albicans infections  has similarities to the skin reactions found in seborrheic dermatitis .
Distribution of the Malassezia yeasts. | Many reports clearly indicate the role of Malassezia in AD, especially AD located to the head and neck area in adults . The Malassezia yeasts have been cultured from patients with AD with the same frequency as from healthy individuals . In one study of children from newborn to the age of 20 years, the Malassezia yeasts were isolated from lesional and nonlesional skin, from the same region, as well as from normal skin of the forehead of patients with AD . Normal skin on the forehead in age- and sex-matched individuals with rhinoconjunctivitis and/or asthma and healthy volunteers served as controls. Cultures did not differ significantly among the three groups or between lesional and nonlesional skin. There was, however, a difference between the age groups. Cultures were positive in 5 to 15% of children aged up 10 years and in 65 to 100% of 11- to 20-year-old persons. In a study of adult patients with AD involving the scalp and neck, Malassezia samples were taken from lesional skin of the forehead and cultured on Leeming and Notman agar in contact plates . Culture was positive in 83% of cases. These two studies were performed before the new taxonomy for the Malassezia yeasts was introduced. In the above-mentioned study by Nakabayashi et al., they were able to classify the Malassezia yeasts . Samples were taken from lesional and nonlesional skin from the scalp, face, and trunk. In lesional skin the most commonly isolated species was M. furfur, which was cultured in 21% of samples. M. globosa was cultured in 14%, M. sympodialis was cultured in 7%, M. slooffiae was cultured in 4%, and cultures were negative in 46%. In nonlesional skin, the most commonly isolated species was M. globosa (33%); M. furfur was cultured in 11% of samples; 22% were unknown species or contaminated cultures, and 33% of samples were culture negative. Gupta et al. cultured the Malassezia yeasts semiquantitatively, using the Leeming and Notman culture medium in contact plates, from patients with various skin diseases and healthy controls . In patients with AD, the total number of isolated colonies was significantly larger from nonlesional skin than from to lesional skin. The number of colonies from both lesional and nonlesional skin was significantly smaller than the number of colonies from healthy individuals, patients with pityriasis versicolor (both lesional and nonlesional skin), and nonlesional, but not lesional, skin of patients with seborrheic dermatitis. In AD there were no differences in the percentages of the various Malassezia species isolated from lesional and nonlesional skin. M. sympodialis was the most commonly isolated species, being cultured in 51% of the patients, M. globosa was cultured in 18%, M. furfur and M. obtusa were each cultured in 10%, M. restrticta was cultured in 8%, and M. slooffiae was cultured in 3%. The majority of Malassezia yeasts were cultured from the forehead and the trunk. In an English abstract from a paper otherwise written in Russian, Arzumanian stated that M. sympodialis was the most commonly isolated species isolated from both patients with AD and healthy individuals . In a recently completed multicenter study in Sweden, involving the Departments of Dermatology in Gothenburg, Lund, and Stockholm and the Department of Clinical Immunology, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, we cultured the Malassezia yeasts from 125 patients with AD, 16 with seborrhec dermatitis, and 30 healthy controls . Cultures were performed using the Leeming and Notman agar  in contact plates from normal-appearing skin of the upper back and, in AD and seborrheic dermatitis patients, also from lesional skin. Cultures were positive in 56% of patients (70 of 125) with AD, 88% of patients with seborrheic dermatitis, and 83% of healthy controls. In patients with AD, M. sympodialis was cultured in 40%, M. obtusa was cultured in 25%, M. globosa was cultured in 23%, M. slooffiae was cultured in 6%, M. furfur was cultured in 4%, and M. restricta was cultured in 2%. The same frequency of the Malassezia yeasts was seen in healthy controls. However, in patients with seborrheic dermatitis, M. obtusa was cultured in 30% and M. sympodialis was cultured in 30%.
A positive skin prick test (SPT) was first reported in 1958 among a group of AD patients . In 1983, Clemmensen and Hjorth described a positive effect of oral ketoconazole in the treatment of adult patients with AD localized to the head and neck area and with positive SPTs to Malassezia . In 1985, Waerstad and Hjorth investigated 741 patients with AD and found a positive Malassezia SPT only in patients with active eczema and most frequently in patients with head and neck dermatitis (28%) . Patients with other atopic manifestations such as rhinitis or asthma but without AD were negative in SPT to Malassezia. Kieffer et al., in collaboration with our group in Gothenburg, reported a positive SPT to Malassezia in 79% of adult patients with AD localized to the head and neck area . The SPT was positive in 45% of patients with AD but without the head and neck distribution, and patients with seborrhoeic dermatitis were negative. These percentages are much higher than those obtained by Waersted and Hjorth. However, several children were included in the report by Waerstad and Hjorth. The Malassezia extract used in this and the two earlier studies is a protein extract prepared by ALK Laboratories, Copenhagen, Denmark. The same extract has also been used for a histamine release assay (Lucotest-HR; Lundbeck Diagnostics, Copenhagen, Denmark) measuring the release of histamine from basophils after stimulation with the antigen. The results of histamine release after stimulation with Malassezia extract paralleled the results obtained with the SPT . Rokugo et al. found that the results of the SPT vary according to the age of the patients . Among AD patients younger than 10 years, 39% were positive in SPT, while 64% of patients older than 10 years were positive. Wessels et al. found positive SPTs to Malassezia in 84% of adult patients with AD . In a study by Broberg et al., children with AD, rhinitis and/or asthma without AD, and healthy controls were investigated . A total of 60 children in each category were included, and the children were divided into four groups: 0 to 5 years, 6 to 10 years, 11 to 15 years, and 16 to 21 years, with 15 in each group. SPTs to Malassezia were positive in 23% of patients with AD, 0% of patients with rhinitis and/or asthma, and 8% of healthy controls (three subjects). Among the patients with AD, 1 of 15 patients in the age group from 0 to 5 years was SPT positive compared to 6 of 15 (40%) in the age group from 16 to 21 years. Kim et al. have performed an SPT with an M. furfur extract in 80 young adult patients with the head and neck distribution of AD and compared the results to those obtained for controls without AD . A total of 45% showed positive SPT responses, and the severity score of the head and neck lesions in the M. furfur SPT-positive group was significantly higher than in the M. furfur-negative group. In another study, Devos and van der Valk studied patients with AD, with and without the head and neck distribution, using SPT with a Malassezia extract and other procedures . In a total of 92 patients with AD (the majority were young adults), the SPT was positive in 40%. However, only 6% of the patients with the head and neck distribution of AD were positive. This is contradictory to all earlier studies, in which patients with the head and neck distribution of AD showed the largest number of positive SPTs to Malassezia . In the above-mentioned Swedish multicenter study, we also performed SPT with extracts of Malassezia, the recombinant allergens Mal f 1, Mal f 5, Mal f 6, and a mix of these recombinant allergens  in patients with AD, patients with seborrheic dermatitis, and healthy controls; 74% of the AD patients had the head and neck distribution. We found that 57% of the AD patients were positive to the extract or recombinant allergens; 52% were positive to the Malassezia extract. However, 56% of patients with the head and neck distribution of AD were positive to the extract compared to only 36% of the patien