Clinical and Taxonomic Status of Pathogenic Nonpigmented or Late-Pigmenting Rapidly Growing Mycobacteria
The history, taxonomy, geographic distribution, clinical disease, and therapy of the pathogenic nonpigmented or late-pigmenting rapidly growing mycobacteria (RGM) are reviewed. Community-acquired disease and health care-associated disease are highlighted for each species. The latter grouping includes health care-associated outbreaks and pseudo-outbreaks as well as sporadic disease cases. Treatment recommendations for each species and type of disease are also described. Special emphasis is on the Mycobacterium fortuitum group, including M. fortuitum, M. peregrinum, and the unnamed third biovariant complex with its recent taxonomic changes and newly recognized species (including M. septicum, M. mageritense, and proposed species M. houstonense and M. bonickei). The clinical and taxonomic status of M. chelonae, M. abscessus, and M. mucogenicum is also detailed, along with that of the closely related new species, M. immunogenum. Additionally, newly recognized species, M. wolinskyi and M. goodii, as well as M. smegmatis sensu stricto, are included in a discussion of the M. smegmatis group. Laboratory diagnosis of RGM using phenotypic methods such as biochemical testing and high-performance liquid chromatography and molecular methods of diagnosis are also discussed. The latter includes PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, hybridization, ribotyping, and sequence analysis. Susceptibility testing and antibiotic susceptibility patterns of the RGM are also annotated, along with the current recommendations from the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) for mycobacterial susceptibility testing.

The species of rapidly growing mycobacteria (RGM) capable of producing disease in humans consist primarily of the Mycobacterium fortuitum group, the M. chelonae/abscessus group, and the M. smegmatis group. Key features for identification of these groups are the presence of typical long-chain fatty acids known as mycolic acids, growth of readily visible colonies on primary isolation within 7 days on multiple types of solid media, arylsulfatase activity within 3 days or 2 weeks, and the absence or slow appearance of any pigmentation . Historically, the M. fortuitum group has been composed of two known species and a taxon which has been reported to include more than one species . The species include M. fortuitum (formerly M. fortuitum biovar fortuitum), M. peregrinum (formerly M. fortuitum biovar peregrinum) and the taxon known as the unnamed third biovariant complex . Several additional taxa to be discussed later are candidates for inclusion in this group. M. chelonae (formerly M. chelonae subsp. chelonae) and M. abscessus (formerly M. chelonae subsp. abscessus) , along with the newly recognized species M. immunogenum , are members of a group known collectively as the M. chelonae-abscessus group. Finally, the M. smegmatis group contains M. smegmatis sensu stricto and two newly described species: M. goodii, and M. wolinskyi . Prior to recent molecular reevaluations, the taxa in the M. chelonae-abscessus and the M. fortuitum group were considered "subspecies" or "biovariants," respectively. However, the introduction and evolution of 16S ribosomal gene (rDNA) sequencing provided strong evidence that these biovars and subspecies were in fact separate species. Gene sequencing also permitted much easier recognition of new taxa, since investigators could use data banks for strain comparisons rather than performing the much more technically difficult genomic DNA-DNA pairing experiments with all potentially related taxa. The genomic DNA-DNA pairing experiments that show <70% homology to other species still remain the "gold standard" for recognition of new species, but such studies are performed infrequently and many new species of mycobacteria are based genetically on 16S rDNA comparisons only. In this review, we update the taxonomy of these nonpigmented RGM and point out many of the changes brought about by such newer technologies as 16S rRNA gene sequencing; high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) of mycolic acid esters, including fluorescence-HPLC; and PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis (PRA) of a 439-bp fragment (referred to as the Telenti fragment) of the 65-kDa heat shock protein-encoding gene (hsp65) . Clinical disease caused by these groups, together with their drug susceptibility, and most effective drug treatment are also addressed. The disease syndromes caused by these organisms are listed in Table .
The nonpigmented RGM are extremely hardy and thrive in even the most hostile of environments (, , -). Some of the taxa ---such as a subgroup of M. peregrinum, some members of the unnamed third biovariant complex of M. fortuitum, and most isolates in the M. smegmatis group ---are able to grow at 45C . Additionally, some species, such as the M. chelonae/abscessus group and M. mucogenicum, resist the activity of disinfectants and biocides such as organomercurials, chlorine, and alkaline glutaraldehyde . These hardy species of RGM are commonly seen in municipal tap water . One study by Carson et al.  showed that 55% of the incoming city water in hemodialysis centers throughout the United States contained RGM. Some outbreaks of human infection related to these organisms have involved hospital water systems as the microbial reservoirs. Recently, the presence of acid-fast mycobacteria in up to 90% of biofilms (the slime layer present at water-solid interfaces) taken from piped water systems has been described . The presence of acid-fast mycobacteria in these biofilms probably serves as a major environmental reservoir for organisms such as M. kansasii, M. mucogenicum, M. simiae, M. xenopi, and M. gordonae. Because of the ubiquity of the RGM, human infections have been reported from most geographic areas in the world  and species of RGM have been recovered from 30 to 78% of soil samples throughout the United States . Most nosocomial (hereafter referred to as health care-associated) outbreaks and pseudo-outbreaks have occurred in the United States and seem to be concentrated mainly in the South. M. senegalense, originally found in Africa, has never been described elsewhere. Such a localized distribution among the RGM seems to be rare, however. Health care-associated outbreaks and pseudo-outbreaks commonly involve exposure to tap water or water sources such as ice, ice water, and water-based solutions . Contaminated ice machines are a relatively important hospital reservoir for the RGM, especially M. fortuitum. Reported disease outbreaks have included sternal wound infections , surgical wound infections following plastic surgery , and postinjection abscesses . Catheter infections also have been associated with the RGM, including M. mucogenicum . Pseudo-outbreaks of disease, defined as clusters of false infections or artifactual clustering of real infections, have been associated with contaminated bronchoscopes and automated endoscopic cleaning machines with tap water as the source of the organism . Localized infection in sporadic community-acquired disease usually occurs after a traumatic injury followed by potential soil or water contamination . Such injuries as stepping on a nail, motor vehicle accidents, compound fractures, etc., are typical of the clinical histories seen in patients with RGM disease .
M. fortuitum Group | The M. fortuitum group has historically included three taxa: M. fortuitum, M. peregrinum, and the unnamed third biovariant complex. Here, we propose the addition of six more species to the group: M. mucogenicum (for reasons given below), M. senegalense, M. mageritense, and three recently described (M. F. Schinsky, M. P. Douglas, A. G. Steigerwalt, R. W. Wilson, M. M. Floyd, M. I. Daneshvar, B. A. Brown-Elliott, R. J. Wallace, Jr., M. M. McNeil, D. J. Brenner, and J. M. Brown, Abstr. 12th Int. Symp. Biol. Actino., abstr. P-117, 2001) species: M. septicum, M. houstonense, and M. bonickei. Few studies have accurately separated these eight taxa, and they were often referred to simply as "M. fortuitum," as if they were a single species. For purposes of this review, "M. fortuitum group" is used when no subgrouping was performed or the data include all subgroups. Names of the specific taxa are used when the isolates were so identified by current methods of carbohydrate utilization  or PRA of the hsp65 gene . Common features within this group are a positive 3-day arylsulfatase, the absence of pigmentation, a positive nitrate reductase, a positive iron uptake, and susceptibility to multiple drugs including polymyxin B, sulfonamides, and the newer fluoroquinolones. Most of these taxa grow better at 30 than 35C. Their 16S rDNA sequences generally differ by 15 bp or less. Historical perspective. | (i) M. fortuitum. | M. fortuitum was the designation given by da Costa Cruz  to a strain of RGM (ATCC 6841T) isolated from a human postinjection abscess in 1938. Subsequently, Stanford and Gunthorpe  determined that the isolate was identical to an established species known as M. ranae, with the type strain isolated from a frog by Kuster in 1905 . Runyon  challenged the name M. ranae, in part because many isolates identified as M. ranae were subsequently found to be M. smegmatis and in part because the name M. fortuitum was more widely recognized and established in the medical literature. Hence, in 1972, the Judicial Commission of the International Committee of Systematic Bacteriology of the International Association of Microbiological Societies ruled in favor of Runyon's recommendation to maintain the species designation M. fortuitum, which has remained to the present .  (ii) M. peregrinum. | M. peregrinum was first proposed in 1962 when Bojalil and colleagues published the first Adansonian or numerical classification of mycobacteria . This analysis separated mycobacteria into 12 different categories or branches based on physiological characteristics. Branch 1 consisted of M. smegmatis, M. phlei, and a group of other strains that showed the greatest metabolic capacity of all the strains analyzed. The name M. peregrinum sp. nov. was proposed for this latter group (Latin adjective meaning strange or foreign) because "they were the only non-pigmented strains in Branch 1" . The type strain is ATCC 14467T.  (iii) M. fortuitum third biovariant complex. | In 1966 Bonicke divided isolates of the M. fortuitum group into three subgroups on the basis of differences in acid production from carbohydrates and designated them biotypes A, B, and C . Biotype A had no unique carbohydrates, biotype B was mannitol positive, while biotype C was mannitol and inositol positive. Subsequently, Pattyn et al.  renamed these three Bonicke biotypes M. fortuitum biovariant fortuitum, M. fortuitum biovariant peregrinum, and an unnamed third biovariant. In 1984, Tsang et al.  used a combination of chemical analysis, seroagglutination, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to compare the glycolipids of the RGM and provided evidence that M. fortuitum biovar peregrinum was a separate species . M. fortuitum biovar peregrinum was later confirmed as an independent species, as M. peregrinum, based on genomic DNA-DNA relatedness studies by Levy-Frebault et al.  and Kusonoki and Ezaki  that showed <70% genomic DNA-DNA homology of M. peregrinum (ATCC 14467T) to other RGM species. By 16S rDNA sequencing, M. peregrinum (ATCC 14467T) is unique, with a Hamming distance of 9 to 15 bp from other members of the M. fortuitum group. Wallace et al. noted two subgroups within M. peregrinum. One group contained the ATCC type strain (ATCC 14467T), which was pipemidic acid susceptible; while the other, represented by ATCC 35755, was pipemidic acid resistant. The two groups have different PRA patterns with the hsp65 gene . An analysis of the taxonomic status of this second group using phenotypic and genetic analysis is ongoing (M. F. Schinsky, R. E. Morey, M. P. Douglas, A. G. Steigerwalt, R. W. Wilson, M. M. Floyd, M. I. Daneshvar, B. A. Brown-Elliott, R. J. Wallace, Jr., M. M. McNeil, D. J. Brenner, and J. M. Brown, unpublished). M. fortuitum biovar fortuitum was also elevated to species status (M. fortuitum) based on DNA-DNA pairing studies which showed <70% homology of M. fortuitum ATCC 6841T to other taxa (,). By 16S rDNA sequencing, M. fortuitum differs by only 6 bp from the unnamed third biovariant sorbitol-negative group, by 8 bp from M. senegalense, and by 15 bp from M. peregrinum (ATCC 14467T). The unnamed third biovariant, first described by Bonicke in 1966 , was later characterized and then subdivided into two groups by Wallace et al.  on the basis of a number of characteristics including sorbitol utilization. The two unnamed third biovariant groups were known as M. fortuitum third biovariant, sorbitol positive, and M. fortuitum third biovariant, sorbitol negative . By 16S rDNA sequencing, these two groups had a Hamming distance of 9 , with proposed representative strains being ATCC 49403 (sorbitol positive) and ATCC 49404 (sorbitol negative) . They differed by up to 20 bp from other M. fortuitum group members. Both sorbitol-positive and negative groups appeared heterogeneous, especially when studied for beta-lactamase alleles  but also when compared by PRA of the hsp65 gene . (a) M. houstonense and M. bonickeii (proposed species). Investigations currently under way may better delineate the multiple taxa or species within the third biovariant complex. Currently, at least six new species have been delineated. The majority of the sorbitol-positive group have been renamed M. houstonense, while the majority of the sorbitol-negative group have been renamed M. bonickei (Schinsky et al., Abstr. 12th Int. Symp. Biol. Actino.). Additional details of these species await publication of the entire study. (b) M. septicum.M. septicum is one of the new species within the third biovariant complex. The type strain (ATCC 700731T) was the causative agent of central- line sepsis in a child with metastatic hepatoblastoma . By HPLC analysis of mycolic acids, the isolate was distinctive but closely related to other members of the M. fortuitum group , including M. senegalense. Standard biochemical testing showed the isolate to be similar to members of the unnamed third biovariant complex sorbitol-negative group (i.e., mannitol positive, inositol positive, sorbitol negative). Although initial testing showed the isolate to be arylsulfatase negative, it has been found to be positive in other laboratories (K. Jost, unpublished data). Analysis of the 16S rDNA showed a sequence related to but not identical to M. fortuitum, M. peregrinum, and M. senegalense (Schinsky et al., Abstr. 12th Int. Symp. Biol. Actino.). (c) M. mageritense.The first five reported organisms in the new species M. mageritense were isolated from human sputa in two hospitals in Spain but were not considered clinically significant . Recently, six clinical isolates of this species were recovered in the United States, four of which were associated with clinical disease . Phenotypically, by antibiotic susceptibility patterns and biochemical tests, isolates of M. mageritense resemble sorbitol-positive members of the M. fortuitum third biovariant complex (positive for mannitol, inositol, and sorbitol) . By sequencing of its 16S rDNA, however, genetically, M. mageritense is more closely aligned with members of the M. smegmatis group . M. mageritense differs by only 9 bp from the type strain of M. wolinskyi (ATCC 700010T), by 16 bp from the type strain of M. goodii (ATCC 700504T), and by 18 bp from the type strain of M. smegmatis sensu stricto (ATCC 19420T). It generally differs by 23 to 28 bp from members of the M. fortuitum group. Future phenotypic and molecular studies of M. mageritense that include larger numbers of isolates may provide a more complete and accurate taxonomic placement of this species.  (iv) M. mucogenicum. | M. mucogenicum has been recognized as a species since 1995. The organism was first called M. chelonae-like organism (MCLO) in 1982, when it was reported as the etiologic agent in a peritonitis outbreak involving two peritoneal dialysis units . It was given the designation MCLO because the outbreak strain, just as M. chelonae, was nitrate negative and growth was inhibited on 5% NaCl. In 1993, a large number of sporadic clinical isolates were evaluated by Wallace and colleagues (200) by using biochemical reactions, HPLC of mycolic esters, and antibiotic susceptibility patterns. Subsequently, in 1995, Springer et al. proposed the name M. mucogenicum for this organism group, reflecting the highly mucoid character of the isolates . This species has always been grouped with the M. chelonae-abscessus group, but is unlike that group in that approximately 50% of isolates are nitrate positive, have a weak but positive iron uptake, and are much more susceptible to antibiotics including the fluoroquinolones, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, polymyxin B, and cephalothin. In addition, by 16S rDNA sequencing M. mucogenicum is more closely related to the M. fortuitum group than to the M. chelonae-abscessus group . The type strain (ATCC 49650T) of M. mucogenicum differs by 11 to 18 bp from members of the M. fortuitum group but differs by 35 bp from M. abscessus and by 38 bp from M. chelonae. Hence, we propose to add this species to other members within the M. fortuitum group.  (v) M. senegalense. | M. senegalense was originally described by Chamoiseau in 1973 as a subspecies of M. farcinogenes . Later, however, it was recognized as a different species closely related to M. fortuitum . Like M. peregrinum, M. senegalense is positive only on mannitol, when tested on common sugars, but has a unique PRA pattern with the hsp65 Telenti fragment . Its 16S rDNA sequence differs by 4 bp from the unnamed M. fortuitum third biovariant complex (sorbitol-positive) strain ATCC 49403; by 5 bp from the unnamed third biovariant complex (sorbitol-negative) strain ATCC 49404; and by only 8 bp from M. fortuitum (ATCC 6841T). By DNA comparison studies, however, it is a species apart from these other organism groups.   Type of disease. | (i) Community-acquired disease. | The M. fortuitum group accounts for 60% of cases of localized cutaneous infections caused by RGM but is a rare cause of chronic mycobacterial pulmonary disease . Localized cutaneous disease generally occurs in previously healthy hosts, and drug-induced immune suppression appears to result in minimal increase in this risk. Wallace et al.  studied 123 patients with extrapulmonary disease caused by RGM and reported that 76 (63%) of these infections were due to the M. fortuitum group. Griffith et al.  studied 154 patients with pulmonary disease due to RGM and reported that only 16% of the infections encountered during the 15-year study were due to the M. fortuitum group . The M. fortuitum group was a common lung pathogen (50% of cases) only in the setting of chronic aspiration secondary to underlying gastroesophageal diseases such as achalasia. Approximately 25% of M. fortuitum group infections based on one study  have been associated with a variety of diseases other than skin or soft tissue infections including cervical lymphadenitis, mastoiditis, and meningitis. . Species in the M. fortuitum group are relatively rare causes of disseminated disease compared to other pathogenic RGM species, especially M. chelonae and M. abscessus.  (ii) Health care-associated disease. | The M. fortuitum group is responsible for the majority (60 to 80%) of cases of postsurgical wound infections and catheter infections caused by the RGM . Most of the responsible organisms are M. fortuitum and are detailed below in the specific section on M. fortuitum .   Geography. | Cutaneous disease caused by the M. fortuitum group, although reported from all over the United States and worldwide, has been recognized most commonly in the southeastern United States . A report in 1989  indicated that about 80% of wound isolates related to cardiac surgery were from seven southern coastal states: Texas, Louisiana, Georgia, Maryland, Alabama, Florida, and South Carolina. A second report published in the same year found that 92% of 37 identified cases of surgical wound infections following augmentation mammaplasty were in patients from southern coastal states, with the majority being from Texas, Florida, and North Carolina . Approximately 80% of isolates in both studies combined belonged to the M. fortuitum group.  Individual taxa. | (i) M. fortuitum. | (a) Community-acquired disease. In essentially all series of community-acquired or health care-associated disease attributed to the M. fortuitum group, most or all of the cases are due to M. fortuitum. In a study of 154 patients with RGM pulmonary disease, Griffith et al.  reported 13% of infections were due to M. fortuitum and only 3% were due to other members of the M. fortuitum group. In a series of cases of extrapulmonary disease cased by the M. fortuitum group, Wallace et al.  reported that almost 80% of the infections were due to M. fortuitum. Disseminated infections with M. fortuitum are rare. The first case report appeared in 1990, when Sack  described a patient with a history of intravenous IV drug abuse and AIDS, who had cutaneous lesions from which M. fortuitum was isolated. Cultures of specimens from lymph nodes, urine, pleural effusions, and feces all yielded M. fortuitum. (b) Health care-associated disease. M. fortuitum has been implicated in numerous outbreaks of hospital or health care-associated infections . These include sternal wound infections; postinjection abscesses related to electromyography needles ; and a respiratory disease outbreak in Washington, D.C. . M. fortuitum has also been recovered from sporadic cases of surgical wound infections and catheter-related infections and is the most common RGM species in women with surgical wound infections following augmentation mammaplasty . Details of some of the outbreaks are listed below. Cardiac disease outbreaks. Isolates of M. fortuitum have been found in sternal wound infections in Hong Kong, Colorado, Nebraska, and Texas . Interestingly, three of the four involved multiple RGM species or multiple strains of the same species. The first outbreak occurred in 1976 in a hospital in Colorado. Of nine patients who underwent cardiovascular surgery within a 2-week period, four became infected with a single genetic strain  of M. fortuitum. Despite intense infection control efforts to recover the organism from environmental sources and subsequent molecular analysis of the isolates recovered, no environmental source was identified . In 1981, Preheim and colleagues (L. C. Preheim, M. J. Bittner, D. K. Giger, and W. E. Sanders Jr., Program Abstr. 22nd Intersci. Conf. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., abstr. 564, 1982) reported an outbreak in a Nebraska hospital that involved five patients who developed sternotomy infections following coronary bypass surgery. All had multiple debridements. One patient died (Preheim et al., 22nd ICAAC). Later analysis by plasmid profiles , multilocus enzyme electrophoresis (MEE), and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  showed the presence of two strains of M. fortuitum. Another outbreak in 1981 involving M. abscessus and M. fortuitum, was reported in a hospital in Corpus Christi, Tex. . Of 51 patients undergoing surgery over a 6-month period, 6 (11.3%) developed infections with one of these RGM. One patient with sternal wound infection due to M. fortuitum died as a result of complications from sternectomy and antimicrobial therapy. A subsequent study was performed in which culture media were inoculated with samples taken from environmental sites including the municipal water system, water from the cold water tap in the operating room, ice machines, swabs of lamps, oxygen tanks, suction apparatus, and commercial bone wax. Multiple sites were culture positive for M. fortuitum strains  which, by MEE and subsequent pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, were identical to the disease strains . This is the first and only cardiac surgery outbreak in which the piped-water system has been implicated as the source of the pathogenic RGM. In this case, the cardioplegia solution was cooled in ice made from tap water contaminated with the outbreak strains. The fourth and latest outbreak of M. fortuitum infection following cardiac surgery came from Hong Kong . Both M. fortuitum and M. peregrinum were implicated. The outbreak spanned the years 1987 to 1989, and 7 (33%) of 21 wound infections were due to M. fortuitum. (Details of the M. peregrinum strains are presented in the M. peregrinum section, below.) Subsequent ribotyping and susceptibility testing suggested that multiple strains were involved . No source for the prolonged Hong Kong outbreak was identified. Postinjection abscess disease. Most outbreaks of postinjection abscesses caused by RGM have involved M. abscessus. However, Nolan et al.  reported an outbreak of M. fortuitum in five (83%) of six patients undergoing electromyography at a facility in Washington state. The outbreak was traced to a break in a manual procedure used for sterilizing the reusable needle electrodes. When subsequent sterilizations were performed using an autoclave, no further cases were reported . Plastic surgery-related disease. No large outbreaks of wound infection following plastic surgery due to M. fortuitum have been reported, but sporadic wound infections following plastic surgery have been well documented . Many of these infections, involving M. fortuitum, occurred after augmentation mammaplasty . A study by Wallace et al.  identified 37 cases of surgical wound infection with RGM following augmentation mammaplasty. Of these isolates, 26 (70%) were identified as M. fortuitum. Several surgeons had more than one case, suggesting that local environmental factors were important to disease development. Six cases of M. fortuitum disease associated with spontaneous breast abscesses with no history of surgery or trauma were also reported. Pseudo-outbreaks. One pseudo-outbreak involving M. fortuitum occurred in 1987 in Houston, Tex., and involved ice contaminated with M. fortuitum. Although M. fortuitum was recovered from specimens from four patients who underwent bone marrow aspiration, none of the patients had evidence of disease due to M. fortuitum. It was later noted that each of the patients whose aspirates yielded M. fortuitum on culture also had viral cultures performed, and this required that the syringe containing the aspirate be plunged into ice for transport. Samples taken from the ice machine located on the same floor as the patients with positive aspirate samples were also positive for M. fortuitum. Samples from ice machines on other floors did not grow M. fortuitum . No molecular typing was performed.  (ii) Unnamed third biovariant complex including M. septicum, M. mageritense, M. houstonense (proposed), and M. bonickei (proposed). | Pattyn et al.  published one of the earliest studies of the unnamed third biovariant complex approximately 30 years ago. The authors commented that most of the isolates they studied were environmental strains and none had a definite disease association. (a) Community-acquired disease. In 1991, Wallace et al. , characterized 85 clinical isolates of unnamed M. fortuitum third biovariant complex, all of which were disease associated. These represented 16% of 410 isolates of the M. fortuitum group submitted to a Texas laboratory and 22% of 45 isolates submitted to the Queensland, Australia, state laboratory. Over 75% of the infections involved skin, soft tissue, or bone. Clinical histories were available for 52 patients with skin and soft tissue infections, and the type of injury responsible for infection was reported for 42 patients. Of these 42 patients, 29% had osteomyelitis confirmed by bone biopsy. Most infections occurred following puncture wounds or compound (open) fractures. Only two patients (children) had no history of trauma leading to their infection. Metal puncture wounds (48%) or motor vehicle accidents (26%) were the most common histories given, and approximately 40% of the injuries involved the foot or leg. Stepping on a nail was the classic scenario . No cases of disseminated disease were observed in this study, and, to date, none have been reported by other authors. This study also identified 26 isolates of the third biovariant complex from pulmonary sources. Clinical significance was not determined, but almost certainly some of these were disease producing. None of these isolates were studied by molecular methods that would identify them as one of the recently described species within the complex (i.e., M. houstonense [proposed], M. bonickei [proposed], M. septicum, or M. mageritense) (190; Schinsky et al., submitted). (b) Health care-associated disease. A small number of cases have been reported in association with hospital-acquired disease in other studies, including wound infections following cardiac surgery  and augmentation mammaplasty . (c) Geography. The original description by Pattyn et al.  of this group was based on isolates from Europe and Africa. Later in 1983, Levy-Frebault et al. characterized 23 additional isolates of M. fortuitum from France and found 6 environmental isolates that were identified subsequently as M. fortuitum unnamed third biovariant complex . A later study by Wallace et al. included 10 isolates from Australia. The remaining 70 isolates were from the United States, of which approximately 70% were from Texas, 6% were from Florida, and 5% were from Alabama and Georgia . Four percent or less of the third biovariant isolates identified in this study were from other states including Tennessee, Louisiana, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Arkansas, and Connecticut (our unpublished data).  (iii) M. peregrinum. | Currently, there is no published series or review evaluating the clinical significance of M. peregrinum. No case of disseminated infection due to M. peregrinum has been reported. However, a small number of cases of sporadic infections have been reported and have been associated with diseases similar to other members of the M. fortuitum group. These include chronic lung disease , sternal wound infections , and cutaneous disease . In general, they represent only 1 to 2% of sporadic community-acquired or health care-associated infections due to RGM. M. peregrinum has been reported as a cause of a pseudo-outbreak of respiratory disease due to a contaminated ice machine  and as the etiologic agent of 67% of cases in an outbreak of sternal wound infections from Hong Kong that occurred from 1987 to 1989 .  (iv) M. mucogenicum. | M. mucogenicum , formerly MCLO, was originally discovered in two outbreaks of peritonitis in 1976 and 1978, in 5 (18%) of 22 and 5 (63%) of 8 patients, respectively, undergoing intermittent chronic peritoneal dialysis . Infections were traced to the use of contaminated automated chronic peritoneal dialysis machines in two dialysis centers. Seven sporadic cases of peritonitis due to M. mucogenicum from the same two centers were also diagnosed. The investigators' findings  suggested that ineffective disinfection of the equipment followed by colonization of the machines by this newly described species was responsible for the outbreaks. Three studies showed that M. mucogenicum, like other pathogenic species of RGM, is relatively resistant to formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde disinfectants, which are typically used to disinfect dialysis equipment . In 1985, Bolan et al.  described a mycobacterial disease outbreak in a hemodialysis center in Louisiana. Of 26 identified isolates, 25 were M. abscessus and 1 was M. mucogenicum. The single factor common to all patients was their exposure to hemodialyzers (artificial kidneys) that had been ineffectively treated with concentrations of disinfectant (formaldehyde) that were below effective levels for these RGM species . Although M. mucogenicum is often recovered as a laboratory contaminant, these three outbreaks alert us to the potential significance of this waterborne organism. In 1993, Wallace et al.  evaluated 87 sporadic isolates of M. mucogenicum. Of these isolates, 54 (62%) were respiratory, and only 2 (4%) of them (both from patients with AIDS) were clinically significant. For the remaining 33 nonrespiratory isolates, significant clinical diseases included posttraumatic wound infections and catheter-related sepsis. Recovery of M. mucogenicum from skin, wound, or blood cultures was most often associated with c