The Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus Repressor Binding Site Represses Expression in Murine and Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells
The Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV) repressor binding site (RBS) is a major determinant of restricted expression of MLV in undifferentiated mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) lines. We show here that the RBS repressed expression when placed outside of its normal MLV genome context in a self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vector. In the lentiviral vector genome context, the RBS repressed expression of a modified MLV long terminal repeat (MNDU3) promoter, a simian virus 40 promoter, and three cellular promoters: ubiquitin C, mPGK, and hEF-1a. In addition to repressing expression in undifferentiated ES and EC cell lines, we show that the RBS substantially repressed expression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, primary mouse bone marrow stromal cells, whole mouse bone marrow and its differentiated progeny after bone marrow transplant, and several mouse hematopoietic cell lines. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we show that binding factor A, the trans-acting factor proposed to convey repression by its interaction with the RBS, is present in the nuclear extracts of all mouse cells we analyzed where expression was repressed by the RBS. In addition, we show that the RBS partially repressed expression in the human hematopoietic cell line DU.528 and primary human CD34+ CD38- hematopoietic cells isolated from umbilical cord blood. These findings suggest that retroviral vectors carrying the RBS are subjected to high rates of repression in murine and human cells and that MLV vectors with primer binding site substitutions that remove the RBS may yield more-effective gene expression.

Retroviral vectors based upon the Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV) have been used widely due to their high efficiency of stable gene transfer. Transcription from the MLV long terminal repeat (LTR) is severely repressed in mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells  and mouse embryonal stem (ES) cells . Characteristics of MLV that have been shown to mediate poor expression in undifferentiated ES and EC cell lines include the inadequate function of the enhancer in the 5'LTR due to the lack of transcriptional activator binding sites , the negative control region (NCR) located in the U3 region of the LTR , and the repressor binding site (RBS) . The RBS is an 18-bp DNA element located downstream of the 5'LTR which directly overlaps the MLV primer binding site (PBS) by 17 of its 18 bp . The MLV PBS functions by binding a proline tRNA molecule that primes reverse transcription. The existence of the overlapping RBS was first determined due to a spontaneously occurring single-base G-to-A mutation that occurred within the PBS sequence that allowed expression by MLV in F9 EC cells . This single base mutation was called the B2 mutation . Like the MLV PBS, the B2 PBS binds to a proline tRNA molecule, but with a single base-pair mismatch . Several other mutations that have been made within the MLV PBS have also been shown to relieve the repression conveyed by the RBS element . Due to the requirement that vectors derived from MLV must contain a functional PBS to initiate reverse transcription, the overlapping RBS sequence cannot be removed simply by removing the MLV PBS. In order to eliminate this repressive element and still have a functional vector, several groups have replaced the MLV PBS with the PBS from dl587rev, a recombinant between MLV and an endogenous mouse retrovirus . The dl587rev PBS sequence contains the B2 mutation plus five additional base pairs different from the MLV PBS and is a perfect match for the glutamine tRNA . The RBS has been shown to repress transcription from the MLV LTR within the context of an MLV genome when located away from its normal position, in either orientation, upstream of the MLV transcription start site  or when positioned downstream within an intron . In addition to repressing transcription from the MLV LTR, the RBS was shown to substantially repress transcription from two internal heterologous viral promoters, simian virus 40 (SV40) and adenovirus major late promoter, which were inserted downstream of the RBS into an MLV vector with an enhancerless LTR . The mechanism by which the RBS represses transcription is not known. The RBS is thought to function by interacting with an unknown trans-acting factor. In support of this hypothesis, the repressive activity of the RBS was demonstrated to be saturable by transfection of increasing amounts of DNA containing the RBS sequence, suggesting that the repressive activity is mediated by a trans-acting factor or factors . With an exonuclease III protection assay, a factor from PC13 EC cell extracts was shown to bind a MLV PBS probe, but not a B2 PBS probe . Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), a predominantly nuclear protein in F9 EC cell nuclear extracts was identified that bound to an MLV PBS probe, but not a B2 PBS probe . Several studies have described the repressive activity of the RBS to be stem cell specific , because it has been shown to have repressive activity in several murine EC cell lines (F9, PC13, and PCC4) and D3 ES cells, but not in 3T3 embryonic fibroblasts. Retroviral vectors with multiple modifications, including the dl587rev PBS, have been demonstrated to be superior to vectors containing only MLV components , but the specific role of the PBS change has not been analyzed. We evaluated whether the RBS alone was sufficient to cause repression by incorporating this element into a lentiviral vector derived from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). We also wanted to determine if the repressive activity mediated by the RBS present in ES and EC cell lines was also present in murine hematopoietic stem cells and more differentiated cells and if the repressive activity mediated by the RBS was present in human cells. Because some of these cell types are inefficiently transduced by MLV-based retroviral vectors, we used a series of HIV-1-based lentiviral vectors into which the MLV, B2, or the dl587 PBS sequences were inserted downstream from various internal promoters. We observed that the PBS sequences acted in the context of the lentiviral vector genome as they do within the MLV vector genome context in that the MLV PBS sequence, containing the overlapping RBS, repressed expression from several internal promoters, while the B2 and dl587 PBS sequences did not. Repression specific to the RBS was also documented in a variety of murine and human cells, including hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Cell culture. | The following cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured according to their recommendations: K562 (ATCC CCL-243), U937 (ATCC CRL-1593.2), PA-1 (ATCC CRL-1572), Tera-2 (ATCC HTB-106), NCCIT (ATCC CRL-2073), 70Z/3 (ATCC TIB-158), STO-SNL/2 (ATCC CRL-2225), ES-D3 (ATCC CRL-1934), Jurkat (ATCC TIB-152), KG1a (ATCC CCL-246.1), AMJ2-C11 (ATCC CRL-2456), F9 EC (ATCC CRL-1720), NIH/3T3 (ATCC CRL-1658), and CCRF-CEM (ATCC CCL-119). DU.528  were obtained from Joanne Kurtzberg (Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N.C.) and cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10% horse serum (HS), 2 mM l-glutamine, 0.1 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 U of penicillin/ml, and 100 mug of streptomycin/ml. BM185 cells have been previously described  and were cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 5% FBS, 0.01 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.), 100 U of penicillin/ml, and 100 mug of streptomycin/ml. WTc.F cells (ES cells derived from C57Bl/6 mice) , a gift of Andrew Kung (Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass.), were cultured on irradiated STO-SNL/2 feeder layers in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 15% FBS, 4 mM l-glutamine, 0.1 mM nonessential amino acids, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 100 U of penicillin/ml, and 100 mug of streptomycin/ml. FDCP-Mix cl.A4 was obtained from Lez Fairbairn (Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester, United Kingdom) and cultured in Iscove's modification of Dulbecco's medium (IMDM) supplemented with 20% HS and 10 ng of murine interleukin-3 (IL-3; Biosource International, Camarillo, Calif.)/ml. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were isolated by trypsinization of embryos dissected at 13.5 days of gestation from outbred CF-1 mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, Mass.). Each embryo was harvested separately, the brain and internal organs were removed, and the carcasses were minced and incubated in 0.05% trypsin for 30 to 45 min at 37C. Single-cell suspensions obtained after trypsinization were plated in 10-cm dishes in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U of penicillin/ml, 100 mug of streptomycin/ml, and 2 mM l-glutamine. Experiments with MEFs were performed on early passages (less than five). Mouse bone marrow (BM) cells were isolated by flushing bone marrow from adult mouse femurs with a 27[1/2]-gauge needle. Bone marrow stromal cell populations were isolated by breaking the femurs into small pieces and culturing them with isolated marrow cells. Cells were allowed to adhere to tissue culture plates for 4 to 6 days in IMDM containing 20% HS, 20% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 U of penicillin/ml, 100 mug of streptomycin/ml, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 6 muM hydrocortisone. Adherent cells were rinsed 5 to 7 times with phosphate-buffered saline (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, Calif.) every day for 10 to 15 days to remove nonadherent cells. Adherent cells were allowed to expand to confluency for an additional 2 to 3 weeks. Remaining CD45+ hematopoietic cells were removed with a magnetic column after staining with rat anti-mouse CD45 antibody and magnetic bead-conjugated goat anti-rat immunoglobulin G. CD45- cells were placed back into culture and later verified to be CD45- by flow cytometry. CD34+ cells were isolated from human umbilical cord blood obtained from normal deliveries, using Miltenyi MiniMACS magnetic separation columns (Miltenyi Biotech, Sunnyvale, Calif.) after Ficoll-Hypaque (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, N.J.) density gradient centrifugation. Use of these cord blood samples was approved by the Committee on Clinical Investigations at Childrens Hospital, Los Angeles, Calif. To isolate CD34+ CD38- cells, CD34+ cells were washed in phosphate-buffered saline and incubated for 30 min at 4C in fluorescein isothiocyanate-CD34 (HPCA2; Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems, San Jose, Calif.) and phycoerythrin-CD38 (leu 17; Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems). CD34+ CD38- cells were then isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), using the gating previously described , on a FACSVantage flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems) and using LysysII software (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems).  Vector construction. | The pL-eGFP-SN vector was constructed by inserting a BglII-NotI fragment containing the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) gene (Clontech Laboratories, Palo Alto, Calif.) into the HpaI site of pL-X-SN as previously described . Modifications made to pL-eGFP-SN to generate pLD-eGFP-SN, pM-eGFP-SN, pMD-eGFP-SN, and pMND-eGFP-SN were described previously . Self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vectors containing the U3 region of the MND LTR (MNDU3; the U3 region from the myeloproliferative sarcoma virus [MPSV] LTR with the NCR removed)  as an internal promoter with each of the PBS sequences were constructed as follows. pCCL-hCMV-eGFP  (kindly provided by Luigi Naldini, Cell Genesys, Foster City, Calif.) was digested with ClaI and SalI to remove a fragment containing hCMV-eGFP to generate pCCL-X. pMND-Neo  was digested with ClaI and Asc1 to isolate a fragment containing the MNDU3 promoter. The MNDU3 enhancer-promoter fragment was blunted and ligated into the EcoR5 site of pIC-20H to generate pMNDU3-20H. pMNDU3-20H was digested with BamHI and BglII to isolate a fragment containing the MNDU3 enhancer-promoter. The MNDU3 enhancer-promoter fragment was inserted into the BamHI site of pCCL-X to generate pCCL-MNDU3-X. pMND-eGFP-SN was digested with XhoI to release a fragment containing eGFP. The eGFP fragment was ligated into the XhoI site of pCCL-MNDU3-X to generate pCCL-MNDU3-eGFP. The MLV PBS was inserted into the SalI site downstream of the MNDU3 promoter using 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides which anneal to create the PBS (underlined) flanked by SalI sites and a unique MluI site used to verify insertion: 5'-TCGACACGCGTGGGGGCTCGTCCGGGATCGGGAGACCCCG-3' and 5'-TCGACGGGGGCTCCCGATCCCGGACGAGCCCCCACGCGTG-3'. The B2 PBS was inserted into the SalI site downstream of the MNDU3 promoter using 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides which anneal to create the PBS flanked by SalI sites and a unique MluI site used to verify insertion: 5'-TCGACACGCGTGGGGGCTCGTCCGAGATCGGGAGACCCCG-3' and 5'-TCGACGGGGGCTCCCGATCTCGGACGAGCCCCCACGCGTG-3'. The dl587 PBS was inserted into the SalI site downstream of the MNDU3 promoter using the following 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides which anneal to create the PBS flanked by SalI sites and a unique MluI site used to verify insertion: 5'-TCGACACGCGTGGAGGTTCCACCGAGATTTGGAGACCCCG-3' and 5'-TCGACGGGGTCTCCAAATCTCGGTGGAACCTCCACGCGTG-3'. SIN lentiviral vectors containing different internal promoters were constructed using pCCL-hCMV-eGFP. The human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) internal promoter in this vector was removed with ClaI and BamHI and replaced with the human elongation factor 1a (hEF-1a) promoter, which was acquired from pV4.1e-hF.IX (kindly provided by Hiroyuki Nakai, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.) by PCR with Pfu Turbo polymerase (Stratagene, La Jolla, Calif.) using the primers 5'-GAAGATCGATCGTGAGGCTCCGGTG-3' and 5'-GGTAGGATCCACGACACCTGAAATG-3', followed by digestion with ClaI and BamHI. To replace the hCMV promoter in pCCL-hCMV-eGFP with the human ubiquitin C (hUbiqC) promoter, the plasmid was first digested with ClaI, blunt ended with Pfu Turbo polymerase, and then digested with BamHI. The hUbiqC promoter fragment was prepared from pFUGW (kindly provided by Carlos Lois, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Calif.) by digesting with PacI, then blunt ending with T4 polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif.), followed by digestion with BamHI. To replace the hCMV promoter in pCCL-hCMV-eGFP with the mouse phosphoglycerate kinase (mPGK) promoter, the hCMV promoter was removed by digestion with ClaI and AgeI, and an oligonucleotide containing restriction sites ClaI-EcoRV-BamHI-AgeI was inserted. The mPGK promoter was excised from pic20H-mPGK with HincII and BglII and inserted into EcoR5 and BamHI. To replace the hCMV promoter in pCCL-hCMV-eGFP with the SV40 promoter, the hCMV-eGFP cassette was removed by digestion with ClaI and SalI and an oligonucleotide containing restriction sites ClaI-XhoI-EcoRV-BamHI-SmaI-SalI was inserted. An eGFP fragment was excised from pMND-eGFP-SN with BamHI and inserted into this multicloning site. The SV40 promoter was excised from pL-X-SN with XhoI and StuI and inserted into this multicloning site after digestion with XhoI and EcoRV. The MLV PBS was inserted into a BamHI site downstream of the hEF-1a and hUbiqC promoters and upstream of the mPGK promoter using 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides that anneal to create the PBS flanked by BamHI sites and a unique NheI site used to verify insertion: 5'-GATCCGCTAGCGGGGGCTCGTCCGGGATCGGGAGACG-3' and 5'-GATCCGTCTCCCGATCCCGGACGAGCCCCCGCTAGCG-3'. The MLV PBS was inserted into an XhoI site upstream of the SV40 promoter using 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides that anneal to create the PBS flanked by XhoI sites and a unique NheI site used to verify insertion: 5'-TCGAGGCTAGCGGGGGCTCGTCCGGGATCGGGAGAC-3' and 5'-TCGAGTCTCCCGATCCCGGACGAGCCCCCGCTAGCC-3'. The MLV PBS was inserted into an AgeI site downstream of the SV40 promoter using 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides that anneal to create the PBS flanked by AgeI sites and a unique NheI site used to verify insertion: 5'-CCGGTGCTAGCGGGGGCTCGTCCGGGATCGGGAGAA-3' and 5'-CCGGTTCTCCCGATCCCGGACGAGCCCCCGCTAGCA-3'.  Vector supernatant production. | MLV vector supernatants were generated by a stably transduced GP+E-86 packaging cell line . Cells were plated close to confluency in T75 flasks, grown at 37C for 48 h in 10 ml of DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U of penicillin/ml, 100 mug of streptomycin/ml, 2 mM l-glutamine. Vector supernatants were filtered through a 0.45-mum filter and frozen at -80C until used. Vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein-pseudotyped lentiviral vector supernatants were generated by transient transfection of 293T cells (ATCC CRL-1268) as previously described  using 10 mug of vector plasmid, 10 mug of pRDelta8.9 packaging plasmid , and 2 mug of pMD.G(VSV) envelope plasmid . Twelve hours after transfection, cells were treated with 10 mM sodium butyrate (Sigma Scientific, Inc., Brighton, Mich.) for 12 h as previously described . After 12 h of exposure to sodium butyrate, the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline and refed with fresh medium. Thereafter, supernatants were collected every 12 h for 3 to 5 days, filtered through a 0.2-mum filter flask (Nalgene, Rochester, N.Y.), and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 50,000 x g for 140 min as previously described . Pellets were resuspended in serum-free DMEM and stored at -80C until used.  Vector supernatant titer determination. | Vector supernatant titers were determined by endpoint dilution. 293 cells (ATCC CRL-1573) were seeded at 105 cells/well in six-well cell culture plates (Corning Inc., Miami, Fla.) in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U of penicillin/ml, 100 mug of streptomycin/ml, 2 mM l-glutamine and placed in a 37C incubator for 12 h. Cells were then transduced with 1-ml serial dilutions (i.e., 10-1, 10-2, 10-3) of vector supernatant and analyzed by flow cytometry for eGFP expression 48 h later. Titers were calculated by multiplying the number of cells at the time of vector supernatant addition by the percentage of eGFP-positive cells determined by flow cytometry divided by 100, multiplied by the dilution factor to yield the number of infectious units (IU) per milliliter. Titers ranged between 0.5 x 106 and 10 x 106 IU/ml before ultracentrifugation and 0.5 x 108 and 5 x 108 IU/ml after ultracentrifugation.  Lentiviral vector transductions. | Target cells that were transduced to determine whether they possessed RBS-mediated repressive activity were transduced in parallel and under the same conditions as F9 EC and 293 cells in order to control for small differences in vector titer that could contribute to differences in transduction efficiency. Most cell types were transduced for 12 h using a final vector concentration of 1 x 106 to 2 x 106 IU/ml and a multiplicity of infection of 5 to 10 in their normal growth medium. CD34+, CD34+ CD38-, and primary mouse BM cells required higher concentrations of vector for efficient transduction and were transduced with a final vector concentration of 5 x 107 to 10 x 107 IU/ml  plus Polybrene at 8 mug/ml. After transduction, cells were passaged in culture for 6 to 10 days and then analyzed by flow cytometry for eGFP expression.  PCR for relative copy number. | Genomic DNA was isolated using a DNeasy tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, Calif.) for use as template in a semiquantitative PCR to determine the relative vector copy number in transduced cells. To generate the standard curve, we used a GP+E-86 cell clone containing five copies of the MND-eGFP-SN vector, as previously described . The standard curve was generated using dilutions representing 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.13, 0.06, and 0.03 copies/cell. DNA of the five-copy clone was mixed with DNA of nontransduced GP+E-86 cells, so that the total input template DNA was maintained constant. Template DNA was diluted to 100 ng in 44 mul of double-distilled (ddH2O) in a PCR tube. Three microliters of this solution, containing 7 ng of template DNA, was removed and placed into a second tube, leaving 41 mul containing 93 ng of template DNA in the first tube. Master mix solutions were then added to make a final volume of 50 mul containing 2.5 U of Pfu Turbo polymerase, 1x Pfu PCR buffer (Stratagene), each primer at a 0.2 muM concentration, and each deoxynucleoside triphosphate at a 0.2 mM concentration. The tube containing 93 ng of template DNA was used for eGFP PCR, and the tube containing 7 ng of template DNA was used for beta-actin PCR to control for varying input template content. eGFP primer sequences used were sense, 5'-ATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGCTG-3', and antisense, 5'-GCCGTCGTCCTTGAAGAAGATGGTG-3', yielding a product of 314 bp. beta-Actin primer sequences used were sense, 5'-GTACCACAGGCATTGTGATG-3', and antisense, 5'-GCAACATAGCACAGCTTCTC-3', yielding a product of 219 bp, as previously described . Reactions were performed on a Perkin-Elmer GeneAmp 9600 PCR system. Both the eGFP and beta-actin PCRs were conducted for 28 cycles with denaturation at 94C for 30 s, annealing at 65C for 1 min, and extension at 72C for 1 min. Reaction products were separated by electrophoresis on 0.8% agarose-EtBr gels and visualized using an Eagle Eye charge-coupled device camera (Stratagene).  Nuclear extracts and EMSAs. | Nuclear extracts were prepared essentially as described elsewhere . Nuclear extracts were prepared without dialysis against modified Dignam buffer D and were left in Dignam buffer C (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 25% [vol/vol] glycerol, 0.3 M NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol) as previously described . EMSAs were performed using previously described binding conditions . Probes were prepared by annealing complementary single-stranded oligonucleotides and then end labeling with [gamma-32P]ATP (Amersham Biosciences) using T4 polynucleotide kinase (Invitrogen). Extended 28-bp PBS probes were used due to reported increased binding in EMSA compared to the 18-bp core PBS sequence (underlined below) . Oligonucleotide probes were as follows: MLV PBS, 5'-GGGGGCTCGTCCGGGATCGGGAGACCCC-3'; B2 PBS, 5'-GGGGGCTCGTCCGAGATCGGGAGACCCC-3'; dl587 PBS, 5'-GGAGGTTCCACCGAGATTTGGAGACCCC-3' (only one strand for each is shown). Radioactively labeled double-stranded DNA oligonucleotides were purified using G-25 columns (Amersham Biosciences) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Radioactive labeling ranged from 200,000 to 400,000 cpm/ng. Each binding reaction was performed with 5 to 15 mul of nuclear extract in a total volume of 30 mul of Thornell binding buffer (25 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 1 mM EDTA, 10% [vol/vol] glycerol, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) containing 25 ng of poly(dI-dC)/ml, 5 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, and 0.1 mM ZnCl2, as previously described . Prior to the addition of probe, binding reaction mixtures were preincubated at 30C for 20 min, and then 0.5 ng of double-stranded radioactively labeled probe was added in a 1-mul volume and reactions were incubated for an additional 20 min at 30C. Binding reactions were run on a 6% native acrylamide gel. The gel was loaded at room temperature, run for 20 min at 130 V, and then transferred to 4C and run at 175 V for approximately 4 h in Tris-glycine buffer (5 mM Tris [pH 8.5], 38 mM glycine, 0.2 mM EDTA). After electrophoresis, gels were dried and opposed to film for 1 to 4 days at -80C with intensifying screens.  Mouse bone marrow harvest, transduction, and transplantation. | Mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Maine) and maintained at the Childrens Hospital Los Angeles Central Animal Facility. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. Donor marrow was harvested from 8- to 12-week-old male B6/SJL mice 2 days after 5-fluorouracil intravenous injection (150 mg/kg of body weight; American Pharmaceutical Partners, Los Angeles, Calif.). The marrow was cultured at a density of 2 x 106 cells/ml in IMDM supplemented with 20% FBS, 10 ng of murine IL-3 (Biosource International)/ml, 2.5 ng of murine stem cell factor (Biosource International)/ml, 50 ng of human IL-6 (Biosource International)/ml, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 U of penicillin/ml, 100 mug of streptomycin/ml, and 0.01 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Harvested cells were prestimulated in cytokine-containing medium for 12 h prior to transduction. Lentiviral supernatant was added to a final concentration of 2 x 107 IU/ml. Polybrene was added to a final concentration of 6 mug/ml. Recipient 8- to 12-week-old female C57Bl/6 mice were exposed to two doses of 600 cGy of gamma irradiation (128 cGy/min from a cesium-137 source) on two consecutive days (total of 1,200 cGy). One to two hours following the second dose of radiation, 2 x 106 to 4 x 106 transduced donor BM cells were injected into the tail vein of each recipient in 200 mul of phosphate-buffered saline containing 50 U of heparin/ml. Antibiotics were added to the drinking water for 3 weeks posttransplantation (200 mug of Maxim-200/ml; Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, St. Joseph, Mo.). The donor-recipient pairs were congenic at the CD45 locus, with donors expressing CD45.1 and recipients expressing CD45.2 isoforms of CD45, which are easily distinguishable by flow cytometry using commercially available antibodies (BD Biosciences, Palo Alto, Calif.).
Modifications made to the MLV vector increase its frequency of expression in F9 EC cells. | We made a series of retroviral vectors containing from one to three modifications to the MLV vector  to remove cis-acting elements reported to restrict expression of MLV in F9 EC cells. Figure  shows the arrangement of elements contained in the full-length MLV vector constructs (not drawn to scale). The vector expresses eGFP from the 5'LTR and neomycin resistance (Neor) from an internal SV40 promoter. Figure  shows the contribution each of the three modifications, both alone and in combination, made to the frequency of expression in F9 EC cells. To control for differences in titer between vector supernatants, 3T3 cells, which are permissive for MLV expression, were transduced in parallel and under the same conditions as F9 EC cells. Values are expressed as the percentage of eGFP-positive F9 EC cells relative to the percentage of eGFP-positive 3T3 cells 7 days after transduction. Figure  shows that the unmodified MLV vector, L, expresses rarely in F9 EC cells. Replacing the MLV PBS with the dl587 PBS in vector LD, thereby removing the RBS, alleviates repression in a substantial fraction of F9 EC cells. Replacing the MLV U3 with the MPSV U3 alone in vector M, while leaving the MLV PBS and therefore the RBS in place, alleviates very little repression in F9 EC cells. MPSV is a variant of the Moloney sarcoma virus that had greater expression in myeloid cells , and the MPSV LTR was isolated and shown to express better than the MLV LTR in EC cells . Among the seven single-base differences between the MLV and the MPSV enhancer repeats, one of these single-base differences has been shown to introduce a functional Sp1 transcription factor binding site in the MPSV enhancer repeat that is not present in the MLV enhancer repeat. This Sp1 site accounts for much of the increase in activity of this enhancer in F9 EC cells . Replacing the MLV U3 with the MPSV U3 and replacing the MLV PBS with the dl587 PBS in combination in vector MD, thereby removing the RBS, alleviates repression in a substantial fraction of F9 EC. Removing the NCR from the U3 of MD to make the triply modified vector MND further alleviates repression in F9 EC cells. In each case where the MLV PBS, and therefore the RBS, is present expression is nearly completely repressed. Figure  shows the contribution that each of these three modifications made to expression in F9 EC cells after selection in G418 for expression of Neor from a downstream internal SV40 promoter. Each of these F9 EC pools was selected with 0.75 mug of G418/ml for 10 days from a pool of cells that was transduced with a dilution of vector supernatant that transduced 3T3 cells in parallel to <10% eGFP positivity, so that most cells within these pools should contain only a single copy of the vector. In 0.75 mug of G418/ml, all nontransduced F9 EC cells in control wells were dead within 7 days. Following G418 selection, the cells were passaged in culture for an additional 2 weeks before analysis of eGFP expression by flow cytometry. Figure  demonstrates the same pattern of increased expression of eGFP from the modified vectors as in unselected F9 EC cells. Again, in each case, removing the RBS by replacing the MLV PBS with the dl587 PBS made the largest contribution to increased expression, while changing the enhancer or deleting the NCR made only more modest improvements. Vectors containing the MLV PBS, and therefore the RBS (L and M), expressed in less than 5% of the G418-selected F9 cells, whereas the vectors lacking the RBS (LD, MD, and MND) expressed in 80 to 90% of selected cells.  The RBS repressed expression from an internal MNDU3 promoter in a SIN lentiviral vector. | To determine if the RBS was capable of repressing expression outside of its normal retroviral genome context, a series of SIN lentiviral vectors were constructed having an internal MNDU3 promoter driving eGFP expression with one of the three PBS sequences under investigation inserted between the promoter and the eGFP transgene . SIN lentiviral vectors do not efficiently express transcript from their own LTR after reverse transcription, and thus eGFP expression reflects the activity of the internal promoter . Each vector supernatant in this series was produced and the titer was determined simultaneously on 293 cells. Based on these titer values, F9 EC and 293 cells were transduced in parallel using identical conditions. After 6 to 10 days the cells were harvested and analyzed for eGFP expression by flow cytometry. Flow cytometric analyses from a typical experiment are shown in Fig. . The averages of 15 experiments are plotted in Fig. . In 293 cells, all four vectors were expressed at the same frequency. In contrast, the lentiviral vector containing the MLV PBS shows essentially no expression in the F9 EC cells, whereas the other vectors, with no PBS or with the B2 or dl587 PBS, all expressed at similar frequencies. An alternative explanation for the results shown in Fig.  is that the vector containing the MLV PBS was not transferred or integrated at the same frequency as the other vectors in the series. To rule out this possibility, we performed semiquantitative PCR on genomic DNA from transduced 293 and F9 EC cells. Figure  shows that the vector containing the MLV PBS was transferred at a similar relative frequency as the vectors containing the B2 and dl587 PBS and the vector containing no PBS. Thus, the difference in expression by the vector carrying the MLV PBS is not due to poor gene transfer and therefore reflects repression of expression.  The RBS repressed expression from internal SV40, hUbiqC, hEF-1alpha, and mPGK promoters. | Previous studies have demonstrated that within the context of the retroviral genome, the RBS was able to repress transcription from two downstream internal heterologous viral promoters, SV40 and AdMLP . To determine whether the RBS also repressed transcription from cellular promoters, we constructed SIN lentiviral vectors analogous to the vector series introduced in Fig. , but having either the SV40, hUbiqC, mPGK, or hEF-1a promoter driving eGFP expression, with and without the MLV PBS sequence inserted either immediately upstream or immediately downstream of the promoter. F9 EC cells and 293 cells were transduced in parallel with the various vector constructs using identical conditions. Cells were passaged in culture for 6 to 10 days and then analyzed for eGFP expression by flow cytometry. Figure  shows the average results from two separate experiments. The data are presented as the percentage of eGFP-positive F9 EC cells normalized to the percentage of eGFP-positive 293 cells in the same vector arm, relative to the F9 EC/293 transduction ratio achieved by vector with no MLV PBS multiplied by 100. Figure  shows that the SV40 promoter and the three cellular promoters examined were substantially repressed by the RBS, although to varying degrees. The SV40 promoter was repressed greater than 90% whether the MLV PBS was placed upstream or downstream of the promoter. The hUbiqC promoter was repressed greater than 60%, the hEF-1a promoter was repressed greater than 75%, and the mPGK promoter was repressed greater than 80%. In comparison, the MN