Existence of Transdominant and Potentiating Mutants of UL9, the Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 Origin-Binding Protein, Suggests that Levels of UL9 Protein May Be Regulated during Infection
UL9 is a multifunctional protein required for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) replication in vivo. UL9 is a member of the superfamily II helicases and exhibits helicase and origin-binding activities. We have previously shown that mutations in the conserved helicase motifs of UL9 can have either a transdominant or potentiating effect on the plaque-forming ability of infectious DNA from wild-type virus (A. J. Malik and S. K. Weller, J. Virol. 70:7859-7866, 1996). In this paper, the mechanisms of transdominance and potentiation are explored. We show that the motif V mutant protein containing a G to A substitution at residue 354 is unstable when expressed by transfection and is either processed to a 38-kDa N-terminal fragment or degraded completely. The overexpression of the MV mutant protein is able to influence the steady-state protein levels of wild-type UL9 and to override the inhibitory effects of wild-type UL9. Potentiation correlates with the ability of the UL9 variants containing the G354A mutation to be processed or degraded to the 38-kDa form. We propose that the MV mutant protein is able to interact with full-length UL9 and that this interaction results in a decrease in the steady-state levels of UL9, which in turn leads to enhanced viral infection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that inhibition of HSV-1 infection can be obtained by overexpression of full-length UL9, the C-terminal third of the protein containing the origin-binding domain, or the N-terminal two-thirds of UL9 containing the conserved helicase motifs and the putative dimerization domain. Our results suggest that transdominance can be mediated by overexpression, origin-binding activity, and dimerization, whereas potentiation is most likely caused by the ability of the UL9 MV mutant to influence the steady-state levels of wild-type UL9. Taken together, the results presented in this paper suggest that the regulation of steady-state levels of UL9 may play an important role in controlling viral infection.

The UL9 gene is required for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) replication in vivo . The UL9 protein is a dimer in solution and exhibits helicase, ATPase, and origin-binding activities . UL9 is believed to play a key role in the initiation of HSV-1 replication by binding the HSV-1 origin of replication via its C-terminal domain and unwinding it in the presence of ATP and ICP8, the HSV-1 single-stranded DNA binding protein. It is likely that UL9 plays an important role in the assembly of the viral replisome  through its interactions with other viral replication proteins . UL9 is a member of the superfamily II helicases . The conserved helicase motifs that are characteristic of this superfamily are positioned within the N-terminal domain of the protein . Genetic studies have previously shown that conserved residues within the helicase motifs are essential for HSV-1 replication in vivo; most engineered motif mutants fail to complement the growth of hr94, a UL9 null virus . Furthermore, biochemical analysis showed a correlation between the failure to complement hr94 and the lack of helicase activity , indicating that helicase activity is essential for UL9 function. Interestingly, a truncated form of UL9 originating from a unique transcript within the UL9 open reading frame designated UL8.5 or OBPC has been observed . OBPC encompasses the 480 C-terminal amino acids of UL9. It is able to bind the origin of replication and localizes to the nucleus, but its significance for the biology of the HSV-1 is not well understood. Several lines of evidence indicate that overexpression of UL9 can inhibit HSV-1 infection. We previously showed that cell lines containing a low copy number of the wild-type UL9 gene could efficiently complement hr94. whereas cell lines harboring a high copy number exhibited lower levels of complementation . In addition, cell lines harboring a high copy number of the UL9 gene were found to inhibit wild-type HSV-1 infection . Furthermore, the cotransfection of wild-type infectious DNA with an excess of plasmid encoding wild-type UL9 reduced the number of plaques observed compared to transfection of wild-type infectious DNA alone . The inhibitory effect of wild-type UL9 overexpression is mediated at least in part by the origin-specific DNA binding function of UL9, harbored in the C-terminal domain (UL9 CTD). In a plaque reduction assay, UL9 CTD severely reduces the efficiency of plaque formation  and is thus considered transdominant (dominant negative). The OB mutation which disrupts the origin-binding activity of UL9 reverses the inhibitory effect of wild-type UL9 as well as the transdominant effect of UL9 CTD . The inhibitory properties of the overexpressed wild-type UL9 are consistent with a model in which HSV-1 DNA replication occurs in two steps or stages . According to this model, early in infection HSV-1 replication initiates by a UL9-dependent process at one or more origins of replication (stage I). Later in infection, replication proceeds in an origin-independent manner (stage II). We have proposed that, if UL9 remains bound to the origin of replication late in infection, it may inhibit the transition between stage I and stage II . Consistent with this model, studies with temperature-sensitive UL9 mutants indicate that UL9 is essential for the early stages of HSV-1 replication and appears to be dispensable for the later ones . According to this scenario, we speculate that it may be necessary to downregulate the levels of UL9 protein during stage II in order for infection to proceed. The characterization of transdominant (dominant negative) mutants is a widely employed genetic approach to gain insight into protein function . Mutations in UL9 helicase motifs I, Ia, II, and VI were previously shown to be transdominant in a plaque reduction assay . UL9 mutant proteins bearing mutations in helicase motifs I, Ia, II, and VI are able to dimerize and bind the origin of replication but are defective for helicase activity . We proposed that the transdominance exhibited by these mutants is a result of inhibition of HSV-1 replication at stage I, due to lack of helicase activity, and inhibition of the transition between stage I and stage II, due to overexpression of protein capable of binding the origin, as proposed above for wild-type UL9. In contrast to the transdominant mutations in helicase motifs I, Ia, II, and VI, a mutation in motif V (G354A) was found to confer a potentiating phenotype. When cells were cotransfected with this mutant and wild-type infectious DNA, the plaque number increased compared to transfection with wild-type infectious DNA alone . Interestingly, no stable mutant protein could be detected in the transient transfection-Western blot assay . Intrigued by the ability of an apparently unstable protein to potentiate HSV-1 infection, we sought to further understand the mechanism of potentiation. In this paper, we show that the ability of the UL9 G234A (motif V) mutation to potentiate HSV-1 infection inversely correlates with protein stability. The overexpression of UL9-MV is able to reduce the steady-state wild-type UL9 protein levels and override its inhibitory effects. Furthermore, we report that a fragment consisting of the N-terminal 535 amino acids of UL9 is also transdominant. Based on the genetic and biochemical properties of UL9 helicase motif mutants, we propose a model for the mechanism of transdominance and potentiation.
Reagents and materials. | All restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs. The pFastBac vector was purchased from Gibco-BRL; the pCDNA-1 and pCDNA-3 vectors were from Invitrogen. Supplemented Grace's medium and penicillin-streptomycin were purchased from Gibco-BRL; fetal calf serum was from Gemini Bioproducts Inc.  Viruses and cells. | HSV-1 strain KOS was used as the wild-type virus in all assays. hr94, a UL9 lacZ insertion mutant, was described previously . Vero cells (American Type Culture Collection) and 2B-11, a Vero-derived cell line stably transfected with wild-type UL9 , were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium as described previously . Spodoptera frugiperda Sf21 insect cells were maintained in serum-free medium containing 0.1 mg of streptomycin per ml and 100 units of penicillin per ml. Escherichia coli DH5alpha cells were used for plasmid amplification. DH10Bac competent cells (Gibco-BRL) were used for bacmid packaging and propagation.  Antibodies. | Several anti-UL9 antibodies were used in this study: R250 (a kind gift from M. Challberg, National Institutes of Health) is a polyclonal antibody that recognizes the C-terminal 10 amino acids of UL9; 17B is a monoclonal antibody that recognizes the N-terminal 35 amino acids of UL9 ; and RH7 (a kind gift from D. Tenney, Bristol Meyers Squib) was raised against a glutathione S-transferase fusion with the UL9 C-terminal domain (residues 535 to 851). The polyclonal anti-UL6 antibody was described previously . Anti-AU1 tag antibody was purchased from Babco (Berkeley, Calif.), and polyclonal anti-ICP8 antibody was a kind gift from W. Ruyechan, State University of New York, Buffalo, N.Y. . Fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin and Texas red-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin antibodies were used as secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence analysis. Commercially available antitubulin antibody (Sigma) was used in Western blot analysis to monitor sample loading. Anti-His tag India probe (Pierce) was used to detect His-tagged UL9 fusions.  Plasmids. | The pFastBac transfer vectors were used to generate recombinant baculoviruses bearing the C-terminal 317 amino acids of UL9 (pFastBac-UL9-CT) and the N-terminal 535 amino acids of UL9 (pFastBac-UL9-NT). The BamHI- and EcoRI-digested PCR product containing the C terminus (UL9-CT) was inserted in the pFastBac plasmid to generate pFastBac-UL9-CT. The PCR product was amplified by stepdown PCR  with pFastBac-UL9-WT-expressing plasmid as a template and the following oligonucleotides: BamHI-UL9Delta1-534 (5'-GCCGAGGTGGATCCATGGATCCCGAGGCGTCGCTGCCGGCCCA-3') and 3'PCL-pFastBac (5'-GATTATGATCCTCTAGTACTTCTC-3'). The pFastBac-UL9-NT plasmid was generated by cloning a BamHI- and EcoRI-digested PCR product containing UL9-NT into the pFastBac plasmid. The UL9-NT PCR fragment was amplified by stepdown PCR with the pFastBac-UL9-WT plasmid as a template and the following oligonucleotides: UL9Delta535-851-EcoRI (5'-GCCGAGGTGAATTCTTACTACCGGCACCGCAGCTCCCGTAGATCG-3') and 5'PCL-pFastBac (5'-GATTATTCATACCGTCCCACCATC-3'). The pCDNA3-UL9-WT plasmid, expressing wild-type UL9 under the control of a cytomegalovirus promoter, was generated by inserting a BamHI-EcoRI fragment containing the wild-type UL9 gene from pFastBac-UL9-WT  into the pCDNA3 vector (Invitrogen). The pCDNA3-UL9-MI plasmid, carrying the K87A mutation in helicase motif I, was generated by inserting a BamHI-EcoRI fragment from pCDNA1-UL9-MI into the pCDNA3 vector. The pCDNA3-UL9-MV plasmid was generated by replacing the wild-type UL9 sequence in pCDNA3-UL9-WT with an AscI-EcoRI fragment containing the G354A mutation from p6UL9-MV . The pCDNA3-UL9-MI/MV double mutant was generated by subcloning an AscI-EcoRI fragment containing the G354A mutation from p6UL9-MV into pCDNA3-UL9-MI, replacing the corresponding wild-type fragment. pCDNA3-UL9 NTD and pCDNA-UL9-CTD were generated by inserting the BamHI-EcoRI fragment from pFastBac-UL9 NTD and pFastBac-UL9-CTD, respectively, into the pCDNA3 vector. The pCDNA3-UL9Delta322-851, pCDNA3-UL9Delta355-851-MV, and pCDNA3-UL9Delta450-851 plasmids were generated by inserting the AscI- and EcoRI-digested PCR fragments containing the corresponding truncations into pCDNA3-UL9-WT, replacing the wild-type fragment. All PCR fragments were generated by stepdown PCR with the pFastBac-UL9-WT plasmid as the template and OligoI (5'-GCGGAGTCGGGAGATCCTCTGGGG-3') as the upstream primer. The pCDNA3-UL9Delta450-851-MV truncation was generated with the same procedure except that the p6UL9-MV plasmid was used as a template in the PCR. The specific downstream oligonucleotides used to generate the above truncations were UL9Delta322-851 (5'-GCCGAGGTGAATTCTCATTAGTCCGTAAACTGACGGCAGAACCGGGCCAC-3'), UL9Delta355-851-MV (5'-GCCGAGGTGAATTCTCATTAGGCCACCGTTACGACCGTCGTGTATATAACCACGCG-3'), and UL9Delta450-851 (5'-GCCGAGGTGAATTCTCATTAGCATGCCGACGCGTCACAGCGCCCCTTGAACC-3'). The pUL9Eco plasmid, cont-aining UL9 under the control of its natural promoter, was generously provided by P. Schaffer (University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine). J. Nellissery kindly provided the pCDNA3-UL6 plasmid. The p6UL9-119b plasmid, containing the UL9 gene under the control of the ICP6 promoter, was described previously . The pCDNA3-UL9-NT-AU1 plasmid was generated by subcloning an AscI- and NotI-digested PCR product into pCDNA3-UL9-WT, replacing the corresponding wild-type fragment. The PCR product was generated by stepdown PCR with the pFastBac-UL9-WT plasmid as a template, OligoI (5'-GCGGAGTCGGGAGATCCTCTGGGG-3') as the upstream primer, and UL9-NT-AU1 (5'-GCCGGCTTCTGCGGCCGCTCACTATATATAGCGATACGTATCATCCCGGCACCGCAGCTCCCGTATG-3') as the downstream primer. The nucleotide sequence encoding the AU1 tag is underlined. The cloning procedure resulted in the addition of the AU1 tag (DTYRYI) at the C terminus of UL9-NT. The pCDNA3-AU1-UL9 plasmid was created by inserting a BamHI-EcoRI fragment containing the wild-type UL9 gene into the pCDNA3-AU1 vector, resulting in the addition of an AU1 tag at the N terminus of UL9. The pCDNA3-AU1 vector was generated by ligation of an AU1-containing linker in the polycloning site via the HindIII and BamHI sites. The AU1-containing linker was created by annealing the BM-HB-AU1-T (5'-AGCTTACCATGGATACGTATCGCTACATAG-3') and BM-HB-AU1-B (5'-GATCCTATGTAGCGATACGTATCCATGGTA-3') oligonucleotides. The nucleotide sequence encoding the AU1 tag is underlined.  Generation of recombinant baculoviruses expressing UL9 variants. | Recombinant baculoviruses (Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis baculoviruses) expressing wild-type  or mutant UL9 variants were generated with the pFastBac (Gibco-BRL) system according to the manufacturer's instructions.  Cell lysates. | Two types of mammalian cell lysates were used in this study. Regular cell lysates were obtained from one 60-mm2 plate which was washed with phosphate-buffered saline containing a Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail, harvested, and resuspended in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) loading buffer, resulting in a total of 300 mul of lysate. The lysates were boiled and analyzed by Western blot analysis. Concentrated cell lysates were prepared from one 60-mm2 plate, which was harvested and resuspended in SDS-PAGE loading buffer, resulting in a total of 60 mul of five-fold-concentrated lysate. The samples were cup-sonicated twice (Sonicator Ultra Processor XL; Misonix, Inc.; power setting 9 for 1 min), boiled, and analyzed.  Transient transfection-complementation assay. | The transient transfection-complementation assay was performed as described previously . Each experiment was repeated three times, and the mean complementation index was calculated.  Plaque reduction assay. | The plaque reduction assay was performed as described previously . In brief, Vero cells in 60-mm2 plates at 50% confluence were cotransfected with wild-type HSV-1 infectious DNA (strain KOS) and the plasmid of interest (at a ratio of 1:10) with Lipofectamine Plus (Gibco), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The plates were overlaid with methylcellulose and incubated until plaques were observed. Plaques were stained with crystal violet and counted. Each experiment was performed three times, and the mean number of plaques and the standard deviation were calculated.  Immunofluorescent microscopy. | Vero cells were transfected with 2 mug of the plasmid of interest with Lipofectamine Plus (Gibco) and processed for immunofluorescence 18 h posttransfection. The transfected cells were fixed, permeabilized, and stained as described previously  except that all procedures were performed at room temperature and phosphate-buffered saline was supplemented with 0.1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2 to reduce cell detachment. The primary antibodies were used at the following dilutions: 17B, undiluted; RH7, 1:100 dilution; anti-ICP8, 1:400 dilution; anti-AU1, 1:500 dilution. The secondary antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:200. Images were taken with an Olympus BX60 microscope (at 100x magnification) equipped with a Hamamatsu Orca digital camera (model C4742-95) and Open Lab software (Improvisions). Images were processed and arranged with Adobe Photoshop 6.0 and Adobe Illustrator 7.0 software.
The UL9 helicase motif mutants were classified as transdominant or potentiating based on a plaque reduction assay in which cells were cotransfected with wild-type infectious DNA and an excess of UL9-encoding plasmid. The number of plaques observed in cells transfected with infectious DNA only was normalized to 100 . Overexpression of wild-type UL9 slightly reduced the number of plaques in this assay (60 compared to 100); therefore, wild-type UL9 is considered inhibitory. Mutants whose overexpression resulted in significant reduction of the plaque number were classified as transdominant. For instance, in cells transfected with motif I, Ia, II, and VI mutants, the number of plaques dropped to 10 to 15. In contrast, mutants whose overexpression led to increased plaque number were classified as potentiating. In cells transfected with the motif V mutant, the plaque number increased to 180 . It was shown previously that the motif V mutant protein was undetectable in mammalian cells transiently transfected with a mammalian expression vector under the control of the ICP6 promoter . No protein could be detected in immunoblots of cell lysates from UL9-MV-transfected cells with any of the available anti-UL9 antibodies (17B, raised against the extreme N terminus; R250, recognizing the extreme C terminus; or RH7, raised against the whole C-terminal domain) . In addition, a mutant carrying the motif V mutation and the OB mutation (a 4-amino-acid insertion after residue 591 in the C-terminal domain of UL9 that abolishes the origin-specific DNA function) was even more potentiating than the motif V mutant alone; the number of plaques in this case was increased to 220 . These results indicated that the motif V mutant was capable of influencing the outcome of a viral infection and thus must be expressed, at least transiently. N-terminal fragment(s) but not full-length UL9-MV protein can be detected in heterologous expression systems. | In order to determine if the motif V mutant protein could be detected in heterologous expression systems, UL9-MV was expressed in insect cells with recombinant baculoviruses. Cell lysates of insect cells infected with the recombinant virus bearing wild-type UL9 or the UL9-MV mutant were subjected to Western blot analysis with antibodies which recognize the extreme N terminus (17B) or the extreme C terminus (R250) of the UL9 protein. Both antibodies detected full-length wild-type UL9 protein (Fig. , lanes 2 and 5, respectively). Consistent with our previous findings in mammalian cells , no full-length UL9-MV protein was observed with 17B or R250 antibodies (Fig. , lanes 3 and 6, respectively). Surprisingly, the 17B antibody was able to detect two fragments of approximately 38 kDa (marked with an arrowhead) and 30 kDa (marked with two arrowheads). No fragments were detected with the anti-C terminus antibody (R250) (Fig. , lane 6). The relative amount of the 30-kDa fragment varied between different sample preparations, suggesting that it may be a degradation product of the 38-kDa fragment. We next asked whether the appearance of the N-terminal fragments in insect cells but not in mammalian cells reflects different expression levels and/or stability in these two types of cells. In order to determine if our previous failure to detect UL9-MV was due to expression levels, we cloned the UL9-MV mutant in a mammalian expression vector (pCDNA3; Invitrogen) under the control of the cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter, a strong constitutive promoter. Vero cells were transfected with the pCDNA3-UL9-MV plasmid, and the cell lysates were assayed for the presence of UL9-MV protein or UL9-MV fragments. As previously seen with vectors with the ICP6 promoter , no protein species were detected with any of the anti-UL9 antibodies (data not shown), but when concentrated lysates of cells transfected with pCDNA3-UL9-MV were prepared as described in Materials and Methods, the 17B antibody detected an N-terminal fragment with an apparent mobility of approximately 38 kDa (Fig. , lane 4). No specific bands were detected with the R250 antibody (data not shown). Thus, we have demonstrated that in both insect and mammalian expression systems, no full-length UL9-MV protein is detectable; instead, an N-terminal fragment with similar if not identical mobility was observed in both cell types. Interestingly, a fragment with the same mobility was observed when UL9-MV was cloned with an N-terminal His tag and expressed in E. coli (Fig. , lane 6). The apparent molecular mass of the N-terminal UL9-MV fragment was determined to be approximately 38 kDa, as judged by Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gels with Benchmark (Invitrogen) or broad range (New England Biolab) molecular weight protein standards. Thus, it appears that a similar 38-kDa band is generated by expression of the motif V mutant in all three expression systems. We propose that the G354A mutation results in a conformational change(s) in the mutant protein leading to the exposure of a normally buried protease cleavage site(s). The difficulties that we encountered in detecting the 38-kDa fragment at first may indicate that some of the mutant MV protein is degraded completely. It is not clear whether the observed 38-kDa fragment is a result of cleavage by a protease present in all three cell types or whether this fragment represents the minimal stably folded fragment and is not the result of the initial cleavage event.  Potentiation is not due to absence of the transdominant origin-binding domain of UL9. | The UL9 C-terminal domain (UL9 CTD), encompassing residues 536 to 851, is transdominant in the context of the plaque reduction assay  and in coinfections of wild-type HSV-1 and recombinant HSV-1 expressing the UL9 CTD . The transdominant effect of the UL9 CTD is abolished if a mutation disrupting the origin-binding function is introduced . Since the C terminus of UL9 is clearly transdominant and since no stable C-terminal fragments were detected when the potentiating mutant UL9-MV was expressed, we wanted to rule out the formal possibility that the absence of the C-terminal domain is responsible for potentiation. We hypothesized that the potentiating phenotype may simply be a result of the absence of the transdominant C-terminal portion of UL9. If this hypothesis is correct, it would be expected that the N-terminal portion of UL9 (UL9 NTD), lacking the transdominant origin-binding domain, would be potentiating. In order to test this hypothesis, a construct expressing the UL9 NTD was generated and tested in the plaque reduction assay. Figure  shows that the UL9 NTD was transdominant rather than potentiating. Interestingly, the UL9 NTD protein was not detectable by Western blot analysis with the 17B antibody when used to transfect mammalian cells, even if concentrated cell lysates were prepared , suggesting that the UL9 NTD is unstable. This is consistent with previous observations from the baculovirus expression system . It should be noted that when much larger amounts of plasmid DNA were used for transfection, the UL9 NTD could be detected but only at very low levels (see below). In summary, the transdominant phenotype of UL9 NTD rules out the possibility that potentiation is a result of the absence of the UL9 CTD.  Level of transdominance of UL9 NTD correlates with its stability and/or steady-state protein levels in the cell. | Since the UL9 NTD is unstable by itself while full-length UL9 is stable, we reasoned that the addition of a tag at the C terminus of the UL9 NTD might improve its stability. An AU1 tag was added at the C terminus of the UL9 NTD after residue 534, resulting in UL9 NTD-AU1. When mammalian cells were transfected with this construct, the tagged version of the N terminus (UL9 NTD-AU1) was readily detected in Western blots with the 17B antibody  as well as with the anti-AU1 antibody (data not shown). When UL9 NTD-AU1 was tested in the plaque reduction assay, it was found to be even more transdominant than the UL9 NTD . Transfection experiments with increasing amounts of plasmid DNA  demonstrated significant differences in the steady-state levels of UL9 NTD and UL9 NTD-AU1. Whereas UL9 NTD-AU1 was readily observed when 2 mug of plasmid DNA was used for transfection, UL9 NTD was hardly detectable when 7.5 mug of plasmid DNA was used . Although it is possible that the lower steady-state protein levels of UL9 NTD are due to lower expression levels, we consider it unlikely because both pUL9-NTD-AU1 and pUL9-UL9-NTD were expressed from the same promoter. We therefore favor a scenario in which the low steady-state levels of the UL9 NTD are due to inherent instability of the N-terminal fragment of UL9. Thus, the AU1 tag appears to increase the stability of the N-terminal domain of UL9. In summary, we have demonstrated that the potentiation phenotype of UL9-MV is not due to the absence of the C-terminal origin-binding domain of UL9. Furthermore, the UL9 NTD by itself is transdominant, and its level of transdominance correlates with stability and/or steady-state protein levels in the cell.  The potentiation phenotype of UL9-MV does not depend on the helicase activity of UL9. | In order to test whether the helicase activity of UL9 is essential for the potentiating phenotype of UL9-MV, a double mutant, UL9-MI/MV, carrying the K87A mutation in helicase motif I (Walker box A) was engineered. The K87A mutation abolishes the ATPase and helicase activities of UL9 . The UL9-MI mutant was previously shown to be transdominant in the context of the plaque reduction assay . The double mutant UL9-MI/MV was found to be potentiating, resulting in approximately the same level of stimulation of viral plaque formation as UL9-MV by itself (data not shown). Thus, the addition of the MI mutation does not affect the potentiation phenotype of UL9-MV, indicating that potentiation does not rely on the helicase activity of UL9.  Presence of the MV (G354A) mutation by itself is not sufficient for potentiation. | As described above, UL9-MV potentiation is not simply a result of the absence of the transdominant CTD of UL9 and is independent of the helicase activity of the protein. Therefore, the potentiation is most likely a property of the G354A mutation itself. In order to investigate this hypothesis, several UL9 truncations were engineered : UL9-Delta322-851, which ends 22 amino acids upstream of the G354A mutation; UL9-Delta355-851-MV, which ends immediately after the MV mutation G354A and corresponds to a protein fragment with predicted molecular weight close to the experimentally determined size of the UL9-MV fragment observed in mammalian, insect, and bacterial cells (Fig.  and Fig. ); UL9-Delta450-851, which ends shortly after the last helicase motif of UL9 and contains wild-type sequence; and UL9-Delta450-851-MV, which ends shortly after the last helicase motif and contains the MV mutation (G354A). All the mutants except UL9-Delta450-851-MV were found to express proteins of the predicted sizes . Interestingly, the UL9-Delta450-851-MV truncation produced a 38-kDa fragment comparable to the fragment seen with full-length UL9-MV . In the plaque reduction assay, all truncations except UL9-Delta450-851-MV were found to be transdominant . UL9-Delta450-851-MV was potentiating, and the level of potentiation was comparable to that seen with UL9-MV itself . From these experiments, it appears that there is a trend correlating the potentiation phenotype in the plaque reduction assay with the ability of UL9 variants to be processed or degraded to the 38-kDa N-terminal fragment. Our results show that the presence of the MV mutation by itself is not sufficient to confer potentiation, as seen from the transdominant phenotype of the UL9-Delta355-851-MV truncation. If the G354A mutation was sufficient for potentiation, then this truncation would be expected to be potentiating and not transdominant. It appears that, in addition to the G354A mutation itself, a region C-terminal to the G354A mutation (residues 354 to 450) is required for potentiation. Interestingly, neither the G354A mutation nor the region encompassing amino acids 355 to 450 was sufficient to confer potentiation when present alone. The G354A mutation may introduce a conformational change which leads to destabilization of the protein. The 355 to 450 region may be involved in protein-protein interactions within the UL9 dimer.  Overexpression of UL9-MV influences wild-type UL9 protein levels and is able to override the inhibitory effect of UL9. | Since the overexpression of wild-type UL9 is inhibitory for HSV-1 infection, the potentiation phenotype of UL9-MV may be a result of removal of UL9 during the course of infection, thereby preventing wild-type UL9 from exercising its inhibitory effect. In order to test this hypothesis, wild-type UL9 and UL9-MV were cotransfected in a ratio of 1:15, and the steady-state levels of full-length UL9 were followed by Western blot. Figure  shows that the overexpression of UL9-MV resulted in lower steady-state levels of wild-type UL9 (compare lanes 2 and 3). In order to determine whether destabilization would also occur in the context of infection, Vero cells were transfected with wild-type UL9 and UL9-MV (ratio, 1:15) and 24 h later were superinfected with the UL9 null virus hr94. In both experiments, shown in Fig. , lanes 1 to 4 (transfection), and Fig. , lanes 5 to 8 (transfection and hr94 superinfection), the level of full-length UL9 was lowered approximately two- to threefold, as estimated from control Western blots in which various amounts of UL9 protein were analyzed for comparison . The possibility that the decrease in levels of full-length UL9 protein was due to transfection of large amounts of plasmid (a total of 16 mug per 60-mm2 plate) was ruled out by transfecting the cells with the same amount of empty plasmid in combination with wild-type UL9 (Fig. , lanes 3 and 7). In order to determine whether the overexpression of UL9-MV resulted in the decrease in levels of an unrelated protein, the same experiment was performed but the levels UL6, an HSV-1 protein essential for cleavage and packaging, were monitored (Fig. , lanes 9 to 12). The overexpression of UL9-MV did not lower UL6 steady-state protein levels. In summary, we found that overexpression of UL9-MV reproducibly lowered the levels of wild-type UL9 in the context of both transfection and infection. To ask whether the decrease in steady-state levels of UL9 also correlated with the potentiation phenotype, the same experiment was performed in the context of the plaque reduction assay . In this case, Vero cells were cotransfected with wild-type HSV-1 infectious DNA and plasmids encoding wild-type UL9 and UL9-MV in a ratio of 1:10:150. As shown in Fig. , wild-type UL9 had an inhibitory effect on plaque formation, but the overexpression of UL9-MV overrode the inhibition. Interestingly, cotransfection of wild-type UL9 and UL9-MV with wild-type HSV-1 infectious DNA resulted in even greater plaque numbers compared to the same experiment in which wild-type UL9 was omitted (Fig. , compare the third and second bars). This further stimulation in the presence of wild-type UL9 may be due to differences in the timing of expression of UL9 from plasmids compared to expression from the viral genome. It may reflect the earlier activation of a degradation pathway which acts to lower the steady-state levels of UL9 (see below). In any case, these experiments indicate that the potentiation phenotype of the UL9-MV mutant is inversely related to the protein levels of wild-type UL9.  Indirect evidence that UL9 NTD and UL9-MV are able to interact with full-length UL9. | Our finding that UL9-MV lowers the steady-state protein levels of 