Surface Downregulation of Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I, PE-CAM, and ICAM-1 following De Novo Infection of Endothelial Cells with Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus
Under selective pressure from host cytotoxic T lymphocytes, many viruses have evolved to downregulate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and/or T-cell costimulatory molecules from the surface of infected cells. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes two proteins, MIR-1 and MIR-2, that serve this function during lytic replication. In vivo, however, KSHV exists in a predominantly latent state, with less than 5% of infected cells expressing discernible lytic gene products. Thus, mechanisms of immune evasion that depend on genes expressed only during lytic replication are unlikely to be active in most KSHV-infected cells. As a result, we searched for evidence of similar defensive strategies extant during latency, employing culture systems that strongly favor latent KSHV infection. We measured cell surface levels of immunomodulatory proteins on both primary dermal microvascular endothelial cells (pDMVEC) infected through coculture with induced primary effusion lymphoma cells and telomerase-immortalized DMVEC infected directly with cell-free virus. Employing a panel of antibodies against several endothelial cell surface proteins, we show that de novo infection with KSHV leads to the downregulation of MHC class I, CD31 (PE-CAM), and CD54 (ICAM-I) but not CD58 (LFA-3) or CD95 (Fas). Furthermore, flow cytometry with a fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibody to the latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) revealed that downregulation occurred predominantly on KSHV-infected (LANA-positive) cells. Although the vast majority of infected cells displayed this downregulation, less than 1% expressed either immediate-early or late lytic proteins detectable by immunofluorescence. Together, these results suggest that downregulation of immunomodulatory proteins on the surface of target cells may represent a constitutive mode of immune evasion employed by KSHV following de novo infection.

Herpesviruses constitute a family of human pathogens that persist indefinitely in the host organism and often contribute to a variety of disease states. Viral persistence depends on the ability of herpesviruses to establish a latent infection within cells. This process requires the successful evasion of host immune defenses, which usually includes the restricted expression of viral genes during latency. Although such restriction lowers their overall antigenic profile, herpesviruses must employ additional mechanisms to ensure prolonged protection from host immune responses. One such mechanism involves the downregulation of immunoregulatory proteins, such as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I, from the surface of infected cells. This serves to limit their recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and dampen the inflammatory response to viral infection. Examples of human herpesvirus proteins that perform this function include the ICP47 protein of herpes simplex virus 1 , the interleukin-10 protein of Epstein-Barr virus , and the US2, US3, US6, and US11 proteins of human cytomegalovirus . Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a recently discovered member of the gamma (lymphotropic) subfamily of herpesviruses and is responsible for several distinct diseases in humans, including Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and multicentric Castleman's disease . While pathologically diverse, these disorders are all associated with an immunocompromised state and pose a significant threat to human immunodeficiency virus-infected individuals and solid-organ transplant recipients worldwide. In contrast, KSHV infection in healthy patients is usually asymptomatic. In all infected individuals, KSHV elicits a humoral and cellular host immune response directed against both lytic and latent proteins of the virus , yet this response, even in healthy persons, is unable to eradicate KSHV from the body. This suggests that KSHV, like other human herpesviruses, possesses the ability to evade immune responses during infection. Recent studies have identified several KSHV lytic proteins that exert potential immunoregulatory roles during lytic replication. These include inhibition of apoptosis by viral Bcl-2  and open reading frame (ORF) K7 , complement deregulation by ORF 4 , Th2-type polarization by viral MIP-II , and inhibition of the interferon antiviral response by viral interferon response factor 1 (vIRF-1) , vIRF-3 , and viral interleukin-6 . Furthermore, KSHV also encodes two immediate-early proteins, MIR-1 (encoded by ORF K3) and MIR-2 (encoded by ORF K5), that downregulate immunoregulatory proteins such as MHC class I and ICAM-1 from the surface of cells to limit their recognition by immune cells (14, 15, 26-28, 61). KSHV, however, most often follows the general paradigm of gammaherpesvirus infection, namely a primarily latent phase of infection marked by a highly restricted pattern of viral gene expression. The prevalence of KSHV-infected cells undergoing lytic (productive) infection both in vitro and in vivo is typically low (1 to 5%), with the remaining infected cells harboring the virus in its latent form . Thus, mechanisms of immune evasion contingent upon genes expressed solely during the lytic cycle would protect only a small fraction of KSHV-infected cells. It follows, therefore, that KSHV may additionally require mechanisms of evasion that are active during latency. Several KSHV latent proteins have likewise been implicated in viral immune evasion. These include disruption of p53 by latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA)  and LANA2 , inhibition of apoptosis by viral FLIP , downregulation of the B-cell receptor by ORF K1 , and deregulation of the interferon response by vIRF-II . Additionally, work by Brander et al. has shown that KSHV-infected PEL cells express lower levels of MHC class I and possess increased resistance to CTLs compared with Epstein-Barr virus-infected or primary B cells . However, the relevance of these findings to de novo infection of endothelial cells with intact KSHV remains unknown. Therefore, we investigated the potential viral immune evasion strategies of KSHV in two endothelial cell culture systems that strongly favor latent infection with KSHV. Specifically, we tested telomerase-immortalized dermal microvascular endothelial cells (DMVEC) infected with concentrated virus and primary DMVEC (pDMVEC) infected via coculture with induced BCBL-1 cells, a PEL line harboring KSHV. With a panel of antibodies against numerous endothelial cell surface proteins, we examined these immortalized and primary cells for signs of immune modulation following de novo infection with KSHV.
Cell culture. | BCBL-1 and BJAB cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, Rockville, Md.) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 100 U of penicillin per ml, 100 mug of streptomycin per ml, 2 mM l-glutamine, 0.05 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, and 0.02% (wt/vol) sodium bicarbonate. Cells were maintained at 2.5 x 105 to 8.0 x 105/ml and were used for up to 2 months after the thaw date. pDMVEC were obtained from Clonetics Corporation (Walkersville, Md.) at low passage and grown in EGM-2 MV medium (Clonetics) with 50 U of penicillin per ml and 50 mug of streptomycin per ml substituted for amphotericin B and gentamicin.  Creation of T4 TIME cells. | Telomerase-immortalized microvascular endothelial (T4 TIME) cells were generated from pDMVEC with the stable incorporation of the human telomerase gene (hTERT) by retroviral transduction. Briefly, the pBABE retroviral plasmid containing the hTERT gene (a gift from R. Weinberg) was packaged into a Moloney murine leukemia virus pseudo typed with the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein G. This virus was then transduced into pDMVEC by spinfection for 2 h at 1,000 x g, and stable clones were selected in the presence of 0.5 mug of puromycin per ml for 1 month. hTERT expression was then confirmed with the Trapeze telomerase detection kit (Intergen, Manhattan N.Y.). One of the resultant clones, T4, expressed high levels of telomerase, as determined by telomerase repeat amplification analysis and has survived, to date, over 80 passages without detectable changes in morphology, growth rate, or susceptibility to infection with KSHV compared with early-passage T4 TIME cells (data not shown).  Coculture infection of pDMVEC cells with KSHV. | pDMVEC at early passage (<15 passages) were infected by coculture with the primary effusion lymphoma cell line BCBL-1, based on methods described by Sakurada et al. . Briefly, BCBL-1 cells were induced with a 12-h exposure to 20 ng of O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate per ml and 300 muM sodium butyrate and, after 3 days, cocultured directly with pDMVEC at various ratios for 12 h in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 mug of endothelial cell growth supplement per ml (BD Pharmingen, San Jose, Calif.). The pDMVEC were then washed vigorously to remove the BCBL-1 cells and cultured for an additional day in EGM-2 endothelial cell medium lacking hydrocortisone. We found that low levels of hydrocortisone, normally present in EGM-2 endothelial growth medium, led to a modest two- to threefold induction of immediate-early lytic protein expression in the immunofluorescence assay (data not shown). As a result, we eliminated hydrocortisone from the growth medium in all short-term experiments to minimize the levels of spontaneous lytic reactivation. For controls, pDMVEC were cocultured with uninduced BCBL-1 cells or BCBL-1 cells induced in the presence of 0.5 mM phosphonoformic acid (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo.).  Cell-free virus infection of T4 TIME cells. | BCBL-1 cells were induced as described above, and virus was collected from the supernatant on the sixth day after induction by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 3 h. The viral pellet was resuspended at 100th the original volume in EGM-2 MV culture medium lacking hydrocortisone, and aliquots were frozen at -80C. A small aliquot of concentrated virus was used to determine the number of viral genome equivalents by Southern blot analysis with a fluorescently labeled single-stranded KSHV DNA probe complementary to ORF 73 (Random Primer DNA chemiluminescence kit; New England Nuclear, Boston, Mass.). Approximately 5,000 viral genome equivalents per endothelial cell were then used to infect T4 TIME cells in the presence of 8 mug of Polybrene per ml (Sigma Aldrich) for 2 h. Hydrocortisone was omitted from the culture medium 24 h before addition of the virus. For controls, a sister plate was infected with an equivalent amount of virus that was first heat inactivated for 30 min at 65C or UV-inactivated at 40 W for 60 min with 254-nm UV light. Cells were then washed to remove the Polybrene and incubated for 2 days in fresh EGM-2 medium lacking hydrocortisone.  Flow cytometry. | pDMVEC and T4 TIME cells were infected with KSHV as described above and harvested for flow cytometry at the indicated times. Cells were detached from the plate with a 0.25% trypsin-EDTA solution (Clonetics), and 0.5 x 106 cells per sample were then transferred to a 96-well plate after assessing cell count and viability by trypan blue exclusion. For surface staining, samples were washed twice with 1x PBSA (1x phosphate-buffered saline [PBS] with 0.09% sodium azide) and blocked for 30 min with antibody staining buffer (3% fetal bovine serum in PBSA). Cell surface staining was then carried out for 1 h at 4C in the dark. All cell surface antibodies and isotype controls were obtained from BD Pharmingen and used at the recommended dilution of 0.25 mug of antibody/106 cells in antibody staining solution. Apoptotic cells were identified with the annexin V fluorescein isothiocyanate apoptosis detection kit as described by the manufacturer (BD Pharmingen). Cells were then washed twice with cold 1x PBSA and permeabilized for nuclear staining with the paraformaldehyde-saponin-based bromodeoxyuridine Fix/Perm kit from BD Pharmingen as described by the manufacturer. Nuclear staining to identify KSHV-infected cells was performed with a rat monoclonal antibody to the KSHV LANA protein (Applied Biosciences Inc., Columbia, Md.) conjugated to the fluorochrome Alexa 488 per the manufacturer's protocol (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oreg.) and used at a 1:1,000 dilution in BD Pharmingen Perm/Wash buffer supplemented with 3% fetal bovine serum. Flow cytometry was performed with a FACSCalibur flow cytometer and analyzed with Cell Quest Pro software (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, Mass.). Prior to analysis, all samples were gated by forward and side scatter to eliminate dead cells.  Immunofluorescence. | T4 TIME cells and pDMVEC (with and without KSHV) were grown overnight on Becton Dickinson eight-well culture slides coated with fibronectin. The slides were then fixed in 95% ethanol-5% acetic acid for 10 min at room temperature and permeabilized in PBS with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 20 min at room temperature as described by Moses et al. . Nonspecific binding was blocked by incubating the cells with 10% goat serum supplemented with 1% glycine and 3% bovine serum albumin and then with the appropriate primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer for 60 min. To determine the extent of KSHV infection, cells were assayed for LANA expression with Alexa 488-conjugated monoclonal antibody to LANA at a 1:1,000 dilution. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies to RTA (ORF 50), (a gift from D. Lukac), ORF 45 (a gift from Y. Yuan), MIR-1 (ORF K3) and MIR-2 (ORF K5) (both gifts from G. Hayward), MCP (ORF 25) and SCAF (ORF 17.5) were all used at 1:500 except MIR-2, which was used at 1:1,000. Following staining with primary antibodies, cells were washed twice with 1x PBS and then incubated with goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin conjugated to Texas Red (Jackson Labs, West Grove. Pa.) diluted 1:150 for 60 min in the dark. Cells were then washed twice with 1x PBS and subsequently stained with 0.5 mug of 4',6'-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma) per ml in 180 mM Tris (pH 7.5) for 30 min at 4C in the dark. The slide was then coated with Antifade mounting solution (Biomeda, Foster City, Calif.) and sealed with a coverslip.  Paracrine experiments. | Medium was harvested from T4 TIME cells 48 h after infection with cell-free virus (as described above). The medium was cleared of cell debris and viral particles by ultracentrifugation at 75,000 x g for 30 min in an SW-55Ti rotor (Sorvall, Newtown, Conn.). Naive T4 TIME cells were then incubated with the virus-free supernatant for 48 h and prepared for flow cytometry as described above. Naive T4 TIME cells incubated with medium from mock-infected T4 TIME cells prepared similarly served as controls.
KSHV infection of telomerase-immortalized endothelial cells. | To investigate potential KSHV-specific immune evasion strategies, we assessed changes in the expression of specific cell surface proteins following de novo infection of endothelial cells with KSHV. We focused our initial efforts on DMVEC because they represent a probable target cell of KSHV within Kaposi's sarcoma lesions in vivo . Previous attempts at infecting similar cells with KSHV, however, have resulted in initial infection rates of less than 5% . Therefore, we took advantage of recent findings indicating that human pDMVEC first immortalized with the human telomerase gene (hTERT) support higher rates of infection with concentrated KSHV . We created hTERT-immortalized microvascular endothelial cells (TIME cells) through the retroviral insertion of hTERT into pDMVEC and the subsequent selection of antibiotic-resistant colonies (see Materials and Methods). Infection of one of the resultant clones, T4, with the concentrated viral supernatant from the KSHV-infected PEL line BCBL-1 resulted in a dramatic morphological change in many of the target endothelial cells to a spindle-like phenotype within 24 h . This change is characteristic of KSHV infection of endothelial cells  and coincided closely with the onset of latent gene expression, as evidenced by the detection of LANA by the immunofluorescence assay . In contrast, incubation of T4 cells with either UV-treated (not shown) or heat-inactivated KSHV caused neither LANA staining nor morphological changes associated with infection (Fig.  and D). The proportion of cells infected with KSHV correlated with the amount of input virus, determined by viral genome copy number (see Materials and Methods). However, with viral concentrations sufficient to generate 100% infection of all of the target cells, we often observed excessive cell death. To avoid this issue, we optimized the initial infection level in most experiments to approximately 50% by maintaining a constant ratio of KSHV genome copy number to target cell of approximately 5,000:1. This high ratio may reflect the small proportion of DNA-containing particles that are infectious virions as well as the relatively low susceptibility of endothelial cells to KSHV infection (C. Tomescu and D. H. Kedes, unpublished observations). With initial infection rates of approximately 50%, the number of infected (LANA-positive) cells remained stable for several days. However, the proportion of KSHV-infected cells began to decrease with continued culture. This reduction began approximately 4 days postinfection, so that by 3 weeks fewer than 15% of the cells remained positive (data not shown). This reduction may reflect either loss of the virus from within infected endothelial cells over time or a growth advantage of uninfected over infected cells within the culture. As a result, we restricted most of our analyses to the first 72 h postinfection. We next characterized the frequency of viral lytic gene expression among the newly infected T4 TIME cells. Lagunoff and colleagues reported that incubation of a similarly derived TIME cell line with KSHV resulted in predominantly latent infection, with lytic protein expression confined to less than 1% of infected cells . To explore whether our T4 TIME cells displayed a similar latent bias after infection, we assayed for KSHV lytic protein expression by immunofluorescence with antibodies specific for four immediate-early lytic gene products, ORF 50 (RTA), ORF 45, K3 (MIR-1), and K5 (MIR-2), as well as two late lytic gene products, ORF 17.5 (SCAF) and ORF 25 (MCP). We also costained samples for latent protein expression with a monoclonal antibody to LANA to identify the KSHV-infected cells in the culture. With this approach, we observed a relative paucity of both immediate-early and late lytic protein expression in the great majority of KSHV-infected (LANA-positive) cells (Fig. , third and fourth columns). Specifically, immunofluorescence assays detected the immediate-early lytic proteins RTA, MIR-1, and MIR-2 in only 1% of KSHV-infected T4 TIME cells (Fig. , fourth column). ORF 45 antibodies gave similar results (data not shown), while even fewer cells demonstrated late lytic proteins such as SCAF (not shown) and MCP (Fig. , fourth column). This last finding may reflect premature termination of the lytic cascade prior to expression of late lytic proteins in the few cells undergoing spontaneous lytic reactivation. Under higher magnification, reactivity with antibodies to lytic proteins in most KSHV-infected cells was indistinguishable from background levels with secondary antibody alone (Fig. , third column) despite characteristic LANA staining (Fig. , first column). In parallel assays, the same set of lytic antibodies reacted with 10 to 15% of similarly induced BCBL-1 cells (not shown), reflecting the higher levels of lytic reactivation that characterize this PEL line . Together, these results argue that KSHV infection of T4 TIME cells, in the absence of inducing agents, is predominantly latent. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the distinct possibility that low levels of lytic proteins, expressed in quantities below the sensitivity of our immunofluorescence assay, are present in some cells following KSHV infection.  Downregulation of MHC class I, PE-CAM, and ICAM-1 after de novo infection of T4 TIME cells with KSHV. | To investigate potential KSHV-specific immune evasion strategies that might arise following initial infection, we examined newly infected T4 TIME cells with a panel of antibodies to endothelial cell surface proteins involved in immune recognition . This analysis included monoclonal antibodies to MHC class I, MHC class II, CD31 (PE-CAM), CD40, CD54 (ICAM-1), CD58 (LFA-3), CD80 (B7.1), CD86 (B7.2), and CD95 (Fas). While four of these nine proteins, MHC class II, B7.1, B7.2, and CD40, were only poorly expressed on T4 TIME cells, the five remaining proteins were well represented prior to KSHV infection. We monitored the cell surface expression of this set and observed a significant downregulation of three of the proteins shortly after infection. Included among these was MHC class I, which was distinctly downregulated within 48 h of KSHV infection . In contrast, incubation of T4 TIME cells with heat- or UV-inactivated virus led to no change in MHC class I levels compared with uninfected, naive cells (data not shown). The number of cells with downregulated MHC class I varied proportionally with the amount of input virus and, in turn, with the level of infection as reflected by LANA reactivity in immunofluorescence assays (not shown). Furthermore, flow cytometry of cultures that were approximately 50% infected (LANA positive) most often demonstrated a widened distribution of MHC class I signal rather than a biphasic curve with two distinct populations, indicating that the extent of downregulation per cell varied considerably . Nevertheless, the mean KSHV-associated reduction in MHC class I ranged between two and fivefold compared to mock-infected control cultures in four separate experiments. These measurements, however, represent a minimal estimate, since approximately 50% of the cells in the cultures were uninfected. In addition to MHC class I, KSHV infection of T4 TIME cells also led to surface downregulation of PE-CAM (CD31) and ICAM-1 (CD54) (Fig.  and C, respectively). These two proteins, normally expressed on endothelial cells, provide adhesion and costimulatory signaling to CTLs during T-cell-endothelial cell interactions . Furthermore, inhibition of these signaling pathways greatly reduces the ability of CTLs to kill target cells . In contrast, KSHV infection of T4 TIME cells led to no appreciable change in the level of the cell surface protein LFA-3 (CD58)  while slightly increasing the levels of another marker, Fas (CD95) (data not shown). These findings argue that the downregulation of MHC class I, ICAM-1, and PE-CAM during infection is specific and not merely a reflection of global or indiscriminant downregulation. To investigate the kinetics of immunoregulatory protein downregulation, we measured cell surface expression of MHC class I, PE-CAM, ICAM-1, and LFA-3 on T4 TIME cells at 12-h intervals following de novo infection with KSHV. For MHC class I, downregulation was not evident at 0 (not shown) or 12 h postinfection . However, downregulation was apparent by 24 h and reached its peak by 48 h . In contrast, LFA-3 levels remained unchanged or slightly elevated throughout this period . PE-CAM and ICAM-1 downregulation kinetics (not shown) were similar to those of MHC class I. For all three proteins, cell surface levels at 72 h (not shown) postinfection were similar to those at 48 h, suggesting that a new, lower expression set point may have been established. By 96 h postinfection, however, the percentage of LANA-positive cells within the culture began to decrease (see above). This led to a concomitant reduction in the number of cells that exhibited downregulation of immunoregulatory proteins, although the profile of proteins affected on these individual cells was unchanged from that at the earlier times. Apoptosis was not directly responsible for a decrease in the proportion of cells downregulating immunoregulatory proteins, since greater than 97% percent of all cells exhibiting downregulation were viable, as evidenced by a lack of annexin V reactivity (data not shown). At all times, the proportion of cells exhibiting surface protein downregulation correlated directly with the proportion of KSHV-infected (LANA-positive) cells within the culture (data not shown). These findings suggest that direct infection with KSHV may be required to induce downregulation on cells within the mixed culture. However, they do not exclude the possibility that downregulation may be variable on infected cells and that soluble paracrine factors or direct cell-to-cell contact may contribute to similar changes on uninfected neighboring cells. To investigate the possibility of a paracrine effect, we incubated naive T4 TIME cells for 48 h with virus-cleared medium removed from a culture of T4 TIME cells infected with KSHV 48 h earlier (see Materials and Methods). Flow cytometry of cells treated with this conditioned medium, however, revealed no downregulation of any of the cell surface proteins that we tested . Instead, treatment of naive cells with conditioned medium from KSHV-infected cells led to a modest upregulation of ICAM-1 and PE-CAM . These findings may reflect a response to proinflammatory cytokines potentially released by cells within the KSHV-infected culture. In any case, these results indicate that soluble factors are not sufficient to elicit downregulation in uninfected cells. However, cell-to-cell contact, as a mechanism of downregulation, remained a formal possibility. Addressing this question required a method to distinguish infected from uninfected cells within a mixed population while simultaneously measuring levels of cell surface proteins.  Development of flow cytometric approach to identify KSHV-infected cells. | Since the downregulation of immunomodulatory proteins by KSHV did not appear to involve paracrine effects, we next tested if the effects were dependent on direct infection with KSHV. To investigate this possibility, we developed a flow cytometric approach, similar to that described by Kellam et al., to identify KSHV-positive cells following de novo infection . As a marker of infection, we chose to monitor the expression of LANA because it is an abundant viral protein expressed in all KSHV-infected cells . We first conjugated the highly reactive fluorochrome Alexa 488 to an anti-LANA rat monoclonal antibody to identify LANA-expressing cells in culture and then devised a fixative process to detect LANA expression in the nucleus while preserving membrane integrity for cell surface analysis (see Materials and Methods). To validate this approach, we tested the ability of this conjugated antibody to detect LANA expression within the KSHV-infected BCBL-1 cell line by flow cytometry. Greater than 95% of BCBL-1 cells were positive for LANA with this technique, while the reactivity of the same antibody with the KSHV-uninfected B-cell line BJAB was minimal . Furthermore, fluorescent microscopy revealed that BCBL-1 cells prepared for flow cytometric analysis with the fluorescently labeled LANA antibody exhibited the speckled nuclear staining pattern that is characteristic of the LANA immunofluorescence assay (Fig. , inset) (-, ). We next used this approach to identify newly infected T4 TIME cells following KSHV infection. LANA-specific flow cytometry detected evidence of KSHV infection of T4 TIME cells within 24 h of their incubation with the virus . Dot plot analysis demonstrated a marked shift in fluorescence in a subset of the cells that stained brightly for LANA (Fig. , gate R3). The mean fluorescence intensity of infected cells was also well above the background of mock-infected cells . In subsequent experiments, we compared cells with the highest (top 25%) LANA signal (Fig. , gate R3) to those with the lowest (bottom 25%) (Fig. , gate R2) to unambiguously delineate any potential differences in the surface protein expression profile of infected versus uninfected cells. The latter group stained with the same low intensity as naive cells and therefore likely represented only background staining. This strict gating approach allowed us to focus on KSHV-infected (LANA-positive) cells in the culture while minimizing potentially confounding effects from background fluorescence. Of note, in determining absolute infection rates, this flow cytometric technique, although specific for KSHV-infected cells, was less sensitive than parallel immunofluorescence assays with the same anti-LANA monoclonal antibody. This difference likely reflects the advantage of the immunofluorescence assay over flow cytometry in distinguishing between the distinct intranuclear, punctate LANA staining pattern and nonspecific background fluorescence. As a result, we used an anti-LANA immunofluorescence assay in each experiment to more accurately assess overall infection rates.  Downregulation of MHC class I, PE-CAM, and ICAM-1 on KSHV-infected T4 TIME cells. | We next investigated whether the cells that exhibited immunoregulatory protein downregulation tracked with the population that gated as LANA positive by flow cytometry. KSHV infection of T4 TIME cells followed by staining for both intranuclear LANA and surface proteins demonstrated that increased expression of LANA generally correlated with lower expression of MHC class I, shifting the population from the upper left quadrant (low LANA/high MHC class I) to the lower right quadrant (high LANA/low MHC class I) in flow cytometry analyses . A similar association was also evident between LANA expression and the downregulation of PE-CAM  and ICAM-1 , although ICAM-1 downregulation was also present in cells with intermediate to low LANA expression. In contrast, LFA-3 surface expression remained essentially unchanged in the same population, showing no correlation with LANA expression . Although these data suggested a trend between level of LANA expression and downregulation of MHC class I, PE-CAM, and, to a lesser extent, ICAM-1, the lack of signal intensity from intranuclear LANA fluorescence in our flow cytometry assay prevented a more definitive assessment of this relationship. Specifically, the LANA flow cytometry assay was unable to separate sufficiently infected cells with intermediate levels of LANA signal from uninfected cells with similar but nonspecific background fluorescence (note the overlap in LANA staining between KSHV-infected and mock-infected cells in Fig. .) Therefore, in subsequent experiments, we used the strict gating approach shown in Fig.  to compare downregulation between the cells exhibiting the greatest (top 25%) and the least (bottom 25%) LANA fluorescence intensity and excluded the remainder of the cells for which the LANA signal overlapped with background staining exhibited on mock-infected cells. This gating focused the comparison between the populations that most likely represented infected and uninfected cells. Using four-color flow cytometric staining, we identified a close association between the downregulation of MHC class I and the downregulation of both PE-CAM and ICAM-1 (but not LFA-3) following KSHV infection, suggesting that these processes arise on a similar population of cells (Fig. , second column, lower left quadrants). To determine whether this population comprised infected or uninfected cells in the mixed culture, we stained T4 TIME cells for both cell surface protein expression and intranuclear LANA expression and gated on cells with the highest (top 25%) and lowest (bottom 25%) LANA signal as described above. We found that the bulk of the KSHV-infected population (highest LANA expressers) exhibited downregulation of MHC class I, PE-CAM, and ICAM-1, as evidenced by a shift in the cell population from the upper right quadrant to the lower left quadrant (Fig. , compare the third and fourth columns). Approximately 70% of KSHV-infected (LANA-positive) cells exhibited downregulation of MHC class I, while less than 3% of the same population showed downregulation of LFA-3 (Fig. , fourth column). In addition, codownregulation of MHC class I with PE-CAM and ICAM-1 was pronounced on the high LANA expressers but only minimal on the low LANA expressers (Fig. , compare the third and fourth columns, lower left quadrants). Together, these results indicate that the downregulation of immunoregulatory proteins occurs preferentially on cells directly infected with KSHV (highest LANA expressers).  Primary DMVEC infected by coculture display similar patterns of MHC class I, PE-CAM, and ICAM-1 downregu