Link between Genome Packaging and Rate of Budding for Rous Sarcoma Virus
The subcellular location at which genomic RNA is packaged by Gag proteins during retrovirus assembly remains unknown. Since the membrane-binding (M) domain is most critical for targeting Gag to the plasma membrane, changes to this determinant might alter the path taken through the cell and reduce the efficiency of genome packaging. In this report, a Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) mutant having two acidic-to-basic substitutions in the M domain is described. This mutant, designated Super M, produced particles much faster than the wild type, but the mutant virions were noninfectious and contained only 1/10 the amount of genomic RNA found in wild-type particles. To identify the cause(s) of these defects, we considered data that suggest that RSV Gag traffics through the nucleus to package the viral genome. Although inhibition of the CRM-1 pathway of nuclear export caused the accumulation of wild-type Gag in the nucleus, nuclear accumulation did not occur with Super M. The importance of the nucleocapsid (NC) domain in membrane targeting was also determined, and, importantly, deletion of the NC sequence prevented plasma membrane localization by wild-type Gag but not by Super M Gag. Based on these results, we reasoned that the enhanced membrane-targeting properties of Super M inhibit genome packaging. Consistent with this interpretation, substitutions that reestablished the wild-type number of basic and acidic residues in the Super M Gag M domain reduced the budding efficiency and restored genome packaging and infectivity. Therefore, these data suggest that Gag targeting and genome packaging are normally linked to ensure that RSV particles contain viral RNA.

Gag polyproteins form retrovirus-like particles that bud from the plasma membrane. Gag is synthesized by soluble ribosomes and is targeted to the site of budding by the membrane-binding (M) domain located in the N-terminal region . In most retroviruses (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus type 1 [HIV-1]), the M domain contains both myristate and a cluster of basic residues, which form hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions with membrane phospholipids, respectively . In Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), an avian retrovirus, the M domain maps to the first 86 residues in Gag  . Although it is not myristylated, the RSV M domain contains 11 basic residues, and according to the nuclear magnetic resonance structure of the M domain, these basic residues are present on the surface of the molecule . Because substitutions of two or more basic residues in the M domain prevent targeting and budding, RSV Gag may bind to the plasma membrane by forming electrostatic interactions with acidic phospholipids . In addition to budding, Gag is responsible for packaging two copies of the retroviral genome. Efficient packaging requires the presence of basic residues and one or two copies of a zinc finger motif (Cys-X2-Cys-X2-His-X4-Cys) in the nucleocapsid (NC) domain of Gag . These elements enable specific interactions between Gag and the packaging signal (Psi), which is located in the 5' end of the viral RNA (vRNA) . Aside from the interaction between NC and Psi, many aspects of genome packaging remain unknown. Of particular interest is the subcellular location(s) at which Gag first binds vRNA. Recently, RNA targeting motifs known as A2 response elements have been identified in the genomes of several retroviruses . In addition, the RNA-targeting protein Staufen has been implicated in genome packaging by HIV-1 Gag . Although the functional significance of these findings is unclear, these data suggest that RNA-targeting proteins might enhance the efficiency of genome packaging by transporting vRNA to the sites of Gag assembly. Given the importance of the M domain in Gag targeting, it is possible that changes in this domain would alter the pathway by which Gag trafficks through the cell, and such changes might also affect the efficiency of genome packaging. There is evidence for this possibility from RSV, where a twofold reduction in the efficiency of genome packaging is caused by adding the myristylated, nine-amino-acid Src M domain to the N terminus of Gag . The mutant, known as Myr1E, is also noninfectious, and the packaged vRNA is monomeric. Stimulated by the potential role of the M domain in genome packaging, we characterized an RSV mutant with two substitutions, E25K and E70K, in the M domain. Although the acidic-to-basic substitutions enhanced budding by this mutant, designated Super M, the extracellular particles were noninfectious and contained only 1/10 the amount of vRNA found in wild-type (WT) particles. To identify the cause(s) of these defects, we considered recent data that suggest that RSV Gag must transit the nucleus to package vRNA . In contrast to WT, Super M Gag did not accumulate in the nucleus when cells were treated with leptomycin B (LMB), an inhibitor of nuclear export. In addition, the importance of Gag-Gag interactions in RSV targeting was tested by deleting the NC domain and examining the subcellular distribution of mutant and WT proteins. Interestingly, deletion of the NC sequences prevented WT Gag from accumulating on the plasma membrane, but Super M Gag targeting was unaffected. Together, these results suggest that the Super M substitutions alter the targeting properties of RSV Gag. Because the altered targeting phenotypes of Super M are likely caused by an enhanced affinity for the plasma membrane, it was possible that packaging and infectivity would also be disrupted. To test this possibility, additional substitutions that reestablished the WT number of basic and acidic residues were introduced to the Super M Gag domain, and these changes reduced the budding rate and restored genome packaging and infectivity. Hence, these observations suggest a relationship between genome packaging and membrane targeting by RSV Gag.
Proviral expression vectors and mutagenesis. | The WT gag gene used in these studies was obtained from the Prague C strain of RSV . To create pRS.V8-EGFP, gag was cloned via the unique SstI and HpaI sites into pRCAS-EGFP, a proviral plasmid that expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the nonessential v-src region of the genome . The substitutions present in Super M Gag and the charge-balanced mutant proviral plasmids were generated by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis using previously described methods . The sequences of the mutagenic oligonucleotides and the resulting substitutions (underlined) are as follows: for Super M, the E25K oligonucleotide sequence is 5'-CTAAGAAGAAAATAGGGGCCATG and the E70K oligonucleotide sequence is 5'-GAAATCGGGAAAGTTAAAAACC; for K6,18E-Super M, the K6E oligonucleotide sequence is 5'-GCCGTCATAGAGGTGATTTCGTCC and the K18E oligonucleotide sequence is 5'-CTATTGCGGGGAAACTAGTCCTTC; for K13,18E-Super M, the K13E oligonucleotide sequence is 5'-GTCCGCGTGTGAAACCTATTG and the K18E oligonucleotide has the sequence shown above.  Analysis of particle release. | Duplicate cultures of QT6 (quail) cells were transfected with mutant or WT proviral plasmids by the calcium phosphate method. Both cultures were labeled with l-[35S]methionine (0.1 muCi/mul, >1,000 Ci/mmol) in methionine-free Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) at 16 h posttransfection. One set was labeled for only 5 min, while the other was labeled for 2.5 h. After the 5-min labeling, the media were discarded, and the cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer. For the 2.5-h labeling, media and cell lysate fractions were prepared. After proteins were immunoprecipitated with antiserum raised against purified RSV, the samples were denatured and separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The amounts of labeled Gag in the lysates of the cells labeled for 5 min and the amounts of capsid (CA) protein released into the media after the 2.5-h labeling were quantified by phosphorimagery. The budding efficiency was calculated by dividing the amount of CA released after 2.5 h by the amount of Gag in the 5-min lysate. The data are expressed as percentages of the WT efficiency of release, which was set to 100%. Pulse-chase analyses were performed by transfecting identical cultures of QT6 cells with WT or mutant proviral (pRS.V8-EGFP) plasmids. After 16 h, the cells were washed and labeled for 10 min with l-[35S]methionine (0.1 muCi/mul, >1,000 Ci/mmol) in methionine-free DMEM. At the end of the pulse (time zero), one culture from each set was placed on ice, and media and cell lysates were prepared with radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer. For the remaining cultures, the labeling media were removed and serum-free DMEM containing an excess of unlabeled methionine was added. At various times, one culture from each set was placed on ice, and media and cell lysates were prepared. After full-length Gag and the products of Gag proteolysis were immunoprecipitated, the labeled proteins were detected and quantified by phosphorimagery. To determine the rate of Gag disappearance from the cell, the amount present at each time point was divided by the amount detected immediately after the pulse. To determine the rate of Gag accumulation in the medium, the amount of CA present at each time point was quantified, and this number was multiplied by the ratio of the number of methionines in full-length Gag to the number in CA (correction factor = 3). The extrapolated value was then normalized by the amount of Gag detected in the cell lysates immediately after the pulse.  Infectivity assays. | QT6 cells were transfected with mutant or WT proviral DNA. After transfection for 16 h, the cells were washed and fresh media were added. Virus-containing media were collected 48 h later, and the cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 2,000 x g. The cell-free supernatants were transferred to new tubes, and reverse transcriptase (RT) assays were performed to determine the concentration of virus. Turkey embryo fibroblasts (TEFs) were then inoculated with equal numbers of particles. After 24 h, the media were changed, and the cells were passaged 1:3 every 3 to 4 days so that infectivity could be determined at days 3, 7, and 14 postinfection. To measure infectivity, the cultures were trypsinized and stored on ice. Approximately 10,000 cells were then examined for the presence of GFP fluorescence with a FACScan (BD Biosciences). As mentioned above, infected cells expressed GFP from the nonessential v-src region of the viral genome. Hence, the percentage of infected cells was determined by dividing the number of green fluorescent cells by the total number examined. To determine whether infectivity by K6,18E-Super M or K13,18E-Super M resulted from unintended suppressor mutations, virus-containing media were collected from the TEFs at 2 weeks postinfection, the cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min at 2,000 x g), and aliquots of the media were used to determine the virus concentrations by RT assay. Equal numbers of WT and mutant virus were added to fresh, uninfected TEFs, and the percentage of infected (GFP-fluorescent) cells was determined at 1 week postinfection. At this time point, the number of cells infected with the charge-balanced viruses would be similar to the number infected by the WT if the mutant viruses had made additional, compensatory changes (e.g., reversion of the Super M substitutions) during the primary infection. However, cultures inoculated with the charge-balanced mutants contained one-fourth to one-third the number of fluorescent cells found in WT-infected cultures (data not shown).  Analysis of physical properties and protein composition of extracellular virus. | For electron microscopy, QT6 cells were seeded on 60-mm-diameter Permanox dishes and transfected with WT or Super M proviral DNA. After 16 h, the cultures were washed with 0.1 M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.4) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde-0.5% glutaraldehyde for 1 h at 4C. Fixed cells were then incubated for 30 min with 1% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated, and embedded in Epon 812. Thin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and extracellular particles were detected by electron microscopy. To determine the density of Super M virus, particle-containing media were collected after labeling transfected QT6 cells for 2.5 h with [35S]methionine. Media were then centrifuged (10 min at 2,000 x g) to remove cellular debris and layered onto a 10 to 50% gradient of sucrose suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). As an internal control, labeled particles produced by pGag-GFP were added to the same gradient. The samples were then centrifuged at 83,500 x g for 16 h at 4C. Sixteen fractions of 0.7 ml each were collected from the bottom of the gradient, and the labeled Gag proteins were immunoprecipitated, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and quantified by phosphorimagery. The amount of WT or mutant protein in each fraction is expressed as a percentage of the total detected in the entire gradient. The density of each fraction was determined by examining a 50-mul aliquot by refractometry. The levels of Env and Pol incorporated into Super M particles were examined by Western blotting. Particles were collected from transfected QT6 cells, and RT assays were performed using exogenous templates (poly[A]) and primers (oligo[dT]). Virus samples corresponding to equal amounts of RT activity were denatured, and the proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and blotted to nitrocellulose membranes. To detect the amount of CA in each sample, the membranes were incubated with rabbit polyclonal antisera specific for RSV Gag and the products of Gag proteolysis (anti-Gag). To detect the levels of Env incorporated, membranes were incubated with rabbit antisera raised against the TM subunit of RSV Env (anti-TM). Primary antibody binding was visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence after incubation of the membranes with goat anti-rabbit antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase.  Analysis of genome packaging. | QT6 cells were transfected with mutant or WT proviral DNA. After 16 h, the transfection media were removed, the cells were washed, and fresh media were added. Forty-eight hours later, virus-containing media were collected and the cellular debris was removed as described above. To concentrate the extracellular virus, the cell-free media were centrifuged at 126,000 x g for 40 min at 4C over a solution of 20% sucrose in PBS. The virus pellet was then resuspended in PBS, and a portion was used to determine the concentration of virus by RT assay. Particle-associated RNA was then prepared with the TRI reagent (Sigma) according to the supplier's protocol and linear acrylamide (Ambion; 10 mug/ml) as a coprecipitant. After resuspension in diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water, RNA sample volumes corresponding to equal numbers of particles were denatured and blotted to nylon membranes with a slot blot apparatus. The amount of genomic RNA packaged by each virus was detected by hybridization with 32P-labeled antisense riboprobes specific for the gag gene, as previously described . The amounts of labeled RNA bound to each sample were quantified by phosphorimagery. In a similar manner, the steady-state levels of genomic RNA present in both WT and Super M-producing cells were examined. The levels of genome packaging by the WT and Super M were also examined by RNase protection assay (RPA) and Northern blotting (data not shown). For the Northern blot analyses, particle-associated RNA was purified as described above. RNA sample volumes corresponding to equal numbers of virus were denatured, resolved on 2.2 M formaldehyde-1% agarose gels in MOPS (morpholinepropanesulfonic acid) electrophoresis buffer, and blotted to nylon membranes by standard techniques. Hybridizations with a 32P-labeled gag-specific riboprobe were performed as described above. For analysis by RPA, RNA from equivalent numbers of Super M and WT particles was denatured and hybridized with a 32P-labeled antisense gag riboprobe (532 nucleotides [nt]) and the RPA III kit (Ambion). Protected fragments (502 nt) were separated by electrophoresis on 5% acrylamide-8 M urea gels and quantified by phosphorimagery. To determine whether Super M contained vRNA dimers, QT6 cells were transfected with WT or mutant proviral DNA and the extracellular particles were collected from the media by ultracentrifugation. RNA from equivalent numbers of particles was purified and resolved on agarose gels under native conditions as described by Fu and Rein . After electrophoresis, the RNA was denatured by incubating the gel in 6% formaldehyde for 30 min at 65C. After several rinses in DEPC-treated water, the gel was soaked in 20x SSC (1x SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.15 M sodium citrate), and the RNA was blotted to nylon membranes. Blotted RNA was hybridized with the 32P-labeled gag antisense riboprobe and visualized by autoradiography (data not shown).  Packaging of heterologous, Psi-containing RNA. | The 160-nt RSV minimal packaging sequence, MPsi, was defined by Banks et al. . To create pCMV.MPsi.gfp, we used PCR to amplify the DNA sequence between nt 156 and 315, which encodes MPsi in the RSV Prague C proviral plasmid pATV-8. The sequences of the primers used for PCR were as follows: sense, 5'-AATAGATCTGATCCTGCCCTCATCC; antisense, 5'-TTAAGATCTGCGGCCGCCGTCTTCCAACG. These primers created BglII sites (underlined) that flank the MPsi sequence, so the PCR product was digested and inserted into the BglII site (nt 610) of pEGFP-N2 (Clontech), which expresses GFP from the cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter. Positive clones containing a single insert in the proper orientation were identified by restriction digestion and confirmed by DNA sequencing. To create the WT gag-only expression vector, the Prague C gag sequences from the proviral plasmid pRC.V8 were isolated by digestion with SstI and HpaI. This fragment was inserted into pEGFP-N2 after the gfp sequences were removed by digestion with SstI and NotI. In this case, the NotI end of the vector DNA was treated with the Klenow fragment of E. coli DNA polymerase I for ligation to the blunt HpaI end of the gag fragment. The resulting plasmid, designated pCMV.GagPR, was transfected into QT6 cells and found to synthesize full-length Gag proteins that were released into the medium and processed by protease (PR) (data not shown). To create pCMV.Super M.GagPR, the SstI/BspEI fragment (453 bp) encoding the Super M changes was exchanged with the corresponding WT sequences in pCMV.GagPR and the resulting clones were screened by DNA sequencing. The abilities of WT and Super M Gag to package heterologous mRNA were determined as follows. First, both pCMV.MPsi.gfp and pEGFP-N2, designated MPsi(-).gfp, were cotransfected into QT6 cells with either the WT or Super M Gag expression vector. All plasmids were transfected at equimolar amounts, and the total amount of DNA per transfection was 15 mug/35-mm-diameter plate. After 12 h, the transfection media were removed, and the monolayers were washed. The cultures were then trace labeled with [35S]methionine (0.1 muCi/mul, >1,000 Ci/mmol) in complete DMEM containing 1% fetal bovine serum. After approximately 20 h of labeling, the media were collected, the cellular debris was removed by low-speed centrifugation, and a portion of each supernatant was used to determine the concentrations of radiolabeled particles by immunoprecipitation, SDS-PAGE, and phosphorimager analyses. Particles were then pelleted from the remaining media, and the particle-associated RNA was purified with the TRI reagent (Sigma) and linear acrylamide as a coprecipitant. The cell-associated RNA was also purified from the monolayers in a similar manner. Upon resuspension of the RNA in DEPC-treated water, equal volumes were mixed with a 32P-labeled antisense riboprobe (306 nt) specific for the 5' ends of MPsi.gfp and MPsi(-).gfp mRNA. After hybridization for 16 h at 42C, RNase digestions were performed with the RPA III kit (Ambion). Protected fragments were resolved on 4% acrylamide-8 M urea gels and quantified by phosphorimagery. Because the labeled riboprobe contained both MPsi and gfp sequences, the presence of the MPsi.gfp mRNA yielded a protected band of 269 nt, whereas MPsi(-).gfp mRNA yielded a protected band of 204 nt. To calculate the packaging efficiency for each RNA species, the amount detected in the medium was divided by the steady-state level detected in the cell. This value was then normalized by the number of radiolabeled particles present in the medium. In each experiment, the efficiency of MPsi.gfp packaging by WT Gag was set to 100%. To determine the abilities of WT and Super M Gag to select for the MPsi-containing mRNA in this assay, the efficiency of MPsi.gfp packaging was divided by the efficiency of MPsi(-).gfp packaging. Hence, this number represents the factor of enrichment for Psi-containing mRNA in WT and Super M Gag particles. To compare the abilities of wild-type and Super M Gag to package nonspecific RNA, QT6 cultures were cotransfected with pCMV.MPsi(-).gfp and either pCMV.GagPR or pCMV.Super M.GagPR vectors. After 12 h, the cells were trace labeled with [35S]methionine and particle-associated RNA was purified as described above. Nonspecific packaging of MPsi(-).gfp mRNA was quantified by RPA and normalized to the amount of radiolabeled Gag present in the medium. For comparison, the level of MPsi(-).gfp packaging by the WT was set to 100%.  Subcellular targeting properties of Super M. | Construction of the pGag-GFP expression plasmid was described previously . To create pDeltaNC-GFP, the region between nt 1044 and 1865 in gag was amplified by PCR. The primer sequences were as follows: sense, 5'-GGGCAAGGGTCAGGG; antisense, 5'-GTTTGGGGCCCCCTCTCTCTATTGAC. To prepare the PCR product for cloning, we made use of the endogenous EspI site at nt 1419 in gag and the ApaI site engineered by the antisense PCR primer (underlined). The digested fragment was then exchanged with the EspI/ApaI fragment of pGag-GFP. The resulting sequences encode a chimera in which GFP is fused to the C terminus of the seventh residue of the NC domain in Gag. Hence, the remaining C-terminal residues of Gag, including the I domains and the zinc fingers, are absent in DeltaNC-GFP. To create pSuperM-GFP and pSuperM-DeltaNC-GFP, the SstI/BspEI fragment encoding the Super M Gag substitutions was exchanged with the corresponding WT sequences in pGag-GFP and pDeltaNC-GFP, respectively. The subcellular distributions of the GFP-tagged chimeras in transfected QT6 cells were examined by confocal microscopy as previously described . To determine the effects of LMB treatment on WT and mutant Gag-GFP localization, transfected QT6 cells were treated with the drug at a final concentration of 10 ng/ml for 3 h before examination by confocal microscopy .
In a previous report, the 11 basic residues in the RSV Gag M domain were shown to be essential for Gag targeting to the plasma membrane . To further investigate the possibility that Gag binds the plasma membrane by forming electrostatic interactions with acidic phospholipids, additional basic residues were introduced into the M domain, and these changes were shown to enhance budding from mammalian (COS-1) cells. The most dramatic increase in budding was observed with a mutant, designated Super M, whose Gag contains two substitutions, E25K and E70K . These substitutions simultaneously increased the number of basic residues in the M domain from 11 to 13 and decreased the number of acidic residues from 6 to 4. Hence, the Super M substitutions cause a net shift of +4 in the M domain. Analysis of Super M virus budding and infectivity. | To further our analysis of Super M, the mutant sequence was subcloned into pRS.V8-EGFP, a proviral plasmid derived from pRCAS-EGFP . Metabolic labeling of transfected QT6 cells subsequently showed that Super M produced three times more virus than the WT control, whereas the level of the previously described Src chimera, Myr1E, was enhanced by about twofold . The enhanced rate of release of these two mutants was confirmed by pulse-chase analyses. As shown in Fig. , the pulse-labeled mutants disappeared from the cells more quickly than the WT, with the levels of Super M and Myr1E being reduced to less than one-half of WT levels after chasing for 30 min. Concurrent with their increased rate of disappearance from the cell, Super M and Myr1E proteins accumulated more rapidly in the media . Therefore, Super M and Myr1E bud much faster than WT virus. Interestingly, 50 to 60% of the amount of wild-type Gag synthesized during the pulse was recovered in the cell and media fractions at the end of the chase (120 min), whereas approximately 80% of Super M Gag was accounted for. Given the correlation between increased recovery and enhanced budding, it was possible that rapid escape from the cytoplasm reduced Gag loss due to premature processing by the viral PR or degradation by cellular machinery. To determine whether PR affected recovery, PR- versions of the WT and Super M were expressed from gag-only vectors and analyzed as shown in Fig. . In this case, approximately 90% of the pulse-labeled WT and Super M proteins were recovered at the final chase point (data not shown). Thus, the difference in recovery between PR+ versions of the WT and Super M is likely due to differences in the relative budding rates rather than a gross change in protein stability. As mentioned above, Myr1E was previously shown to be noninfectious . Since Super M and Myr1E exhibit similar, enhanced budding rates, we considered the possibility that Super M would be noninfectious as well. To test this, WT and mutant viruses were collected from transfected QT6 cells. Media containing equal numbers of particles were then transferred to primary cultures of TEFs. The kinetics of virus spreading were determined by examining the cultures at days 3, 7, and 14 postinfection. Infected cells were detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) because the proviruses expressed gfp from the nonessential, v-src region of the genome . To determine the sensitivity of this method, serial twofold dilutions of infected (GFP-positive) cells were made with uninfected (GFP-negative) cells. Subsequent analyses revealed that FACS reliably detected GFP-positive cells in a linear range from 1 to 100% of the total population examined (10,000 cells) (data not shown). Despite the apparent sensitivity of this assay, fluorescent cells were not detected in the TEF cultures incubated with Super M virus . Moreover, no infectivity was detected when 104-fold more Super M virus (relative to the WT control) was incubated with the TEF cultures (data not shown). Therefore, Super M is noninfectious.  Physical properties and composition of the Super M virus. | To uncover the cause(s) of the Super M infectivity defect, several features of the mutant virus were examined. Thin sections of Super M-producing cells examined by electron microscopy revealed particles of normal size with electron-dense cores like those of mature, WT virus . Analysis of particles by isopycnic sucrose gradient centrifugation showed that the density of Super M virus was like that of WT particles, with the peak of each population banding at a density of 1.16 g/ml in sucrose . To determine the levels of Env and Pol incorporation, particles were collected from transfected QT6 cells and analyzed by RT assays using exogenous templates and primers. Virus sample volumes corresponding to equal amounts of RT activity were denatured, separated by SDS-PAGE, and probed by Western blotting. With a primary antibody specific for RSV Gag and Gag-derived proteins (anti-Gag), equal amounts of CA (27 kDa) were detected in the WT and Super M lanes . Since these samples were first normalized by RT activity, this result indicates that the ratios of Gag to Pol for WT and Super M viruses are similar. Likewise, an antibody specific for the TM subunit of Env (anti-TM) yielded bands of equal intensities when the WT and Super M samples were normalized by RT activity. Here, however, the TM bands migrated faster than the published mobility of 37 kDa, a difference probably due to fewer glycosylation sites in the TM subunit of this particular strain of RSV . In contrast to the levels of Env and Pol, the amounts of genomic RNA packaged by Super M were significantly reduced. This defect was first identified by slot blot analyses using RNA purified from equal numbers of WT and mutant particles . Specifically, Super M contained only 10% of the amount of vRNA found in WT virus. Northern blotting and RPAs confirmed the severity of this defect (data not shown). To determine whether the Super M packaging deficiency was due to a paucity of vRNA inside the cell, perhaps as a result of vRNA instability due to the Super M mutations, RNA was also purified from the transfected monolayers. As shown in Fig. , however, the Super M-expressing cells contained normal amounts of genomic RNA. Therefore, the Super M packaging defect is not due to a gross reduction in the level of intracellular vRNA. Although the mutations that cause the two acidic-to-basic substitutions in Super M lie downstream of the packaging signal, it was possible that these mutations somehow altered folding in the 5' end of the vRNA and disrupted stem-loop structures that are critical for Psi function. Alternatively, the Super M changes might have altered folding in the NC domain and prevented Gag from recognizing the Psi sequence. To test these possibilities, a plasmid expressing MPsi.gfp, an RNA consisting of the 160-nt RSV minimal packaging sequence, MPsi, at the 5' end of a nonviral (gfp) mRNA, was generated  . With this vector, designated pCMV.MPsi.gfp, the abilities of WT and mutant Gag proteins (expressed from pCMV.GagPR, a gag-only expression vector) to package identical, MPsi-containing mRNA were compared. To determine the specificity of packaging in this system, the pCMV.MPsi.gfp plasmid was cotransfected with pCMV.MPsi(-).gfp, a vector that expresses a gfp mRNA lacking the MPsi sequence. Under these conditions, Super M Gag packaged about one-fourth the amount of MPsi.gfp found in WT virus-like particles (VLPs) . Thus, the genome packaging defect seen in provirus-transfected cells is likely due to the amino acid substitutions in the Super M protein rather than to the mutations made in the genomic RNA. With MPsi.gfp, however, the Super M defect was less pronounced (i.e., genome packaging was 1/10 WT levels, whereas MPsi.gfp packaging was 1/4 WT levels). A possible explanation for this difference is that the number of MPsi.gfp mRNAs (produced by the cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter) may have exceeded the number of viral genomes that Gag normally encounters in an infected cell. Nevertheless, packaging of MPsi.gfp mRNA by WT and Super M Gag was apparently specific because incorporation of the MPsi- control was only 1/5 to 1/10 as efficient. This result reveals that, although the absolute amounts differed, the ratios of MPsi to MPsi(-).gfp mRNA in WT and Super M VLPs were similar . Thus, the ability to select for MPsi-containing RNA suggests that the Super M substitutions do not weaken NC's specificity for vRNA. Instead, the Super M domain may prevent packaging by an indirect mechanism, perhaps by enabling Gag to leave the site of genome packaging more quickly. Given recent data suggesting that RNA is required to serve a structural role during retrovirus assembly , the ability of Super M to incorporate nonspecific, cellular RNA was investigated. In this case, either WT or Super M gag-only (pCMV.GagPR) expression vectors were cotransfected into QT6 cells with pCMV.MPsi(-).gfp, which makes mRNA that can only be packaged nonspecifically. The amounts of MPsi(-).gfp mRNA in the cell and medium fractions were determined by RPA, and the packaging efficiency was calculated by normalizing to the amount of Gag released. Under these conditions, Super M Gag packaged about one-half the amount of MPsi(-).gfp mRNA found in WT VLPs . Hence, this result suggests that Super M is able to "compensate" for the vRNA packaging defect by incorporating nonspecific, cellular RNA. However, because Super M Gag exhibited a twofold reduction in the relative level of MPsi(-).gfp incorporation, it seems likely that the rapid rate of budding inhibits nonspecific RNA packaging, albeit to a much lesser degree than vRNA packaging. Despite the reduced amount of RNA incorporation, Super M virus appeared normal by electron microscopy and exhibited WT density in sucrose . Therefore, the level of total 