Method for Estimation of Low Outer Membrane Permeability to beta-Lactam Antibiotics
The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria plays a major role in beta-lactam resistance as it slows down antibiotic entry into the periplasm and therefore acts in synergy with beta-lactamases and efflux systems. Up to now, the quantitative estimation of low outer membrane permeability by the method of Zimmermann and Rosselet was difficult because of the secreted and cell surface-associated beta-lactamases. The method presented here uses the acylation of a highly sensitive periplasmic penicillin-binding protein (PBP) (BlaR-CTD) to assess the rate of beta-lactam penetration into the periplasm. The method is dedicated to measurement of low permeability and is only valid when the diffusion rate through the outer membrane is rate limiting. Cytoplasmic membrane associated PBPs do not interfere since they are acylated after the very sensitive BlaR-CTD. This method was used to measure the permeability of beta-lactamase-deficient strains of Enterobacter cloacae and Enterobacter aerogenes to benzylpenicillin, ampicillin, carbenicillin, cefotaxime, aztreonam, and cephacetrile. Except for that of cephacetrile, the permeability coefficients were equal to or below 10-7 cm/s. For cephacetrile, carbenicillin, and benzylpenicillin, the outer membrane of E. cloacae was 20 to 60 times less permeable than that of Escherichia coli, whereas for cefotaxime, aztreonam, and ampicillin it was, respectively, 400, 1,000, and 700 times less permeable. The permeability coefficient for aztreonam is the lowest ever measured (P = 3.2 x 10-9 cm/s). Using these values, the MICs for a beta-lactamase-overproducing strain of E. cloacae were successfully predicted, demonstrating the validity of the method.

beta-Lactams are the most potent and widely used antibiotics, and many studies have been devoted to understanding how bacteria increase their resistance to these compounds. Gram-negative resistance results mainly from the interplay between four independent factors: (i) the sensitivity of the target enzymes, the penicillin-binding proteins, (ii) the properties and concentration of the periplasmic beta-lactamases, (iii) the permeability of the outer membrane and (iv) the efficiency of the active efflux system . On this basis, a model which allowed a quantitative prediction of the MICs for gram-negative bacteria was developed and applied with success to Escherichia coli and Enterobacter cloacae . However, as demonstrated by Livermore and Davy , this model was not applicable to Pseudomonas aeruginosa, one of the most common opportunistic pathogens. This was due to efflux pumps which also significantly contribute to intrinsic beta-lactam resistance in P. aeruginosa . This was unexpected, because beta-lactam targets are located outside the cytoplasmic membrane and also because in E. coli this mechanism does not produce such a high and broad level of resistance . Li et al., pointed out that the low outer membrane permeability of P. aeruginosa renders this efflux mechanism particularly efficient (15, 16). In fact, while the few permeability coefficients (P) published for P. aeruginosa are low, they are also highly variable. For cephaloridine and nitrocefin, Nikaido's group reported P values of 10-6 and 6 x 10-7 cm/s, respectively , but others have measured values equal to or less than 2 x 10-8 cm/s . All these values were determined on the basis of the method of Zimmermann and Rosselet , in which the hydrolysis of beta-lactam by intact cells is compared to that obtained with a lysate. The analysis is then based on the assumption that a steady state is rapidly established in the periplasm, where the rate of penetration of the antibiotic which obeys Fick's law of diffusion is equal to that of the beta-lactamase-catalyzed hydrolysis, which follows Henri-Michaelis kinetics. If the validity of this assumption has been demonstrated experimentally , the method is not accurate when beta-lactamase activity is present in the medium or on the cell surface. Under these conditions, the error introduced remains negligible if the outer membrane permeability is high, as with E. coli , but when the permeability is low, as with P. aeruginosa, the correction factors range from 4 to 10 depending on the experimental conditions , and in addition it should be carefully verified that steady-state conditions really prevail. It is therefore not surprising that only a few P values have been determined for Enterobacter and Pseudomonas species. In the present study, we have developed a new method based on the properties of a soluble, periplasmic high-affinity penicillin-binding protein (PBP) which can easily be used to measure low outer membrane permeability coefficients. This PBP is the C-terminal domain of the BlaR penicillin sensory transducer involved in beta-lactamase induction in Bacillus licheniformis (M. Swinnen, S. Lepage, A. Brans, B. Granier, J. M. Frere, and B. Joris, submitted for publication).
Bacterial strains and plasmids. | Enterobacter aerogenes 006 is a wild-type strain that produces an inducible beta-lactamase. E. aerogenes 008-4 is a beta-lactamase-deficient strain obtained by subjecting the beta-lactamase-overproducing strain E. aerogenes 008 to chemical mutagenesis. These strains were kindly provided by N. A. C. Curtis . The resistant E. cloacae 908R overproduces a class C beta-lactamase. It was obtained by sequential passages on increasing concentrations of ceftriaxone and was kindly given by R. L. Then (Hoffmann-LaRoche, Basel, Switzerland) . E. cloacae AD2 is a beta-lactamase-negative mutant isogenic to E. cloacae 908R, obtained by insertion of the kanamycin resistance gene in the chromosomal ampR-ampC locus. For details about the construction of this strain see reference  and references given therein. P. aeruginosa PAO1 was kindly provided by D. M. Livermore. Plasmids pDML309 and pDML310 were constructed by inserting the 1.2-kb HindIII-BalI fragment of plasmid pRTW8 coding for the 256 residues of the C-terminal domain of the BlaR penicillin sensory transducer of B. licheniformis (BlaR-CTD) in plasmid pIN-III-ompA . This vector allows periplasmic expression of proteins. It contains the strong lppp promoter of the E. coli lipoprotein controlled by the lac-UV5 promoter-operator. The E. coliompA signal peptide is under the control of the two latter promoters and a polylinker is present just at the end of the ompA signal peptide sequence. The ampicillin resistance gene of pIN-III-ompA was replaced by the tetracycline and kanamycin resistance genes, yielding pDML309 and pDML310, respectively (Swinnen et al., submitted). The resulting plasmids were used to transform E. cloacae AD2 and E. aerogenes 008-4, respectively. Plasmid pBL2 was used to produce BlaR-CTD in the periplasm of P. aeruginosa. It was constructed by ligating the 5.8-kb PstI-HpaI fragment of plasmid pDML309 to the 5.9-kb PstI-PvuII fragment of pKT240  (purchased from the Laboratorium voor Moleculaire Biologie Plasmidencollectie culture collection, University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium).  Antibiotics. | The following compounds were kind gifts of various companies: carbenicillin from Beecham (Brentford, United Kingdom), cefotaxime from Hoechst-Roussel (Romainville, France), cephaloridine from Eli-Lilly (Indianapolis, Ind.), aztreonam from Squibb (Princeton, N.J.), benzylpenicillin from Rhone-Poulenc (Paris, France), ampicillin from Bristol-Myers Squibb (Brussels, Belgium), nitrocefin from Oxoid (Basingstoke, United Kingdom), and [14C]cephacetrile (4.5 mCi/mmol) from Ciba-Geigy (Basel, Switzerland). 3H- and 14C-labeled benzylpenicillin (19 Ci and 59 mCi/mmol, respectively) were purchased from Amersham (Little Chalfont, United Kingdom), and tetracycline and kanamycin were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, Mo.) and Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), respectively.  MIC determination. | MICs were determined in Isosensitest broth (Oxoid) with serial doubling dilutions of the antibiotics. For each antibiotic concentration, an inoculum of 2 x 104 CFU taken from a growing culture in Isosensitest broth (A600 = 1), was added to 2 ml of medium. Results were recorded after a 24-h incubation at 37C with shaking (200 rpm). The MIC was taken as the minimal antibiotic concentration inhibiting bacterial growth.  Measurement of benzylpenicillin hydrolysis. | An aliquot of cells was centrifuged at 5,000 x g and 4C for 3 min. A 10-mul aliquot of the supernatant was applied to a silica thin-layer chromatography plate (Merck), and benzylpenicillin was separated from benzylpenicilloic acid using chloroform-methanol-acetic acid (88:10:2, vol/vol/vol) as a solvent.  SDS-PAGE and fluorography. | Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and fluorography were performed according to standard methods .  Cell fractionation and labeling with fluorescent antibiotic. | Enterobacter cells were harvested by centrifugation when the culture had reached an A600 value of 0.8; resuspended in 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, containing 27% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and lysozyme (0.5 mg/ml); and incubated at 4C for 20 min. The periplasmic fraction was separated from the spheroplasts by centrifugation at 30,000 x g for 15 min. To lyse the spheroplasts, they were resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, containing 10 mM MgCl2 and DNase (20 mug/ml). The lysed spheroplasts are referred to hereafter as the cellular fraction. For P. aeruginosa, the periplasmic fraction was isolated by three freeze-thaw cycles. Labeling of the periplasmic and cellular fractions was performed with 5'-fluoresceyl-glycyl-6-aminopenicillanic acid (5'-Flu-Gly-6APA) as previously described .  Determination of beta-lactamase content of cells. | Aliquots of cells growing in Isosensitest broth were withdrawn after various time intervals. A portion (50%) of each aliquot was filtered on a Millipore GVWP filter (pore size, 0.2 mum) for dry weight measurement. The other 50% was kept in dry ice until sonication on ice (three 30-s bursts; amplitude, 6 mum). The beta-lactamase activity was determined in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.2) and at 30C with 115 muM nitrocefin as a substrate.  Determination of outer membrane permeability. | Cells were grown overnight in Luria-Bertani broth containing kanamycin or tetracycline (50 mug/ml) as plasmid selection agents. The resulting culture was diluted 100-fold into the appropriate culture medium without any isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside or antibiotic, and growth was resumed at 37C up to an A600 of 1.5. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 15 to 20C and resuspended in the appropriate prewarmed medium. The assay was started 3 to 5 min after equilibration at the desired temperature. A sample was also taken for dry weight determination.  (i) Determination of outer membrane permeability by the method of Zimmermann and Rosselet. | A portion of cell suspension (cell density [dry weight] between 0.05 and 0.15 mg/ml) was sonicated on ice (three 30-s bursts; amplitude, 6 mum) and used for determination of maximum rate (Vmax). The remaining part of the intact cell suspension was mixed with 400 to 800 muM cephacetrile or 250 to 1,000 muM cephaloridine and transferred to a cuvette with a 1-mm light path, and the absorbance at 260 nm was recorded with the help of an Uvikon 860 device (Kontron Instruments).  (ii) Determination of outer membrane permeability by the new method. (a) Preliminary comment. | The protocol described here is optimized for 3H- or 14C-labeled benzylpenicillin and [14C]cephacetrile. However, it can probably be adapted according to the properties of the radiolabeled antibiotic. Optimal results are obtained if BlaR-CTD labeling can be quenched as fast as possible and if the excess of free antibiotic can be almost completely removed.  (b) Determination of outer membrane permeability if the studied antibiotic is radiolabeled. | Nine hundred microliters of cells (cell density [dry weight], 5 mg/ml) in the appropriate prewarmed medium was mixed with 100 mul of prewarmed antibiotic (10 muM [3H]benzylpenicillin [see Fig. ]; 4.5 to 18 muM [14C]benzylpenicillin [see Fig. ]; 1.5 muM [14C]cephacetrile). Aliquots of 100 mul were withdrawn after various intervals and mixed to 25 mul of 5 N HCl to instantaneously stop the binding to BlaR-CTD. The excess of free radiolabeled antibiotic was eliminated by three extractions with the same volume of water-saturated butanol. The proteins were then precipitated by adding 25 mul of a mixture of 50% trichloroacetic acid-3.75% tungstosilicic acid (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland). Samples were left on ice for 10 min and then centrifuged 45 min at 15,000 x g. The supernatant was removed and the tubes were washed once with water to remove the last traces of radiolabeled antibiotic. After centrifugation, the pellet was solubilized in 10% SDS and the radioactivity was determined with a scintillation counter.  (c) Determination of outer membrane permeability if the studied antibiotic is not radioactive. | If the studied antibiotic is not radioactive, the unlabeled antibiotic is incubated at 25C for increasing periods of time in a total volume of 1 ml of the cell suspension. The residual free BlaR-CTD is then counterlabeled with 15 muM [14C]cephacetrile. This labeled compound was chosen for its high diffusion coefficient. Under the conditions described here the counterlabeling is completed within 20 s. A higher cell density was used because of the lower specific radioactivity of the counterlabeling antibiotic. Nine hundred microliters of cells (cell density [dry weight], 20 to 30 mg/ml) in the appropriate prewarmed medium was mixed with 100 mul of prewarmed nonradioactive antibiotic. After different time intervals, 100-mul samples were removed and added with 50 mul of 45 muM [14C]cephacetrile. After 2 min of incubation at 25C, the reaction was stopped and the samples were treated as above. The antibiotic concentrations used for permeability measurements were as follows: 7.5, 15, and 30 muM cefotaxime; 50, 100, and 200 muM carbenicillin; 5, 10, and 20 muM ampicillin; and 75, 100, and 200 muM aztreonam. The longest incubation time was 45 min.  Model and simulation. | Using the new method, the situation that prevails during the measurement of the outer membrane permeability for a beta-lactamase producing strain is represented by the following model:  where Ie represents the external concentration of antibiotic, Ip represents the periplasmic concentration of antibiotic, E1 represents the periplasmic concentration of BlaR-CTD, E2 represents the periplasmic concentration of beta-lactamase, E1I* and E2I* represent the corresponding acyl enzymes, X represents the degradation product of I (all concentrations are micromolar concentrations), kd represents the first-order rate constant for antibiotic diffusion through the outer membrane (per second), kf1 and kf2 represent the second-order rate constants for the formation of E1I* and E2I*, respectively (per micromolar per second), and k3 represents the first-order rate constant for deacylation of the beta-lactamase (per second). The equations describing the variations of Ip, E1I*, and E2I* are  Simulations were performed on the basis of these equations with the help of a numerical integration program based on a Runge Kutta method of the fourth order . For beta-lactamase-deficient strains, the same model was used with [E2] and [E2I*] equal to zero.  Calculation of the permeability coefficient (P) by the new method. | Since kd is equal to PA/Vp and [E1I*] is equal to nE1I*/Vp, where Vp is the periplasmic volume and nE1I* is the quantity of labeled BlaR-CTD (in picomoles)  A is equal to 132 cm2  mg (dry weight)-1, and the unit for [Ie] is nanomolar. d(nE1I*)/dt can be obtained by multiplying the slope of the observed labeling versus time (expressed in counts per minute second-1  milligram [dry weight]-1) by the specific activity of the labeled antibiotic (0.0096 pmol  cpm-1 for [14C]benzylpenicillin and 0.123 pmol  cpm-1 for [14C]cephacetrile as estimated using [14C]hexadecane [1.1 muCi/g] as a standard for estimating the counting yield).
Validity of the new method. | Zimmermann was the first to use the rate of PBP acylation for a qualitative evaluation of outer membrane permeability . However, as pointed out by Nikaido, the method is valid only if the periplasmic concentration of the beta-lactam has not reached its equilibrium value, i.e., if the reaction of the beta-lactam with the PBP is more rapid than the diffusion process . Using the above model for a beta-lactamase-deficient strain, we have searched for combinations of kf1, kd, E1 total concentration (E1tot) and Ie which result in rate-limiting diffusion under these conditions:  Simulations were done keeping E1tot between 10 and 40 muM, Ie between 0.5 and 100 muM, and kd at <0.26 s-1. In all cases the acylation of E1 up to 70% saturation (E1I*/E1tot = 0.7) was analyzed by linear regression. The kd values calculated on the basis of equation 2 were then compared to those used in the simulation. From these analyses (data not shown), it appears that diffusion can be considered limiting if  This relation gives useful information on the limitations of the method. For example, it will be difficult to study the outer membrane permeability of E. coli because most of its kd values are larger than 0.13 s-1 , and on the basis of equation 3, it would thus be necessary to produce a periplasmic PBP with kf values larger than 30,000 M-1 s-1 (if we assume E1tot = 40 muM). On the contrary, this method applies well to P. aeruginosa because all reported kd values are below 0.13 s-1. BlaR-CTD is therefore an ideal PBP for such studies, because the kf values for various beta-lactams are between 103 and 106 M-1 s-1 (Swinnen et al., submitted). Note that if the value of kf1 for the studied compound is not known, it can be easily measured to demonstrate that diffusion is the rate-limiting factor (equation 3). beta-Lactamase production is another important factor, as these enzymes compete with PBPs for the free antibiotic. Consequently this method is not applicable to beta-lactamase-overproducing strains. For beta-lactamase-inducible strains, which produce low levels of enzyme in the noninduced state, the validity of the method will depend on (i) the relative concentration of the two enzymes, (ii) their relative affinity for the antibiotic, and (iii) the stability of the beta-lactam against hydrolysis.  Development of the method. | Because some beta-lactams might cross the cytoplasmic membrane , the cellular localization of BlaR-CTD was analyzed. Periplasmic and cellular fractions were added with 5'-Flu-Gly-6APA, and the labeling was assessed under UV after SDS-PAGE. As expected from the plasmid construction, more than 95% of BlaR-CTD is found in the periplasm, and only a small amount of precursor is detected in the cellular fraction (result not shown). The influence of antibiotics on outer membrane integrity is still largely unknown, and therefore fresh cultures were grown without selective pressure. Under these conditions, 5 to 15% of cells lose their plasmid. Although these cells influence the dry weight but do not participate in the permeability measurement, no correction was introduced when calculating kd. Incubation of E. aerogenes 008-4 intact cells with [3H]benzylpenicillin shows that they bind more beta-lactam if they express BlaR-CTD . Some protein-bound radioactivity is released into the medium during the assay, but it only represents a small percentage of the cell-bound counts and is not expected to influence the slope of the line over the first 15 min. The binding appears to be a three-step process. First, a rapid step of small amplitude occurs during the mixing time (i.e., t = 0 [5 to 10 s in Fig.  ]), followed by a second step of larger amplitude over a 15-min time scale and finally a third step with a small amplitude on a larger time scale. The same experiment analyzed by fluorography shows that during the first 15 min, when the highest binding rate is observed, only BlaR-CTD is acylated . Acylation of the membrane-bound PBPs only takes place during the third step of the experiment when BlaR is fully labeled. Because the total amount of BlaR-CTD is constant during the experiment and no significant release into the medium occurs during that time, the labeling observed over the first 15 min after mixing is diffusion dependent and can be used to measure the outer membrane permeability. The binding which occurs during the mixing time remains unexplained, since in the case of E. aerogenes 008-4 devoid of plasmid, no labeled protein is detected when samples are directly denatured and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. This labeling is probably due to nonspecific adsorption or trapping of the antibiotic because of the high cell density and acidic treatment. When pDML310 is present in the cells, in addition to this phenomenon, some BlaR-CTD might be freely accessible because it is inserted into the outer membrane with its active site directed to the medium, as already observed with beta-lactamases . Moreover, whatever its cause, this phenomenon does not alter the linearity of BlaR-CTD labeling during the second phase . For the cells which do not produce BlaR-CTD, the slow labeling is due to the membrane bound PBPs. The method was applied to measure the outer membrane permeability of E. aerogenes 008-4 to [14C]benzylpenicillin. As illustrated by Fig. , during the second phase, the labeling rate increases in proportion with the external antibiotic concentration. The permeability coefficient calculated from the slopes using equation 1 is (2.7 +- 0.5) x 10-8 cm/s. Using the same method, we have measured the permeability coefficient of [14C]cephacetrile. As expected from previous work, its diffusion rate is about 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of benzylpenicillin and is equal to (1.8 +- 0.3) x 10-6 cm/s and (4.2 +- 0.8) x 10-6 cm/s for E. aerogenes 008-4 and E. cloacae AD2, respectively. Because our method is expected to be less accurate for high P values, its validity was tested by measuring the permeability of E. cloacae 908R to cephacetrile with the help of the method of Zimmermann and Rosselet. Using the kinetic parameters of E. cloacae P99 beta-lactamase , the P value was estimated at about (5.2 +- 0.4) x 10-6 cm/s, a value not significantly larger than that measured by the new method. For unlabeled antibiotics, the method is only applicable by counterlabeling with a radioactive compound. Of course, the result is only valid if the diffusion rate of the labeled antibiotic (i.e., kd  [Ie]) is at least 10 times larger than that of the unlabeled beta-lactam. Due to its high P value, cephacetrile is adequate in this case. Using the counterlabeling method with [14C]cephacetrile, the P value of E. aerogenes 008-4 for benzylpenicillin was found to be 3.1 x 10-8 cm/s. This value is close to that measured directly with radiolabeled benzylpenicillin, demonstrating that counterlabeling with cephacetrile is accurate. Therefore, the permeability coefficients of E. aerogenes 008-4 and E. cloacae AD2 for ampicillin, carbenicillin, cefotaxime and aztreonam were measured at 25C (Fig. ; Table ). In all cases, the outer membrane permeability of E. aerogenes is lower than that of E. cloacae by a factor of about 2.  Application to wild-type beta-lactamase-producing strains. | As mentioned before, the presence of a periplasmic beta-lactamase can be an important limiting factor for the method. Using experimental values obtained with P. aeruginosa PAO1 and the mean P of Enterobacter for benzylpenicillin, simulations were performed to see if a low amount of class C beta-lactamase as encountered in wild-type strains could impair benzylpenicillin permeability measurements. On the basis of the beta-lactamase activity in a total cell lysate of PAO1, a periplasmic enzyme concentration of 0.09 muM was estimated. Table  shows that BlaR-CTD is acylated even in the presence of a low amount of class C beta-lactamase. On the basis of the simulated acylation rate (23 muM in 120 s), the calculated kd was 6.3 x 10-3 s-1, which is only 5% lower than that used in the simulation. We therefore measured the outer membrane permeability of two wild-type strains producing low levels of inducible beta-lactamase. The measured P for E. aerogenes 006 to [14C]benzylpenicillin was 2.4 +- 0.5 x 10-8 cm/s. When the method was applied to P. aeruginosa PAO1, a P of 1.3 +- 0.25 x 10-8 cm/s was obtained for benzylpenicillin. In these two experiments, less than 30% of the beta-lactam was hydrolyzed during the experiment as shown by thin-layer chromatography analysis.
Until now, the only method allowing a direct quantitative measurement of the outer membrane permeability was that of Zimmermann and Rosselet. Although there have been some technical improvements to this method, it still remains inaccurate to measure low permeability values when freely accessible beta-lactamase is present in the medium or on the cell surface. The new method described in this paper uses a periplasmic PBP which exhibits a high affinity for beta-lactams and is best suited for the measurement of low outer membrane permeability values. Indeed, equation 2 is only valid when the diffusion process is rate limiting, a condition more easily fulfilled when P is low. Under our conditions, and as shown by Fig. , only BlaR-CTD was significantly labeled. Interference by another PBP would require a rapidly reacting, overproduced, readily accessible protein, a situation which, to our knowledge, has never been encountered. Another advantage is that experiments can be performed even in complex solutions such as culture media. This is important since various experiments have demonstrated that pH and Donnan potential can modify the P for various beta-lactams . By our method, we have measured the outer membrane P values for two Enterobacter strains and six antibiotics. It should be noted that whatever the species, P values for benzylpenicillin, ampicillin, carbenicillin, and aztreonam had never been measured on whole cells. As shown in Table , with the exception of cephaloridine and cephacetrile, the P values do not exceed 10-7 cm/s. Also note that the permeability for aztreonam is the lowest ever measured and this antibiotic is the only one for which the half-equilibration times are larger than the generation times of the bacteria. This very low diffusion rate can also invalidate the method of Zimmermann and Rosselet, since the steady-state assumption is not verified. It also appears that the outer membrane of E. cloacae is two- to threefold more permeable than that of E. aerogenes, and as reported for other Enterobacter species, P values are lower than those of E. coli . For cephaloridine, cephacetrile, carbenicillin, and benzylpenicillin, E. cloacae AD2 is 20-to 60-fold less permeable than E. coli SNO3. For cefotaxime, aztreonam, and ampicillin, E. cloacae AD2 is, respectively, 400-, 1,000-, and 700-fold less permeable than E. coli. In decreasing order of permeation rate, the classification for E. cloacae is cephaloridine, cephacetrile, ampicillin, benzylpenicillin, cefotaxime, carbenicillin, and aztreonam. These results suggest that the porins of these Enterobacter strains have a different selectivity compared to those of E. coli. They seem to be more restrictive and/or more affected by the drug structure. Note that the only obvious common characteristic of ampicillin, cefotaxime, and aztreonam, the compounds for which the largest difference is observed between E. coli and Enterobacter, is the presence of a free amine on the side chain (in C-6 for the penam, C-7 for the cephem, and C3 for the monobactam). Whether or not this could influence the diffusion through Enterobacter porins remains to be established or confirmed. A similar wider dispersion of the P values in Serratia marcescens when compared to E. coli has been reported by Raimondi et al. . At 37C, the P value of E. cloacae AD2 for benzylpenicillin does not significantly increase when compared to that at 25C, whereas for E. aerogenes 008-4 and cefotaxime, benzylpenicillin, and aztreonam, these values increase by factors of 1.8, 2.4, and 3.5, respectively (data not shown). Consequently it appears that the studied beta-lactams mostly cross the outer membrane through porins. Because the measured diffusion rates are very low, one can wonder if active efflux mechanisms impair the measurement of the P values. The two beta-lactamase-deficient strains studied here are derived from beta-lactamase overproducing strains obtained by a multistep selection process. Based on recent results, one might suppose that these four strains possess an increased efflux activity that can compete with BlaR-CTD for the periplasmic beta-lactam. Various data do not favor this hypothesis. First, E. cloacae 908S (the wild-type beta-lactamase-inducible strain) and E. cloacae 908R (the beta-lactamase-overproducing strain) show the same level of resistance to various non-beta-lactam antibiotics such as chloramphenicol, norfloxacin, nalidixic acid, or erythromycin, and these levels are the same as those observed for Salmonella wild-type strains . Moreover, the P for benzylpenicillin, a beta-lactam sensitive to efflux systems, is the same for E. aerogenes 006, the wild-type strain, and E. aerogenes 008-4. Therefore, the efflux activity of the beta-lactamase-deficient and -overproducing strains used in this study is not significantly different from that of the wild-type strains. To demonstrate that, in the cases we studied, the basal efflux system does not interfere with the method, we have tried to predict the MICs  for the beta-lactamase-overproducing strains on the basis of the following equation: MIC = Ipl + VmaxIpl/[PA  (Km + Ipl)]. Because its beta-lactamase is still partially inducible (data not shown), the prediction was not done with E. aerogenes 008. In Table , the lethal periplasmic concentration of beta-lactam (Ipl) is the MIC for E. cloacae AD2. These values are higher than expected on the basis of the PBP sensitivity, but as discussed previously , except for cephaloridine, this has little impact on the MICs for E. cloacae 908R, because they are much larger than the corresponding Kms, and therefore the VmaxIpl/PA  (Km + Ipl) term simplifies to Vmax/PA. This "abnormal" resistance of E. cloacae AD2 probably results from an efflux system naturally expressed in this strain or from the selection of a mutant overproducing an efflux system during MIC measurements. How ever, while efflux certainly contributes to increase the MICs for AD2, it is unlikely to affect the beta-lactam resistance of 908R (compare the MICs for the isogenic AD2 and 908R strains). If efflux was interfering with P measurement, it would certainly decrease the periplasmic concentration of antibiotic and thus the rate of BlaR-CTD acylation. This would result in underestimated P values and overestimated predicted MICs, which is not the case except for cephaloridine, for which P was determined by the method of Zimmerman and Rosselet, and benzylpenicillin, but in the latter case the MIC might be higher as higher antibiotic concentrations have not been tested. Otherwise the predicted and observed MICs are in fair (benzylpenicillin and carbenicillin) to good (all others) agreement. It is important to note that because the antibiotic concentrations used for the permeability measurements are much lower than those used in the Zimmermann-Rosselet experiments, the new method could be more easily affected by efflux systems since their influence is not masked by a high antibiotic influx. However, as for beta-lactamase, the importance of efflux in the experiment will depend on the relative affinity and expression level of these systems compared to BlaR-CTD. This restriction does not seem to apply to our conclusions, since the rate of BlaR-CTD acylation was high in all cases. Showing that the measured P values are compatible with the MICs for a beta-lactamase-overproducing mutant is thus a useful control of the validity of the method. Thanks to the progress in genetic engineering methods, it is now easy to selectively inactivate chromosomal beta-lactamases or efflux systems in gram-negative bacteria. Therefore, we think that despite some limitations, the method described here will be of great interest to more accurately measure low outer membrane permeabilities encountered in some genera and/or resistant mutants.
Time-dependent labeling of the 50% trichloroacetic acid-3.75% tungstosilicic acid insoluble fraction of E. aerogenes Time-dependent labeling of the 50% trichloroacetic acid-3.75% tungstosilicic acid insoluble fraction of E. aerogenes 008-4 cell suspensions incubated at 25C with 10 muM [3H]benzylpenicillin. Symbols: , cellular fraction from cells producing BlaR-CTD; , supernatant fraction from cells producing BlaR-CTD; , cellular fraction from nontransformed cells.
PBP labeling after various incubation periods of time (labeled atop the lanes, in minutes) of 10 muM [3H]benzylpenicillin with whole cells of E. aerogenes PBP labeling after various incubation periods of time (labeled atop the lanes, in minutes) of 10 muM [3H]benzylpenicillin with whole cells of E. aerogenes 008-4 producing BlaR-CTD. Lanes: C, purified BlaR-CTD protein; S, supernatant. (A) Short autoradiography exposure time (24 h). Only BlaR-CTD is detected. BlaR-CTD is not detected in the lane S because the quantity (<0.5 pmol) was too small. In lanes 5 to 30, the quantity of BlaR-CTD is about 3 pmol. (B) Long autoradiography exposure time (9 days). Labeling of membrane-bound PBP becomes detectable after 20 min of incubation. BlaR-CTD is the intense, fast-moving band.
Progressive labeling of whole E. aerogenes Progressive labeling of whole E. aerogenes 008-4 cells producing BlaR-CTD in the presence of 18 muM , 9 muM , and 4.5 muM  [14C]benzylpenicillin. The slopes of the initial parts of the lines were 8.08, 2.8, and 1.6 cpm/s  mg (dry weight), respectively, and were thus proportional to the external antibiotic concentration. Errors on the various experimental measurements were below 15% with 18 muM penicillin and below 10% with 9 and 4.5 muM penicillin. Values were obtained at 25C in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7, containing 5 mM MgCl2.
BlaR-CTD acylation rate in whole cells of E. aerogenes BlaR-CTD acylation rate in whole cells of E. aerogenes 008-4 incubated with 75 muM , 100 muM , and 200 muM  aztreonam as detected by counterlabeling with [14C]cephacetrile. The slopes of the initial parts of the lines were -0.133, -0.165, and -0.41 cpm/s  mg (dry weight), respectively.
Outer membrane permeability at 25C of E. aerogenes 008-4 and E. cloacae AD2 for beta-lactams and corresponding half-equilibration times
Simulation of the influence of a low level of inducible periplasmic class C beta-lactamase (E2) on the acylation rate of BlaR-CTD (E1) by benzylpenicillin
Predicted and observed MICs of beta-lactams for E. cloacae 908R
