Bioinformation
Bioinformation
Bioinformation
0973-2063
Biomedical Informatics Publishing Group


1891631
17597854
16-1-2005
Web Database


A database for medicinal and aromatic plants of JK (Jammu and Kashmir) in India

Masood
Akbar

*

Shafi
Mujtaba


Bioinformatics Centre, The University of Kashmir, Hazratbal, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India 190006

*
akbar@bioinfoku.org
; Corresponding author

2005

7
10
2005

1
2
56
57
26
9
2005

6
10
2005

6
10
2005


© 2005 Biomedical Informatics Publishing Group
2005
This is an open-access article, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction 
				in any medium, for non-commercial purposes, provided the original author and source are credited.


High throughput screening of small molecules for a given drug target is achieved using plant materials of medicinal value. 
          Therefore, it is important to document the availability and location of such medicinal plants in the form of a database. Here, 
          we describe a web database containing information (botanical name, common name, local name, botany, chemistry, folklore 
          medicinal use and medicinal uses) about the medicinal and aromatic plants available in JK (Jammu and Kashmir). The database is 
          available for free in public domain.
Availability

          http://www.bioinfoku.org/db/medsearch.php



medicinal
aromatic
plants
Jammu and Kashmir
India
botanical name
common name
folklore



Background
Medicinal plants documented in the literature from thick vegetations of the world are routinely used for high throughput 
      screening in small molecular drug discovery. A large number of such plants are known to be recognized in a discrete manner. 
      Therefore, it is important to store information related to medicinal and aromatic plants of JK in a database. This will help in 
      the use and exploitation of the plant materials for drug discovery. Some of the plants available in this region are also known 
      to have aromatic value. Here, we describe the development and use of a database containing information on medicinal and aromatic 
      plants from JK. 

Methodology
Dataset
Folklore medicinal usage and other associated data were manually collected from the inhabitants (tribal/gujjars/local 
      clinicians) of JK through direct person to person survey for each plant species. The current dataset contains information for 
      about 133 plant species.

Database Interface
The database interface is designed for searching the dataset using a PHP (a programming language that allows web developers 
      to create dynamic content that interacts with databases) server enabled script for keywords such as botanical name, local name, 
      folklore use and medicinal use. The database is accessible for free through the internet. 

Database Design
The database is developed in MySQL on a Linux Platform and updated regularly.

Search result
Figure 1
.


Utility
The database finds utility in the selection of medicinal plant species for high throughput screening in drug discovery.


This project is funded by BTIS (Biotechnology information system), DBT (Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of Science and 
      Technology, Government of India, India.
    

Figures and Tables
Figure 1
A database for medicinal and aromatic plants of JK (Jammu and Kashmir) in India. A sample output for ‘diabetes’ is shown. 




Citation:
Masood & Shafi, Bioinformation 1(2): 56-57 (2005)




