Matern Child Health J
Maternal and Child Health Journal
1092-7875
1573-6628
Springer US
Boston


1592161
16927159
97
10.1007/s10995-006-0097-8
Original Paper


Promising Practices in Preconception Care for Women at Risk for Poor Health and Pregnancy Outcomes

Biermann
Janis

jbiermann@marchofdimes.com

1

Dunlop
Anne Lang

2

Brady
Carol

3

Dubin
Cynthia

2

Brann
Alfred

2

1
March of Dimes, 1275 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, NY 10605 USA 
2
Emory University, School of Medicine, 1440 Clifton Road N.E., Atlanta, GA 30322 USA 
3
Northeast Florida Healthy Start Coalition, 6850 Belfort Oaks Place, Jacksonville, FL 32216 USA 

22
8
2006

9
2006

10
Suppl 1
21
28
© Springer Science+Business Media, Inc. 2006

Objectives: Two programs targeting urban African-American women are presented as promising models for preconception care, which includes interconception care. Methods: The Grady Memorial Hospital Interpregnancy Care (IPC) Program in Atlanta, Georgia, and the Magnolia Project in Jacksonville, Florida, are described. The IPC program aims to investigate whether IPC can improve the health status, pregnancy planning and child spacing of women at risk of recurrent very low birthweight (VLBW). The Magnolia Project aims to reduce key risks in women of childbearing age, such as lack of family planning and repeat sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), through its case management activities. Results: Seven out of 21 women in the IPC were identified as having a previously unrecognized or poorly managed chronic disease. 21/21 women developed a reproductive plan for themselves, and none of the 21 women became pregnant within nine months following the birth of their VLBW baby. The Magnolia Project had a success rate of greater than 70% in resolving the key risks (lack of family planning, repeat STDs) among case management participants. The black to white infant mortality (IM) ratio was better for the babies born to women managed in the Magnolia Project compared to the same ration for the United States. Conclusions: Preconception care targeted to African-American women at risk for poor birth outcomes appears to be effective when specific risk factors are identified and interventions are appropriate. Outreach to women at risk and case management can be effective in optimizing the woman's health and subsequent reproductive health outcomes.

Keywords
Preconception
Interconception
Birth outcomes
Risk reduction
Family planning

issue-copyright-statement
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2006




Introduction
1
2
].
3
4
].
before
between
 pregnancies (commonly known as interconception care) to ensure that conditions and behaviors which may pose a risk to mothers and infants are identified and managed. A specific element of interconception care is the identification and reduction of risks indicated by a prior adverse pregnancy outcome. The major components of preconception care are risk assessment (identification of conditions that may be amenable to intervention that adversely affect reproductive health outcomes), education and health promotion, and medical and psychosocial interventions.
5
].
Given the diversity of women of reproductive age, the numerous health and psychosocial issues that impact reproductive health outcomes and the varied settings for delivery of health care, a single ‘best’ model of preconception care for all women is unlikely. Rather, tailoring the delivery of preconception care interventions to women with specific circumstances and in specific care settings will be necessary. This paper describes two programs for delivering preconception care for women at-risk for poor health and pregnancy outcomes. One targets women whose risk status is defined by African-American ethnicity and delivery of a very low birth weight (VLBW; <1500 g) infant and, thus, specifically involves the provision of an interconception intervention. The other program targets women whose risk status is defined by African-American ethnicity and residence in Jacksonville-Duvall County, Florida, and involves the delivery of an intervention with preconception and interconception components.

The grady memorial hospital Interpregnancy Care (IPC) program
Background
6
].
7
17
18
19
]. In fact, the best predictor of whether a woman will have a VLBW delivery is her history of a previous VLBW delivery, with the rates of recurrence after a single VLBW delivery being approximately 1.5 times higher for African-American compared to white women (13.4% vs. 8.2%, respectively, for non-teen mothers; 26.8% vs. 16.4%, respectively, for teen mothers). The reason for recurrence of VLBW delivery is likely that aspects of the woman's pre-existing health status—including untreated or poorly managed medical problems and unaddressed nutritional, social, and behavioral risk factors—that may have contributed to delivery of the VLBW delivery persist after delivery and in subsequent pregnancies.
In 1998 the Georgia Task Force on Perinatal Care was convened to make recommendations for reducing Georgia's overall feto-infant mortality rate and racial disparities in feto-infant mortality. From its findings as outlined above, the Task Force specifically recommended that interpregnancy care be initiated and evaluated for women at risk for having recurrence of VLBW delivery. The Grady Memorial Hospital Interpregnancy Care (IPC) Program was initiated in response to the recommendation of the Task Force.

Target population
African-American women residing in Fulton or DeKalb counties, Georgia who qualify for county-supported indigent care services and who deliver liveborn or stillborn VLBW infants at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta are considered eligible for the IPC program.

Program description
The Grady Memorial Hospital IPC program provides 24 months of integrated primary health care and dental services through enhanced nurse case management and community outreach via a Resource Mother. The Resource Mother is a layperson who is trained by the Fulton County Health Department using a specific set of objectives to facilitate life skills and health education acquisition to support high-risk women. The nurse case manager offers all women who deliver a VLBW (stillborn or liveborn) infant at Grady Memorial Hospital enrollment in the program during or soon after their delivery admission. Women who choose to enroll in the IPC program have their initial home visit with the Resource Mother within 1–2 weeks of discharge from the delivery admission; they are scheduled for their initial IPC clinical evaluation at a clinic within Grady Memorial Hospital at 4–6 weeks postpartum.
At the initial IPC clinical evaluation, the IPC program's family physician or nurse- midwife performs a comprehensive survey of medical, obstetrical, nutritional, psychological, and social issues (using standardized assessment tools); a thorough physical examination including pelvic exam; and laboratory evaluations to screen for anemia, nutritional deficiencies, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and reproductive tract infections. Standard postpartum care issues are addressed in the initial IPC clinical evaluation, thus eliminating a separate postpartum appointment.
As part of the evaluation, the participant and provider explicitly discuss a care plan for the 24-month period of the program. For each woman, the care plan addresses the following seven areas epidemiologically linked to LBW delivery: 1) Pregnancy intendedness and child-spacing through the provision of health education concerning the importance of achieving at least a 9-month (and preferably an 18-month) interpregnancy interval, assisting the woman to articulate her own reproductive plan and select a corresponding contraceptive method; 2) Management of chronic disease (if present) through the promotion of self-care and adherence to scheduled appointments in Grady Health System that are facilitated by nurse case management; 3) Screening and treatment for nutritional deficiencies; 4) Prevention, screening, and treatment for STDs and reproductive tract infections; 5) Treatment and referral for substance abuse (if present) including linkage with rehabilitation programs for illicit substance abuse, and support in and linkage with existing programs for tobacco and alcohol abuse; 6) Screening and treatment or support for depression, psychosocial stressors, and domestic violence; 7) Prevention, screening and treatment for periodontal disease.
20
].
Resource Mother support services are focused on identification and management of psychosocial stressors, and life skills enhancement, including parenthood preparedness, safe housing, skills training, employment acquisition, and relationship issues. Resource Mother support is offered at least twice monthly in the form of home visits and telephone contact. Participants are able to contact the Resource Mother via her cell phone to request support, if needed.

Providers
Primary care and outreach services are delivered by a multidisciplinary team comprised of a family physician, an advanced practice nurse trained as both a nurse midwife and a family nurse practitioner, a periodontist, a nurse case manager, and a Resource Mother. Social workers affiliated with Grady Health System also support the IPC program and interface with the IPC team.

Outcome objectives
The purpose of the Grady Memorial Hospital IPC program is to investigate whether interpregnancy care can improve the health status, pregnancy planning and child spacing of women at risk of recurrent VLBW delivery. Findings will contribute to the field of primary health care of reproductive age women in several important ways: (a) the content of a successful IPC package for improving the health of high-risk women will be explored; (b) the concept of IPC will be tested as a means of improving attainment of desirable interpregnancy intervals and decreasing the occurrence of subsequent adverse pregnancy outcomes for high-risk women; (c) the cost of providing IPC to high-risk women will be studied.

Funding
The health care services rendered to IPC participants were provided through the services of the Grady Health System. Funding for the research and evaluation components of the IPC Program, including Vasser-Wooley Foundation, Healthcare Georgia Foundation, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Rockdale Foundation, and March of Dimes.

Results from the first year of the IPC program
Enrollment
During November 2003 through March 2004, the feasibility phase of the IPC program was initiated by enrolling the first sequential 29 eligible women who gave their informed consent for participation. During the enrollment period, a total of 47 women delivered VLBW infants at Grady Memorial Hospital. Of these 47 women, nine were not African-American or did not reside in Fulton or DeKalb counties, four declined enrollment, three who wished to be contacted afterdischarge from the hospital were unable to be contacted, and two were discharged from the hospital within 24 h and before being offered enrollment.

Participation
Twenty-one of 29 enrolled women (72.4%) successfully completed the initial 12 months of the planned 24 months of follow-up. During the first 12 months, eight women became disenrolled from the program two moved out of state (and informed us of their move), three electively disenrolled (two before prior to the initial home visit and the initial IPC clinical evaluation; one after a single IPC clinic visit), and three became lost to follow-up (two before the initial IPC clinical evaluation; one after a single IPC clinic visit and four home visits) all of whom who had noted problems with cocaine abuse in their medical records during their pregnancy.

Outcomes
Chronic diseases that were previously unrecognized or poorly managed were identified for 7/21 participants, and include valvular heart disease (1/21), sickle cell anemia (1/21), hypertension (2/21), diabetes (1/21), asthma (1/21), systemic lupus erythematosus (1/21), prolactinoma (1/21), panic attacks (1/21), and generalized anxiety disorder (1/21);

Reproductive tract infections were diagnosed and treated for 15/21 participants;

Iron-deficiency anemia was diagnosed and treated for 5/21 participants;

Concerns about finances, employment, and needs of the child are almost universal stressors;

Average annual outpatient charges per participant for IPC are $1,801 (average 4.6 visits, $389 per visit).



With extensive case management and patient education, 21/21 women who had at least two visits during their first 12 months of IPC, stated a reproductive plan for themselves and initiated a contraceptive plan in accordance with their stated reproductive plan. Despite a stated desire to either avoid or delay a pregnancy (21/21 women), a significant number of barriers to effective contraception existed and were dealt with, including misinformation about contraceptive methods and reproduction, concerns about side effects of contraceptive methods, and perceptions of partners’ desires regarding child bearing and contraception.

All of the women who had at least two visits during their first 12 months of IPC (21/21) achieved at least a nine-month interpregnancy interval (i.e., none have become pregnancy within nine months of the index VLBW delivery). For the 21 actively participating women, pregnancy ascertainment involved ongoing contact with the women and reviewing the Grady Healthy System medical record system for any evidence of health care visits or laboratory tests in which a pregnancy was diagnosed, incidentally noted, or treated. No pregnancies are known to have occurred within nine months of the index VLBW delivery for the eight women who became disenrolled, for which pregnancy ascertainment involved telephone follow-up, where possible (two women), and review of the Grady Health System medical record system. It is possible that those women with whom contact was lost have had a pregnancy for which no care was sought or care was sought outside of Grady Health System.





Barriers
In the United States, a major barrier to studying the impact of interpregnancy care on the health status and reproductive outcomes of high-risk women has been the lack of financial coverage for the health care component of the IPC intervention. For the IPC program in Atlanta, the Grady Health System has provided the two years of primary health care and treatment of all identified diseases for all enrollees.
Specific barriers exist for retaining participation in the IPC program. Women with substance abuse problems who do not enroll in formal substance abuse treatment programs are difficult to maintain in the IPC program. These women seem to have poor insight into the effects that substance abuse has on their repeated poor pregnancy outcomes. For some enrolled women, receiving health care services is less of a priority than securing employment, which negatively influences their health care seeking behaviors.

Next steps
Upon conclusion of the planned 24 months of follow-up, the final results for all evaluated outcome objectives from the feasibility phase will be reported. The IPC program is currently seeking grant support to conduct a randomized clinical trial to test the hypothesis of whether IPC can decrease the occurrence of subsequent adverse pregnancy outcomes for pregnancies conceived within 18 months of a VLBW delivery at Grady Memorial Hospital. The project plans to enhance participant retention by offering more opportunities for life skills enhancement, job training, and delivery of health care services via the community-based Grady Neighborhood Health Centers.


The magnolia project
Background
In 1998, infant mortality rates in Jacksonville-Duval County, Florida were increasing while statewide rates were declining. The Northeast Florida Healthy Start Coalition, Duval County Health Department and other community partners undertook a community assessment and identified racial disparities as a major factor contributing to the city's high infant mortality. The Coalition utilized the Perinatal Periods of Risk (PPOR) and findings from its Fetal & Infant Mortality Review (FIMR) project to analyze linked birth and death data. The results of this analysis indicated the need for interventions that focused on the health of women, particularly African-American women, before conception. The Coalition used this information to apply for federal Healthy Start funding under a 1999 initiative to address racial disparities in birth outcomes. This funding was used to establish The Magnolia Project, which adapts selected Healthy Start program models to at-risk African-American women of childbearing age who are not pregnant, but sexually active and likely to become pregnant. The project is implemented in a five-zipcode area of Jacksonville-Duval County that accounts for over half of all African-American infant mortality and about 30% of African-American births.

Target population
The Magnolia Project targets African-American women ages 15–44 living in a socioeconomic high-risk area of Jacksonville-Duval County. The project focuses on women of childbearing age who are likely to become pregnant and have some identified risk factor associated with poor birth outcomes. The project also maintains a small caseload of pregnant women (<10% of patients).

Program description
The Magnolia Project provides outreach, case management, risk reduction, support, well-woman prenatal care, health education, and community development. The project engages high-risk women through an empowerment model that promotes improved wellness and health, rather than future childbearing. Clinical services and health education are available to all eligible women in the target area. The project offers intensive case management to a subset of women who have specific risk factors identified through FIMR, including previous fetal or infant death or delivery of a LBW infant; repeated STDs; lack of family planning; substance abuse; first pregnancy before age 15; and lack of access to health care.
A comprehensive assessment of each participant's abilities and needs at program entry
. This assessment includes completion of a problem checklist; screening for depression and stress; and evaluation of self-esteem. Participants are re-assessed periodically based on need and progress to determine resolution or recurrence of problems and risks, achievement of personal goals, and improvements in coping skills and self-esteem.

Participant care and goal plan
. This plan addresses the needs and preferences of each participant. The written plan is a collaborative process involving the participant and the case manager. It addresses health and social risks and outlines specific steps that the participant must follow to improve her health and well-being and to meet her goals for social, economic, and personal development.

Ongoing monitoring and service coordination
. The case management team monitors services to ensure that quality care is being provided, participants are addressing their care plans, and participants who are referred to another agency follow through and receive appropriate services. The risk profile (problem checklist) and other measures (stress, self-esteem) are updated at regular intervals (at 6 and 9 months).

Anticipatory guidance, health education and advocacy
. Case management staff addresses participant risk factors, ensures compliance with services, and promotes achievement of personal goals. Educational support groups are organized monthly. Women receive an incentive ($50 gift certificate) for each six months that they remain in the program, provided they have made progress in addressing their goals.




Providers
The clinical component of the program is staffed by a nurse-midwife and related nursing, lab and support staff. The program has a full-time health educator who provides a brief counseling intervention on key issues (e.g., use of multivitamins, nutrition, douching, and safe sex) to every woman who comes into the clinic. The clinic serves approximately 800 women annually. A team that includes a nurse, a social worker and two specially trained paraprofessionals provides intensive case management to about 75 women a year. Community development and outreach staff, as well as members of the Magnolia Project Community Council, who are indigenous neighborhood leaders, conduct outreach and community awareness activities. The project uses a collaborative, multi-agency staffing model. The Northeast Florida Healthy Start Coalition is the grantee and project administrator. Subcontractors include the Duval County Health Department (clinical care and case management) and Shands Jacksonville, a tertiary care and teaching hospital (case management and outreach). Staff is co-located at a storefront community site within walking distance of six public housing complexes. The University of North Florida Center for Community Initiatives serves as project evaluator.

Outcome objectives
The project addresses all the outcome objectives required by the Maternal and Child Health Bureau of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) regarding birth outcomes (LBW, VLBW, infant mortality, adequacy of prenatal care, etc.). However, because the project primarily focuses on women who are not pregnant, it has developed specific outcome objectives that examine its success in reducing key risks associated with poor outcomes through its case management activities. These include lack of family planning and STDs. Specific outcome objectives have been developed to measure the program's success in addressing participant risks identified at program entry and closure.

Funding
The Magnolia Project is primarily funded through a grant from the federal Healthy Start program ($925,000). Additional funding is provided through Medicaid and other third- party reimbursement for prenatal, family planning and STD services; state categorical funding through the health department (about $250,000 a year); and smaller community grants for special projects. Total 2004–2005 budget was just over $1 million.

Results to date
1
Table 1
Frequency of risks/problems, case management participants, The Magnolia Project, July 2001–May 2005

 Risk factor/problem
n
=1214)
n
=1727)


Social problems

 Family planning issues
26
43.5

 Job placement
8.2
33.0

 Education/training
11.3
27.3

 Stress
8.7
21.7

 Housing
4.1
15.7

 Domestic violence
7.2
11.3

 Depression
8.2
11.1

 No source of care
6.7
8.7

 Lack of exercise
7.0
8.7

 Injury prevention/safety
2.8
8.0

 Drug abuse
10.0
6.7

 Transportation
4.4
5.9

 Sexual abuse
7.0
4.4

 Alcohol abuse
6.4
4.1

Medical problems

 Bacterial vaginosis
12.9
30.2

 Poor nutrition
17.8
19.3

 Repeated STDs
12.4
16.5

 Tobacco use
13.2
15.5

 Breast health
3.9
11.3

 Douching
8.5
10.8

 Abnormal pap
9.5
9.5

 Overweight
11.6
9.5



Source: Magnolia Project database; compiled by UNF Center for Community Initiatives, August 2005.



Two-hundred-forty-seven participants received at least three months of case management and were closed to care because they completed their care plans, voluntarily withdrew or were lost to service. For key risk factors, case management participants were most successful in resolving or managing issues related to domestic violence (68%) and poor nutrition (63%). The project was least successful in addressing substance abuse by participants (31%).
In October 2004, the HRSA Office of Performance Review conducted a site visit and assessment of Magnolia Project outcomes and activities. Its report noted that participants receiving case management services from 2001 to 2003 successfully addressed two priority risks: 86% of participants with family planning issues were consistently using a method at closure; 74% of participants with repeated STDs had no recurrent STDs at closure.

Barriers
Insufficient funding has limited expansion of the Magnolia Project. Existing funding streams focus primarily on pregnancy, not women's health. The Magnolia Project has successfully cobbled together categorical funding and Medicaid reimbursement for most clinical services, however, in Duval county, the delivery of most categorically funded services remains siloed (e.g., STDs, primary care, prenatal care).
Additionally, case management/risk assessment is not universally accepted or valued in the medical model of health care, even though many of the risk factors associated with poor outcomes are social, rather than medical, in nature. More longitudinal evaluations are needed to determine the impact of preconception intervention on pregnancy outcomes. Longitudinal evaluations are not easily incorporated into service delivery projects that rely on short-term outcomes for continued funding. Finally, although outcomes have improved in the target area since the implementation of the Magnolia Project, infant mortality rates in the overall community remain high. The project is unlikely to affect these rates because of its comparatively small reach.

Next steps
The Magnolia Project is aggressively seeking funding for a longitudinal evaluation. Current program evaluation is limited to an assessment of how well the project is achieving short-term objectives and objectives set by the funding agency (primarily focusing on birth outcomes for the small number of pregnant women served by the project). The CDC recently provided support to the Duval County Health Department for the initial design and piloting of tools for a longitudinal assessment of case management participants served by the project. Additionally, the project is working to interest local providers in replicating the intervention in other at-risk areas in Jacksonville-Duval County. Funding for replication is a significant challenge.

Discussion
The Grady IPC program and the Magnolia project use a classic public health model of care. They identify women at known risk for an adverse outcome and attempt to alter the woman's risk status to improve outcomes. These programs deliver aspects of preconception care to women at risk for poor health and pregnancy outcomes. The programs do, however, target different categories of high-risk African-American women and utilize different sites for contacting and interfacing with them. The IPC program identified women at risk based on race/ethnicity, qualification for charity care (based on financial status and geographic residence in two counties of metropolitan Atlanta) through Grady Memorial Hospital, and a prior poor birth outcome (VLBW delivery). The IPC program enrolled women soon after their VLBW delivery and provided interconception care in the clinical setting of the hospital (with community outreach). The Magnolia project serves women at risk based on race/ethnicity and residence in Jacksonville-Duval County, Florida. It provides preconception care in a community-based storefront setting with enhanced interconception care for women with a previous LBW delivery or a previous fetal or infant death. Access to the Magnolia project is enhanced by offering evening clinics and walk-in Wednesdays.
Both programs deliver services via a multidisciplinary team approach, though there are differences in the exact composition of the team. Inherent in the team approach of each program is attention to participants’ physical and psychological health and social well-being.
The programs emphasize several comparable intervention strategies, including community outreach via lay persons; psychosocial support; group education and health promotion modeled on the Centering Pregnancy philosophy of care; and provision of health services. Both programs also emphasize the provision of family planning services for helping women achieve intendedness of any subsequently conceived pregnancy.
Each program offers unique strategies as part of the interconception intervention. Because of the link between periodontal disease and preterm delivery (almost all VLBW deliveries are preterm), the IPC program incorporates the services of a periodontist to screen and treat women. To specifically enhance particpants’ life skills, the IPC program utilizes a layperson as a Resource Mother who has undergone a tailored training program through the local department of health. A unique feature of the Magnolia Project's approach is its reliance on indigenous neighborhood leaders (e.g., Magnolia Project Community Council) and community-based organizations to provide outreach, community awareness, and education. The Magnolia Project also has established a partnership with the Ryan White III program for STD/HIV/AIDS screening and treatment.
Both programs have had success in accessing and providing services to the specific target group of women. Women who choose not to avail themselves of the services seem to have greater socioeconomic issues, such as substance abuse and lack of housing, jobs, and childcare. Due to the magnitude of some of the problems, maintaining contact is challenging and care often is not continuous.
21
].
22
]. Goldenberg advocates for a Medicaid mandate that women who have had an adverse pregnancy outcome be eligible for continued medical coverage in the postpartum period to reduce risk factors and improve health status before the next pregnancy.
23
24
].
Both programs demonstrate several components essential to any successful preconception care program: identification of risk factors amenable to change by the target population; tailored interventions for the target population; integration of preconception care into existing services; incorporation of family planning counseling and clinical services, health education, and community outreach. Preconception care aims to promote the health of women of reproductive age before conception and thereby improve pregnancy-related outcomes. Both the IPC program and the Magnolia Project show promise in achieving this goal for their target audiences.



References
1.
The Alan Guttmacher Institute. Facts in brief: Contraceptive use. Available: http://www.agi-usa.org/pubs/fb_contr_use.html; September, 2005.

2.
US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Maternal and Child Health Bureau. Women's Health USA 2002. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services.

3.
US Public Health Service, Expert Panel on Health and Human Services. Caring For Our Future: The Content of Prenatal Care: A Report of the Public Health Service Expert Panel on the Content of Prenatal Care. Washington, DC: Public Health Service, US Dept. of Health and Human Services, 1989.

4.
Moore
K

Persaud
TVN


Developing human
1998
Philadelphia
WB Saunders

Moore K, Persaud TVN. Developing human. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998. 

5.
Henderson
JT

Weisman
CS

Grason
H


Are two doctors better than one? Women's physician use and appropriate care
Women's Health Issues
2002
12
139
49

Henderson JT, Weisman CS, Grason H. Are two doctors better than one? Women's physician use and appropriate care. Women's Health Issues 2002;12:139–49. 

6.
Iyasu
S

Becerra
JE

Rowley
DL



Impact of very low birthweight on the black-white infant mortality gap
Am J Prev Med
1992
8
271
7

1419125


7.
Kovilam
O

Khoury
J

Miodovnik
M



Spontaneous preterm delivery in the type 1 diabetic pregnancy: The role of glycemic control
J Mat-Fetal & Neonatal Med
2002
11
245
8
10.1080/713605517

Kovilam O, Khoury J, Miodovnik M, et al. Spontaneous preterm delivery in the type 1 diabetic pregnancy: The role of glycemic control. J Mat-Fetal & Neonatal Med 2002;11:245–8. 

8.
Sibai
B

Caritis
SN

Hauth
JC



Preterm delivery in women with pregestational diabetes mellitus or chronic hypertension relative to women with uncomplicated pregnancies
Am J Obstet Gynecol
2000
183
1520
4
10.1067/mob.2000.107621

11120521


9.
Lockwood
CJ


Heritable coagulopathies in pregnancy
Obstet Gynecol Surv
1999
54
754
9
10.1097/00006254-199912000-00004

10596396


10.
Jacobsson
B

Pernevi
P

Chidekel
L



Bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy may predispose for preterm birth and postpartum endometritis
Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica
2002
81
1006
10
10.1034/j.1600-0412.2002.811103.x

12421167


11.
Offenbacher
S

Lieff
S

Boggess
KA



Maternal periodontitis and prematurity. Part I: Obstetric outcome of prematurity and growth restriction
Ann Periodontol
2001
6
164
74
10.1902/annals.2001.6.1.164

11887460


12.
Madianos
PN

Lieff
S

Murtha
AP



Maternal periodontitis and prematurity. Part II: Maternal infection and fetal exposure
Ann Periodontol
2001
6
175
82
10.1902/annals.2001.6.1.175

11887461


13.
Cnattingius
S

Bergstrom
R

Lipworth
L



Pre-pregnancy weight and the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes
N Engl J Med
1998
338
147
52
10.1056/NEJM199801153380302

9428815


14.
Sebirea
NJ

Jollya
M

Harris
J



Is maternal underweight really a risk factor for adverse pregnancy outcome? A population-based study in London
BJOG: An Int J Obstet Gynaecol
2001
108
61
6
10.1111/j.1471-0528.2001.00021.x

Sebirea NJ, Jollya M, Harris J, et al. Is maternal underweight really a risk factor for adverse pregnancy outcome? A population-based study in London. BJOG: An Int J Obstet Gynaecol 2001;108:61–6. 

15.
Xiong
X

Buekens
P

Alexander
S



Anemia during pregnancy and birth outcome: A meta-analysis
Am J Perinatol
2000
17
137
46
10.1055/s-2000-9508

11012138


16.
Scanlon
KS

Yip
R

Schieve
LA



High and low hemoglobin levels during pregnancy: Differential risks for preterm birth and small for gestational age
Obstet Gynecol
2000
96
741
8
10.1016/S0029-7844(00)00982-0

11042311


17.
Kelly
RH

Russo
J

Holt
VL



Psychiatric and substance use disorders as risk factors for low birth weight and preterm delivery
Obstet Gynecol
2002
100
297
304
10.1016/S0029-7844(02)02014-8

12151153


18.
Georgia Perinatal Task Force. Report of the Task Force on the Georgia Perinatal Program. Atlanta, GA: Georgia Perinatal Task Force, 1998.

19.
Adams
MM

Elam-Evans
LD

Wilson
HG



Rates of and factors associated with recurrence of preterm delivery
JAMA
2000
283
1591
6
10.1001/jama.283.12.1591

10735396


20.
Rising
SS


Centering pregnancy. An interdisciplinary model of empowerment
J Nurse-Midwifery
1998
43
1
46
54
10.1016/S0091-2182(97)00117-1

9489291


21.
Haas
JS

Fuentes-Afflick
E

Stewart
AL



Prepregnancy health status and the risk of preterm delivery
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
2005
159
58
63
10.1001/archpedi.159.1.58

15630059


22.
Goldenberg
RL

Culhane
JF


Prepregnancy heath status and the risk of preterm delivery
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
2005
159
89
90
10.1001/archpedi.159.1.89

15630064


23.
US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS): PRAMS and unintended pregnancy. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/prams/up.htm. October 2005.

24.
Hogue
CJ

Vasquez
C


Toward a strategic approach for reducing disparities in infant mortality, rural health and women of color
Am J Public Health
2002
92
4
552
5

11919050





