TEACHERS' VIEWS ON PROVIDING FOR CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS IN INCLUSIVE CLASSROOMS A PAPUA NEW GUINEA STUDY

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Special Education at the University of Waikato

By Allan Jim Mapsea

University of Waikato 2006

ABSTRACT
The purpose of having inclusive education is to value children with special needs so they can participate equally in all educational activities alongside their peers without special needs. There should not be any discrimination, segregation or isolation of these children with special needs from being educated rather they must be given an equal opportunity to participate alongside children without special needs. This study seeks to investigate primary school teachers' views and experiences in implementing the Inclusive Education Policy in regular schools. The study was conducted in five districts of the Enga Province of Papua New Guinea. Six primary schools were selected and involved 77 teachers who responded to questionnaire items, while 12 teachers within the group were chosen to be involved in interviews. Data for the study were gathered and analysed from the questionnaires, and the interview transcripts. The findings from the study revealed that most teachers supported the notion of Inclusive Education Policy and would like to implement it. However, they indicated that there needed to be a change in attitudes of teachers, peers, boards of management, and parents/caregivers to provide assistance for children with special needs. Most teachers felt that there needs to be more awareness of the principle and the importance of inclusion. Teachers' limited knowledge of teaching children with special needs was also highlighted. In this study teachers admitted they needed more training in the field of educating children with special education in order to accommodate and teach children with special needs. This shows that teachers' colleges and universities need to have trained lecturers to develop more courses in special education. Teachers expressed concern that school inspectors do not know enough about the inclusive education concept and need to be trained as well so collaboratively they could implement the policy. i

Government support is needed to effectively implement the inclusive education policy. This includes training of specialists to support teachers, funds for teaching and learning resources and facilities in schools. The cultural implications and geographical issues have also had some impact on the implementation of the Inclusive Education Policy, while the issue of children with HIV and AIDS was raised that teachers needed to be prepared in order to accommodate and teach those infected children. All these issues highlighted are very important and it is hoped that the outcome of the findings will provide the Department of Education with new strategies to improve and strengthen their commitment to implement Inclusive Education Policy.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to take this opportunity to thank these following people who made it possible for me to complete this thesis.

First, to Dr. Roger Moltzen, my thesis supervisor and Dr. Vivien Hendy my thesis tutor for their continuous critical but quality comments, support and encouragement throughout my thesis. Vivien was a true mentor for me throughout this journey and I really thank her from my heart. I also would like to thank Dr. Deborah Fraser to have a final proofread in my thesis. Second, to the New Zealand Government for awarding me a New Zealand Development Scholarships (NZDS). This has made it possible for me to come to New Zealand to pursue my postgraduate studies in special education. I would also like to thank Mrs. Sonya Saunders (Team Leader) and Mrs. Sue Malcolm, (Scholarship Coordinator) representing the NZDS here at the University of Waikato for financially supporting my family and me while being here in New Zealand. Without their support, this would have been almost impossible for me to achieve. Third, to the Division of Teacher Education and Staff Development Unit for their continuous support in financial assistance, which made it possible for me to complete my studies here in New Zealand. I further extend my appreciation to the Advisor, Mr. Paul Sarr, of the Division of Education for his positive support that made it easy for me to carry out my research in Enga Province. My acknowledgement also goes to the primary school teachers who were willing to participate in this research. Their invaluable comments contributed greatly to this research. Fourth, to my `brother' John Rombo, for his wonderful support behind the scenes. His continuous encouragement, editing, critical comments and suggestions were so valuable. I also would like to thank Jimmy Pep for assisting with analysis of the quantitative data.

iii

Fifth, to all the Christians for their continuous spiritual support. The good Lord is the source of wisdom, knowledge and understanding and I have always drawn near to Him in times of need. Finally, to my beloved wife, Helen and children, Isaac, Lorrymah, Fregeth and `bikhet meri' Rithia for their patience, support and encouragement while being with me in New Zealand. A cup of coffee each night for dad showed how much they cared for me to complete this thesis.

"It was a long journey of faith and struggle, and together we made it."

iv

DEDICATION

This thesis is dedicated to the Lanekep tribe of Wabag District, and the people of Enga Province, Papua New Guinea.

v

LIST OF TABLES Tables
Table 1: Teachers' knowledge and understanding of Inclusive Education Policy. Table 2: Teachers' views and experiences in teaching children with special needs in regular classrooms. Table 3: Government supports to implement Inclusive Education Programme. Table 4 General issues related to Inclusion.

Page
68 96 124 134

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract Acknowledge Dedication List of Tables Contents Page i ii iii vi vii

CHAPTER ONE
1. Personal experience 2. Statement of the problem 3. Purpose of study 4. Research Questions 5. Significance of the study 6. The research setting 7. Summary

INTRODUCTION

1 1 2 4 4 4 6 7

CHAPTER TWO

LITERATURE REVIEW

8 8 8 9 9 10 10 10 11 11 12 13 13 15 15 16 17 17 20 22 23 24 26 28 29 30

Section 1 1. Disability 2. Discourses of Disabilities 2.1 Medical Discourse 2.2 Charity Discourse 2.3 Lay Discourse 2.4 Right Discourse 3. The concept of Inclusive Education 3.1 History of Inclusive Education 3.2 Integration 3.3 Inclusion 3.4 The Salamanca Framework 3.5 Inclusive Legislations and Policies 4. Special Education Policy in New Zealand 5. School Policy Section 2 1. Academic value for children with special needs 2. Social value for children with special needs 3. Inclusive Education Programme in regular classroom 3.1 Role of the teacher 3.2 Attitudes of teachers 3.3 Stress & teaching 3.4 Teacher's workload 3.5 Cooperative learning 3.6 Peer teaching vii

4. Parents/caregivers' role 5. Collaboration with Colleagues 5.1 The Teacher Aide 5.2 Special Education Specialist 6. Curriculum Section 3 1. Government Support of the programme 1.1 Financial Support 1.2 Staff Development programme 1.3 Resources and facilities 2. Culture concept Section 4 1. Background information of Papua New Guinea 2. The Education System 3. Education change 4. Universal Primary Education 5. History of Special Education in Papua New Guinea 6. Identification and labelling of people with disabilities 7. Children with disabilities at school levels 8. Provision of Special Education programmes 9. Recognition of Special Education Programme 10. Special Education Legislation and Policies 11. Directives and Implementation 11.1 Teacher preparation 11.2 Special Education Resource centres 11.3 Community based rehabilitation Education 11.4 Assessment of children 11.5 Enrolment and organisation 11.6 Curriculum and instructions 11.7 Administration and funding 12. Special Education Unit 13. Teacher training 13.1 Teachers Colleges 13.2 In-service Colleges 13.3 University of Goroka 13.4 Primary and Secondary Training Education Programme (PASTEP) 13.5 Overseas Training 14. Funding 15. Summary of inclusive education in Papua New Guinea 16. Summary

32 33 34 35 36 37 37 37 39 40 41 42 42 43 44 45 46 47 47 48 48 49 50 50 51 51 51 51 52 52 52 52 53 53 53 54 54 54 55 55 57 57 58

CHAPTER THREE
1. Quantitative Research 2. Qualitative Research

METHODOLOGY

viii

3. Research Design 3.1 The Questionnaire 3.2 The Interview 3.3 Preliminary data analysis 4. Data Collection Procedure 4.1 Research setting 4.2 Research Participants 4.3 Method of data analysis and interpretation 4.4 Validity and Reliability 4.5 Ethical protocol 4.6 Informed consent 4.7 Confidentiality and Anonymity 4.8 Other ethical concerns relevant to the research 4.9 Problems encountered while collecting the data 5. Summary

59 59 61 62 62 62 62 63 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 68 68 84 84 86 88 89 92 93 95 109 110 113 115 117 119 120 121 123 124 130 130 133

CHAPTER FOUR

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Theme1. Understanding the concept of Inclusion Discussion 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 The right of formal education Including children with certain types of disabilities The appropriate learning place Understanding the Inclusive Education Policy School policy on Inclusive Education Policy Attitudes of teachers towards inclusion

Theme 2. Benefits of inclusion Discussion 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Academic benefits from inclusion Social benefit from inclusion Children with special needs demand extra time Teachers workload The issue of separate curriculum Peer support Teachers and parents collaboration Specialists support

Theme 3. Government support to implement Inclusive Education Programme Discussion 3.1 3.2 Professional training Financial support

ix

Theme 4. General issues related to inclusion Discussion 4.1 4.2 4.3 Summary Cultural implications on inclusion Geographical location a barrier for inclusion Inclusive education best for Developed countries and not appropriate for Papua New Guinea

134 141 141 143 145 147

CHAPTER FIVE

LIMITATIONS OF THE RESEARCH, IMPLICATIONS OF STUDY, SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH AND CONCLUSION

149 149 150 150 151 151 151 152 152 153 153 154 155 155 156 159

1. Limitation of the research 2. Implication of findings 2.1 Awareness of the Inclusive Education Policy 2.2 Tribal warfare 2.3 Teaching posting in rural schools 2.4 School inspector's knowledge on the Inclusive Education Policy 2.5 Class size 2.6 Government support 2.7 Training of lecturers, specialists and teacher aides 2.8 Special education courses 2.9 Courses on HIV/AIDS 2.10 Cultural barrier 3. Suggestions further research 4. Conclusion

REFERENCES APPENDICES
Appendix. 1 Appendix. 2 Appendix. 3 Appendix. 4 Appendix. 5 Letter to the concern authorities Letter to the principals Consent form of the interviewee Questionnaire Semi structured interview questions

169 171 173 174 177

x

CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
1. Personal Experience In 1989, my second year of teaching I was posted to a remote primary school which is on the border between Western Highlands Province and the Gulf Province in Papua New Guinea. There was no road linking the school to the nearest district office or the main provincial centre. Air transport was the only means of going in and out of this place, or there was a walk of two days before reaching the nearest feeder road to the main provincial centre. There were only three of us posted to this school. I was given the grade four class to teach. To my surprise, the principal told me that there was a child with a hearing impairment in this class. Initially I had mixed feelings about whether to teach the child or send him home. Nevertheless, I kept him in the class but was worried and scared because I had no idea how to teach him with the other 31 children. I asked the principal, who had taught him for the last two years, for advice. He said he actually did nothing to help this child but kept him in the school. I tried to help him in his academic work for the first term. I did not know the sign language so had to use other children to help me get concepts across to this child. This did not go well because the child could not understand much of what was said in the classroom. The children who assisted me could not translate the English words into their own language for the child to understand the concept and it was so difficult for both the child and myself. I became totally confused and final admitted to the principal that I could no longer continue to teach this child. We requested the parents to come and discussed the difficulties I had faced with the child. The principal told the parents to withdraw their child from the school. In 1993, while teaching in a primary school a few kilometres away from the main provincial centre came another challenge for me. I had a grade three girl who used a wheelchair and who was paralysed from the neck down. She was brought to me by the community based rehabilitation officer. Together we helped each other and provided basic education for her. Nonetheless, this did not continue because the officer was transferred to another district. I tried my best to educate her, however could not manage the challenge so referred her to the nearest special education centre. I could

do little to assist, even though I knew that children with special needs had the right to education. What hindered me in providing educational assistance was my lack of knowledge in these situations. This was the turning point for me to pursue my interest in the field of special education. I tried to get a teaching position at the nearest special education centre but was unsuccessful because I had no background knowledge in that specific area of education. I did not know the concept of inclusion and its importance in educating children with special needs. I decided that I should take up further studies so I could gain experience of teaching in a special education resource centre. I started taking studies seriously, obtaining my diploma and degree in education. However, the papers I took for this qualification, only covered general issues in education and did not meet my expectation. I believed that taking up further studies in the area of special education would help me obtain practical knowledge and skills to help children with special needs. This resulted in my application to do a master's degree in special education and I was accepted at the University of Waikato in 2004 and I was able to get the training in the field of special education that I so desired. Special education encompasses a great deal and what I have learned at the university will be taken back to Papua New Guinea and be put into practice by educating other teachers in the field who lack the knowledge and skills to educate children with special needs. I believe there are teachers out in the field who have negative perceptions and experiences in teaching children with special needs. They may not be willing to teach children with special needs because of the many factors involved in such an undertaking. However, once qualified, I believe together we will make a difference for these children so that they can have equal access to education with other children in my country.

2.

Statement of the Problem

Inclusive education refers to educating all children regardless of their abilities, gender or ethnicity. Every child has to be given equal as well as quality educational opportunities. It is a philosophical concept, where emphasis is placed on respecting the rights of children with special needs and the avoidance of discrimination. This means that schools should accommodate the needs of all children and encourage mutually enriching relationships between teachers, children and parents.

Inclusive education, since gaining recognition in 1994 by the United Nations, has been incorporated into the education systems of many countries. The importance of providing equal and quality education to children with disabilities has become the main focus many parts of the world. Papua New Guinea is a member of the United Nations and has adopted the policy into the National Department of Education yet, the implementation of the inclusive education policy in the primary schools has proven to be difficult and is either ignored or moving at a slow pace. Teachers are the implementers of the inclusive education programme in their respective schools. The principle of inclusion means that children with special needs should be accommodated in the same academic learning environment as children without special needs. However, from the researcher's experience it would seem that many primary school teachers in the field are not aware of the policy of inclusive education. The concept of inclusive education is new to many practising, especially those teachers who have been teaching for more than 15 years. They possibly believe that children with special needs have no place in the regular classroom. Teachers who have graduated with a diploma in teaching since 1994 have gained some training in inclusive education but nonetheless it is doubtful whether many are implementing the programme in schools. They possibly fear that their training has been inadequate regarding many different aspects of inclusive/special education and therefore these teachers do not have the knowledge and experience to implement a programme(s) in this area. Studies emphasise that teachers often worry that they are not competent to teach children with special needs in their classrooms (e.g., Bailey & du Plessis; Center & Ward 1987 cited in Foreman, 2005; Connelly, 2004; Mushoriwa, 2001; Williams & Gersch, 2004). Studies also report that teachers often do not work collaboratively with the parents to address the children's academic and social needs. It appears teachers feel that they do not have time to assist children with special needs. A study carried out by Connelly (2004) in New Zealand found that the increased workload on teachers resulted in very little support for inclusive programmes. In Papua New Guinea, there seems to be little awareness of the importance of this policy within the National Department of Education so this is not passed on to the

teachers, children, parents, other related organisation. Therefore, this research is to investigate the factors that contribute to either promoting or hindering the programme being implemented.

3.

Purpose of the Study

The purpose of the study is to investigate Papua New Guinea primary school teachers' views and experiences in implementing the inclusive education policy at the schools in the Enga province. It is hope that the outcome of the findings will provide the Department of Education with new strategies to improve or strengthen their commitment to the Inclusive Education Policy.

4.
i. ii. iii. iv.

Research Questions

There are four research questions formulated to guide the study. What are the views of primary school teachers on the implementation of Inclusive Education Policy in regular schools? What are some of the challenges that teachers face when implementing the inclusive education policy in regular classrooms? What are some of the supports being provided by the Government to assist in the implementation of the Inclusive Education Policy? What are some factors that impact on the effective implementation of the Inclusive Education Policy?

5.

Significance of the Study

This research is significant for the National Department of Education. First, this study will investigate whether primary school teachers have understood the concept of inclusive education and are implementing it. It will target teachers with either a certificate or a diploma in teaching in primary schools. It is anticipated that the findings the content to which teachers know and practice the concept of inclusive education in schools. Eventually, the findings from the research should support teachers who have graduated with diplomas at the teachers colleges and also those in the in-service college who have taken special education courses as a core subject, to provide professional development at their school for teachers with certificates and also the elementary teachers. Together these teachers can carry awareness into the

community regarding the importance of inclusive education and encourage parents to send their children with special needs to their local school. From this, it would be hoped that the Boards of Management of schools will then develop policies to accommodate children with special needs in the schools. Second, the findings will help the Department of Education to identify the areas in special education which have not received enough attention by the policy makers and the policy implementers. These include areas like the policy development, teacher training and funding for effective implementation of the inclusive education programme in primary schools. This study is the first of its kind in Papua New Guinea, even though the United Nation introduced the Inclusive Education Policy back in 1994. No research has yet been carried out in Papua New Guinea to check the progress of the inclusive education programme at primary school level. Comparative studies in special education in 1994 only showed how Papua New Guinea had progressed to meet the needs of people with disabilities (Vlaardingerbroek, Tottenham, & Leach, 1994). The study emphasises how the non government organisations provided support for people with disabilities and mentioned that special education resource centres had been established to cater for children with special needs. Other similar studies in different countries that looked at the progress of inclusive education in schools have focused on progress of implementation this. For example, in New Zealand Connelly (2004) carried out research on principals' and teachers' attitudes towards implementing inclusive education. In Australia, Bailey & Plessis (1998) carried out a similar study on principals' attitudes towards inclusion. Although this present study includes data from five districts from only one province in the country, the results should reflect the progress of inclusive education in the other provinces.

6.

The Research Setting

The research was conducted at Enga, one of the 20 provinces in Papua New Guinea. The province is located in the highlands region and is situated in the highest and the most rugged part of the country. The altitude is about 2000 metres above sea level and is located up along the trunk of the Owen Stanley Range. The landmass of the province is small, 12,800 square kilometres and has a population of 289,299 from the 2000 census (Department of Education, 2002; Wikpedia Encyclopaedia, 2005). There are five districts in this province and the provincial capital is Wabag, situated at the centre of the province. Enga is unique among other provinces in the country because it has only one major language and ethnic group throughout the province. There are about 1,146 teachers teaching in the province, distributed over four levels of education. The primary level has 682 teachers, which is the highest number followed closely by the elementary level of 240 teachers. The secondary level has 173 teachers and the Technical/Vocational level has only 51 teachers (Department of Education, 2004). The study involves 80 primary school teachers in six schools within the five districts of Enga Province. These districts include Wapenamanda, Wabag, Kompiam Ambum, Porgera Laiagam and Kandep. Enga Province was chosen for this study because first, the Provincial Administration with the full support of the Provincial Government gives priority to education. The Provincial Government's initiative is to focus on and finance building the human resources of the province. Second, special education has not been a high priority for the last two decades in this province. There was no Special Education Resource Centre in the province and most children with disabilities did not have any opportunities to be educated. However, last year, the importance of developing the human resources also focused on educating people with disabilities and the provincial administration has created the position of a Special Education Coordinator to develop plans to accommodate special education programmes. Third, the Provincial Education Personnel are familiar to the researcher and provided assistance to facilitate this study. Therefore, this research has the potential to make a positive contribution to special education practices in the province.

7.

Summary

In this chapter, the researcher outlines his experience and inadequacy in catering for children with special needs in his own classroom. This inadequacy has motivated him to pursue further studies in special education in order to gain sufficient knowledge to provide academic support for children with special needs and this was the purpose for this research thesis. The research has been undertaken in one province in Papua New Guinea and has focused on the impediments to practicing effective Inclusive Education Policy. The research anticipates that findings from this unique study in Papua New Guinea will assist the policy makers to provide strategies to enable effective practice across the whole country.

CHAPTER TWO

LITERATURE REVIEW Introduction
This chapter examines the relevant literature on inclusive education. It discusses first, what disability means and the perceptions people have about those with disabilities. It explores the history and progress of inclusive education and the development of policies to recognise the importance of inclusive education internationally. Second, the effects of inclusion, academically and socially, are discussed. Third, there is some discussion of the elements of an effective inclusive education programme in primary schools. Finally, the education system in Papua New Guinea is detailed, followed by the history and progress of special education there. Although, this study has been under taken in Papua New Guinea, the New Zealand situation is familiar to the researcher and is often used to illustrate particular points in his study.

Section 1

Section one reviews the definition of disability, which are needed to understand the historical and philosophical journey disability has taken towards the notion of inclusion. The transition to this policy was brought about by many social and political developments leading to the goal of people with disabilities being recognized as equal. The section will not only define the term disability but examine the way society views and perceives people with disabilities. The review will discuss the history of approaches in educating children with special needs.

1.

Disability

The term disability is often used to refer to one or some of the body parts, which do not function freely resulting in an impairment (Ashman & Elkins, 1998). Disability is generally perceived as a condition, which results in a person being incapable of performing certain duties physically. Although there are many different definitions for disability, the World Health Organisation (WHO) defined disability as: "any restriction or lack (resulting from impairment) of ability to perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered normal for human beings" (WHO, 1990 cited in Neilson, 2005. p. 11). It could be physical, sensory or intellectual.

The word disability usually raises many conflicting issues within a social group because it does marginalise people with some form of impairment from the other people. People with disabilities are often classified and labelled as incapable of contributing to society's social and economic development (Fulcher, 1989). The labelling of people with disability has been one of the hottest debated issues because it focuses on the negative features of the disability. This has led to the development of the discourse theory whereby the concept of disability can be categorised into different domains.

2.

Discourses of Disabilities

A focus on discourses of disability demonstrates the main ways in which society views people with disabilities (Fulcher, 1989; Hendy, 1995; Neilson, 2005). People with disabilities are a minority group and generally considered inferior so society frequently overrules them in decision-making about their lives. Many develop the attitude that these people need to be cared for, as they cannot support themselves. This kind of thought was the foundation of the development of the four discourses by Fulcher (1989). She categorised people with disability into four main discourses according to how society based their knowledge and understanding on the type and situation of the disability. These discourses include medical, charity, lay and rights. The first three discourses classify disability as a perceived `need' while the fourth one, the `rights discourse', provides opportunity for people with disabilities to have a choice in decision-making and to participate meaningfully in society (Neilson, 2004).

2.1

Medical Discourse

The medical discourse refers to disabilities that focus more on medical attention. It is the dominant discourse when people with disabilities are referred for medical attention to `cure' or `treat' the disability (Fulcher, 1989; Neilson, 2005). From this perspective such people are considered handicapped and unable to contribute fully to the well-being of the society.

2.2

Charity Discourse

The charity discourse is closely related to medical discourse. From this view people with disabilities are kept in one place so that care and medical attention is provided (Fulcher, 1989: Hendy, 1995: Neilson, 2005). In this discourse those labelled disabled are classified as "dependent, helpless, and needy" (Neilson, 2005, p.15) and required some form of care and support from society. This discourse emphasises "public concern and empathy" towards people with disabilities (Hendy, 1995, p.11). Different organisations are formed and institutions are established with the expectation that they will take the full responsibility to care for those with disabilities and at the same time raise funds to meet the operational cost of the care (Neilson, 2005). Some of these organisations include the International Red Cross Society, the Cheshire Home and Mount Zion Blind Centre in Papua New Guinea.

2.3

Lay Discourse

The lay discourse is based on and influenced by the other two earlier discourses. This discourse labels and classifies people with disabilities as "inferior, dependent and [therefore] marginalises them" (Neilson, 2005, p.16). Often people with disabilities are categorised by their disabilities rather than their person (Fulcher, 1989; Neilson, 2005). As a result, they are frequently being left out of society so they are prevented from participating fully in an economic or social way.

2.4

Rights Discourse

The rights discourse is totally opposite to the other three discourses. As Hendy (1995) states, this discourse is clearly a political issue. This discourse demands the right for people with disabilities to be considered as equal as other people so that they can participate meaningfully in the social and economic aspects within society (Fulcher, 1989; Neilson, 2005). It fights against "discrimination, exclusion and oppression" (Hendy, 1995, p.11) for equal opportunities to education, employment and social activities. People with disabilities do not want to be discriminated against, but to be independent, self-reliant and participate equally along with those who do not have disabilities.

3.

The Concept of Inclusive Education

Inclusive education is a complex notion and is closely associated with people's understanding of with disabilities generally, and this right to access educational opportunities like other people (Thomas & Vaughan, 2004). Advocates of inclusion have included the parents of children with disabilities, teachers of children with disabilities, civil rights advocates and those involved at a political level (Peterson & Hittie, 2003; Pijl, Meyer & Hagarty, 1997; Smith, Polloway, Patton & Dowdy, 2005; Thomas & Vaughan, 2004). The idea of inclusion was developed and adapted as the best solution to combat discrimination so that people with disabilities would not be segregated. Inclusion is based on a social model, which recognises the value of people with disabilities and the positive contributions they make to society (Armstrong, 2003; Florin, Rose, & Tilstone, 1998). Inclusion means that people with disabilities are given equal opportunities to participate meaningfully in all activities, whether, educational, or social i