1

1

Introduction

Colour image processing is a developing field in science and technology. Applications include agriculture quality control (e.g. fruit sorting), surveillance of vehicles or crowds, graphic arts, medical imaging case studies and industrial handling. In many cases images captured by the camera do not give a good quality colour images, that is, variation in colour and brightness of an image due to artefacts, change in luminance and focus levels. Often colour correction is necessary to get good quality images and many software packages are available to correct brightness, contrast, colour and sharpness levels. However these software do not produce the colour according to the perception of human visual system. The aim of the thesis is to do colour correction in the colour images captured by the University of Waikato Range Imager to produce realistic colour images. The Range images are a special class of digital images, in which each pixel of the range image expresses the distance between the camera and the scene. Range images are often captured by range image camera. The Waikato Range Imager uses the principle of imaging lidar systems to capture range images. By using different coloured illuminants it can also capture colour information at the same time as ranging. Unfortunately chosen illuminants are not ideal so that the colours in the image are not entirely natural looking. In this thesis we explore the correction of the colour to produce natural looking colour images. In chapter 2 of the thesis we discuss in detail about the background theory of colour vision and colour science needed for this study. Topics covered include human visual system, theories of colour vision, and internationally recommended CIE system that form the basis for colourimetry applications. Also explained is colour measuring instruments, colour spaces and colour space conversions used in colour measurement and calculation. Towards the end of the chapter we discuss the Genetic Algorithm (GA) approach to estimate the spectral reflectance of the ranger surface (Schettini and Zuffi, 2006).

2

The equipment and hardware used in this study is discussed in the chapter three. First, the components of the spectroradiometer used in measuring the spectral power distribution of the illuminant source is described. Second the principle used in WaikatoRange Imager, and the components used in the experimental set up are described. Chapter four introduces the experimentation and methodology used in this study. We outline the acquisition of colour range images by Waikato Range Imager using red, green and blue LEDs as the illuminants. Next we discuss the tristimulus values (CIE XYZ) calculation of the ranger surface and radiometric quantities measurement using the spectroradiometer. Finally, genetic algorithm toolbox used in Matlab to estimate the spectral reflectance of the ranger surface and also the fitness function and the normalisation constant used for the ranger data are described. Reconstruction of RGB images and estimating reflectance spectra for each pixel of the Ranger colour image is described in chapter five. It also includes the CRT colour image calculated from the estimated reflectance and the CIE colour matching functions. Chapter six gives the idea of problems, improvements as well as future works to be done in this study. We give the outline of works to be done in the future by comparing our tristimulus values and the CIE system.

3

2 Background Theory
This chapter explains in detail about the anatomy of human visual system, colour vision and theories based on colour vision. We give an overview of colour science and the internationally recommended CIE system which forms the basis for colourimetric application, followed by colour measurements instruments and colour spaces used in colour calculation and correction. Finally the outline of linear models and genetic algorithms used in estimating the spectral reflectance of the colour surface are introduced.

2.1 Digital Image Processing
Digital image processing is the processing of digital images by means of a digital computer (Gonzalez and Woods, 2002). Normally it consists of three level processes · · · Low-level process Mid-level process High-level process

Low-level processing operator includes primitive operations like noise removal, contrast enhancement and image sharpening in the image. The input and output of the operators are images. Mid-level processes are tasks like image segmentation, edge deduction, representation and description of images. Here the input is an image and the output is a set of attributes extracted from the images. Higher-level processing involves "making sense" of an ensemble of recognized objects, as in image analysis, and, at the far end of the continuum, performing the cognitive functions normally associated with vision. The output is the interpretation of an image (Gonzalez and Woods, 2002). Digital image processing is a well-established technique with a large body of theory and many practical applications in fields like industrial inspection, medicine, publishing and multimedia. Many of these applications require colour information in the images.

4

2.2

Colour Image Processing and its Future

Colour image processing is a branch of digital image processing; obviously colour images convey more information than monochrome images. To understand the image acquisition, the processing, and the display of colour images some knowledge is required in the fields of image formation, colourimetry and colour reproduction. After the creation of advanced sensors, computing and display technologies researchers have to deal with lot of aspects of colour image processing. In many industrial applications computers extract more information than the human eye, such as the position and orientation of an object, which is used to control a machine. Due to cost and immature development of complex processing algorithms advancement of colour image processing is still under research. Some of the applications include agriculture quality control (e.g. fruit sorting), surveillance of vehicles or crowds, graphic arts, medical imaging case studies and industrial handling (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

2.3

Colour Vision

Colour vision is the ability of the human visual system or machine to perceive coloured objects based on the wavelength (or frequency) of the light reflected or emitted. The human visual system can perceive the distribution of light intensity over the visible spectrum (360­760 nm). A red board does not emit red light instead it simply absorbs the frequencies of light shining on it, except the frequencies of red (580nm), which are reflected. Now the red board is seen to be red, because the human eye can distinguish different wavelengths of the visible spectrum. The three major components needed to distinguish colours are a light source, a detector (human eye) and the sample under view.

2.3.1 Colour
Colour definition is not straightforward; we can say colour is how a human observer interprets light. For example, take a colour square and place it under a variable intensity of light. When the intensity is varied, the colour of the sample stays the same. Therefore colour can be defined as something which is invariant

5

with respect to light intensity. In other words, the eyes and brain turn an incoming emission spectrum into a discrete set of values. This signal is processed in our brain and interpreted as colour (Sangwine and Horne, 1998)

2.3.2 Human visual system
Human visual perceptions are strongly influenced by the anatomical structure of the eye. The human system can detect the range of light spectrum from about 360 ­760 nm. In many aspects the human eye works like a camera. The cornea and lens of the eye act together like a camera lens to focus an image of the visual world onto the retina at the back of the eye (see figure 2-1). There are some differences between camera and the eye. The presence of flat image plane in the camera provides good resolution and uniform spectral response throughout the entire plane whereas the human eye has a motion sensor system with 180° horizontal coverage. Due to this reason the peripheral vision system of eye provides low resolution imaging but with excellent motion detection (Scott, 2006). The small opening in the center of the iris is the pupil (see figure 2-1). The iris is the coloured part of the eye and it controls the light intensity levels inside the eye. Through the pupil light enters the eye and its size determines the amount of light entering the eye. The optics of the eye forms an inverted image of the scene on the inner surface of the retina. The retina is a multi-layered sensitive tissue that lies at the back of the eye. The retina contains a deep collection of light sensitive photoreceptors called rods and cones which transfer light signals (photons) into electro-chemical signals and they are converted to neural signals in the retina and transmitted to the brain through the optic nerves

6

Figure 2-1 Structure of the human eye [Source: www.bbc.co.uk/.../4nervoussystemrev6.shtml]

The most important difference between rods and cones is in visual function. Rods are very sensitive cells that respond to low light levels. Rods are located in the peripheral retina, are responsible for night vision, but cannot distinguish colour. There are approximately 120 million rods in the retina. There are three kinds of cones: red(R), green(G), blue(B); sometimes they are also referred to as L, M and S cones for long, medium and shorter wavelength. Cones, primarily located in the centre of the retina at the fovea, are not good for night vision, they are able to detect colours and perceive colour during daylight conditions (Scott, 2006). Figure 2.2 shows the structure of the retina.

7

Figure 2-2 Structure of retina which contains rods and cones [Source: http://www.photo.net/photo/edscott/vis00010.htm ]

Each cones type absorbs light over broad range of wavelengths, but has its peak absorption at different wavelength. The R cones have peak absorption at approximately 570nm, the G cones at approximately 545nm, and the S cones at approximately 440nm. Figure 2.3 shows curves of cone absorption at different wavelengths. These cone absorption rates curves determine the intensity of the colours the human eye recognises for each wavelength in the visible spectrum. A red sensation is not only because of activity in the R cone, but also due to comparison of both R and G cones (Sangwine, 1998).

Figure 2-3 Curves showing Cone absorption rates [Source: www.psych.ucsb.edu/~rowe/ComparativeColorVisi...]

8

2.4 Theories of colour vision
There are three major colour theories that explain and guide research on colour vision; first one is trichromatic theory which is also known as the YoungHelmholtz theory, secondly the opponent-process theory and the final one is zone theory. First two theories are complementary and explain processes that operate at different levels of the visual system. The trichromatic theory operates at the photoreceptor level and the opponent - processes theory applies to the subsequent neural level of color vision processing. Historically, the two theories were pitted against each other, but now it is realised that both theories help to explain how the human color vision system works. The Zone theory combines features of the trichromatic and opponent-process theory and it explains the process taking place in the brain to interpret colour (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

2.4.1 Trichromatic Theory
The trichromatic theory of colour vision is based on the working of three types of cone receptors present in the retina. This theory was originated in the 18th century and thus also has a long history. The most important feature of this theory is that it is possible to match all of the colours in the visible spectrum by appropriate mixing of three primary colours. In trichromacy, the primary colours of red, green, and blue are processed and mixed by the human vision system to produce various types of colours in differing hues and shades. Trichromacy is the basic principle of colour reproduction methods such as those used in television, printing, and photography (Kaiser, 2005). In 1802 Young assumed that there are three cone receptors responsible for colour vision and in 1850 Helmholtz developed the theory based on Young's assumption. He performed theory colour matching experiments, in which as observer altered the relative intensity of three different wavelengths of light to match a test colour. They were not able to perceive the colours if they used only two wavelengths, but they could distinguish any colour in the spectrum if they used three colours. Trichromatic theory is also known as the Young-Helmholtz theory of colour vision. Loss of either red, green, or blue as colour perceptive elements in the retina causes an inability to perceive certain colours produced by the mix of

9

primaries. A number of colour perception phenomena cannot be explained by the trichromatic theory alone, for example, it fails to explain about the complementary afterimages. Figure 2-3 explains the trichromatic theory.

2.4.2 Opponent-process theory
Trichromatic theory says that when two lights results in the same cone responses, they produce the same colour. It does not explain when two colours have different cone responses. Obviously, they look different, but we do not know how different and exactly what colour they are. The Opponent process theory proposed by Herring in 1874 answers the questions above. The basic assumption is that colours come in pairs. The pairs are further divided into the achromatic system consisting of the black-white pair and the chromatic system consisting of the red-green and blue-yellow pairs. The red-green and yellow-blue pair are said to be exclusive colour sensation pair, because no colours can be seen with both colours in each pair. The achromatic system distinguishes brightness and contrast and the chromatic system perceives colour (Visualexpert, 2004). Figure 2.4 shows how the three classes of photoreceptor map on to the opponent process pairs. Opponent Process Theory predicts that certain colours such as reddish-green or greenish-red cannot exist. When we mix red and green or blue and yellow it produces a neutral result, because the two colours of the pair cancel each other. Note that, colours cancel each other only if they can exactly balance, that is, if they are red-green or blue-yellow pair; otherwise there is a colour left behind which is stimulated by the other colour pair. For example, the blue colour can be formed by mixing green and purple, as purple is red and blue, so the green cancels the red, leaving the blue signalled by the blue-yellow opponent process. Black colour is considered as a positive sensation, not as an absence of light in Opponent-Process theory. Therefore blind people, who do not perceive any light, do not see black instead they see a colour called `neural grey' (Visualexpert, 2004).

10

Figure 2-4 Opponent ­process theory of colour vision [Source: www.visualexpert.com]

2.4.3 Zone theory
The research work of Muller and Judd in 1930 and 1949 provided the Zone theory of colour vision by combining the features of the previous two theories. The trichromatic theory failed to explain the way some colour stimuli appear to an observer. Opponent process theory failed to explain certain types of colour blindness. Zone theory explains the action taking place in the brain, where the signals are interpreted in the environment of all the other visual inputs. In other words, opponent processes explains the linear transformation of a cone response, but zone theories describes how this transformation takes place (Sangwine and Horne, 1998). The zone theory predicts that opponent processes are just linear combination of cone responses. The red/green opponent process (ZRG) is a difference of Rand G cone responses:

Z RG =  (rR - rG )

(2.1)

11

where rR and rG are the R and G cone responses, and  is an arbitrary scaling constant. The red and green opponency is explained by this difference. If rR > rG, the red/green is positive and this mean that colour seen is reddish. If rR < rG, the red/green signal is negative then it means that the colour appears greenish. When rR = rG, the red/green signal is zero, and the colour appears neither red nor green. The blue/yellow component opponent process (ZBY) is a difference between the B cone response and a sum of R and G cone responses:

Z BY =  ( rB - ( rR + (1 -  ) rG ))

(2.2)

with   0.7 and where  is another arbitrary constant. When the blue/ yellow signal ZBY is positive, the colour seen is blue; when it is negative, the colour appears yellow. Finally, the third axis of a colour description, the light/dark signals (ZDL), is usually modelled as a combination of the L and M responses:

Z DL =  rB + (1 -  )rG

(2.3)

with  approximately 0.66. The zone theory equations (2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) model the actual mixing of the cones response that occurs in the brain. The zone theories do not provide clear explanation about white. White is defined as the absence of colour, so value of zero must be given to white signal in both the red/green and the blue/yellow opponent processes. This occur only when rR = rG = rB , so any light which yields the equal cone responses is colourless. In this case, only the light/dark signal responds. In the zone theories white is a derived sensation, caused by the absence of colour; there is no channel which explicitly signals the amount of whiteness in an object, although anything which activates the light/dark process only must be white (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

2.5

Colour Science

Colour science concerns with all aspects of computing colour stimuli and it can be divided into many branches such as radiometry, colourimetry, photometry, psychophysics and colour vision. It covers a wide range of sciences associated

12

with how human beings perceive colour. It also covers some engineering subjects associated with the generation of colour and the application of colourants to different materials; such as colour displays, illuminating, printing, dyeing, paint, plastics, colourant manufacturing. In each case, information about image colour must be physically measured in order to record it and they are reproduced as the same for other purposes in different formats. The colour perception is considered as a psychophysical phenomenon, so the colour measured must be specified in such a way that their results should match accurately with the visual perception of a normal human observer (Lee, 2005). Colourimetry is the science and technology used to quantify and describe physically the human colour perception. Colourimetry has been extensively used in various colour industries. Nowadays it is been increasingly used in the field of image processing due to the extensive development of cheaper and more advanced computer-controlled colour displays, printing and scanning devices. Colourimetry applications can be divided into three areas: colour specification, colour difference and colour appearance.

2.5.1 The CIE System
The basis for colourimetry was established by CIE (Commission Internationale de l' Éclairage) in 1931 based on visual experiments. Even though they have some limitations, the CIE system of colourimetry remains the only internationally agreed system for colour measurements. All the colour-related international standards and specifications use the CIE system. The CIE system provided a standard method for perceiving a colour stimulus under controlled illuminating and viewing conditions. There are three key elements given by CIE system for colour perception: spectral power distribution (light), reflectance spectrum (object), and colour matching functions (response of the cones) (Ohno, 2000).

Spectral power distribution
The light source is specified by means of the spectral power distribution (SPD)

S ( ) . It can be measured using a spectroradiometer. A light source can also be
measured in terms of colour temperature (in kelvins, K). The colour temperature

13

measurements are normally derived from the blackbody radiator. When the blackbody radiator is heated, it changes the colour from black to red to yellow to white to blue. In 1931 CIE recommended three standard illuminants, known as A, B and C, which represent incandescent light, direct sunlight and average daylight, respectively. Later in 1964 CIE recommended a series of D illuminants. The commonly used D illuminants are D65 and D50, which represents the daylight at approximately 6500K and 5000K, respectively. These illuminants are used in the graphic arts industry and in surface colour industries. CIE provided SPD values of all the recommended illuminants (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

Reflectance Spectrum
The colour of a sample is specified by the reflectance R( ) , a function of wavelength. Reflectance is the ratio of the light reflected from a sample to that reflected from a reference white standard (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

Figure 2-5 Specular and Diffuse reflection

There are two kinds of reflection: specular and diffuse reflection. Specular reflection is a direct reflection from a surface; in this case incident light does not penetrate the surface so that the incident beam and the reflected beam are of same colour. In diffuse reflection part of the incident beam is absorbed by the object and reemitted back in all directions. This is called diffuse reflection. CIE specified

14

four different types of illuminating and viewing conditions: 45°/Normal, Normal/45°, Diffuse/Normal, Normal/Diffuse. The reflectance can be measured using a spectrophotometer. Figure 2.5 shows the specular and diffuse reflection

Colour Matching Functions
The most important component in the CIE system is the colour matching functions, which define how human eyes match colour stimuli using a set of red, green and blue reference primaries. According to trichromatic theory of colour vision any colour perceived by the observer can be described by the amount of primaries present. The CIE colour matching function is derived based upon the laws of additive colour mixing. The commonly used additive primary colours are red, green and blue. In some cases subtractive colour mixing is also used, but additive colour mixing is theoretically simpler than subtractive (Ohno, 2000). In 1931, CIE recommended a set of standard colour matching functions, known as the CIE 1931 standard colorimetric observer (or 2° Observer). In 1930, Wright and Guild have performed independent visual experiments to derive colour matching functions using three R/G/B primaries, the result of their experiments became the basis of CIE colourimetry system. The functions are designated as

r ( ), g ( ) and b ( ) which are expressed in terms of colour stimuli of
wavelength 700 nm, 546.1 nm, and 435.8 nm, respectively. Figure 2-6 shows the relative intensities of the R, G, B primaries that matched with monochromatic stimulus at each wavelength. The negative value indicates that one of the primaries has to be added to the monochromatic stimulus to provide the match between the primary colours. In other words, negative amounts indicate that the light was added to the test colour instead of to the red, green and blue mixture. In the1931 CIE system converted the RGB colour matching functions to new primaries called X, Y, and Z. The colour matching functions are then denoted as x ( ), y ( ) and z ( ) , as plotted in Figure 2.6.

Two significant assumptions were made in deriving these colour matching functions: Firstly, observer field-of-view is taken as 2°. Secondly, additivity of light stimuli explained by Grassmann's Law is assumed. Grassmann's Law states

15

that "If the test colour is the combination of two monochromatic colours, then the observer's matching value of each primary will be the sum of the matching values for each of the monochromatic colours when viewed separately". The colour matching function which satisfies above two conditions is called CIE 1931 standard colourimetric observer. But practically this colour matching functions can be used for a field-of-view of up to 4°. In 1964, the second set of standard of colour matching functions for a 10° field-of-view was derived by the CIE system, denoted as x10 ( ), y10 ( ), and z10 ( ) . This is known as CIE 1964 supplementary standard colourimetric observer, and can be used for a field of view greater than 4°. The colour matching functions values for the CIE 1931 standard colourimetric observer (2°) and CIE 1964 supplementary standard colourimetric observer was given by the CIE system along the visible spectrum (Ohno, 2000). Figure 2.6 shows CIE RGB (dashed lines) and XYZ (solid lines) colour matching functions.

Figure 2-6 The CIE colour matching functions for R, G, B and X, Y,Z primaries [Source: H. Joel Trussell, 2005]

2.5.2 Tristimulus values
Tristimulus are determined by the three key elements of colour perception which is expressed in terms of functions of the visible spectrum. Any colour specified by a triple of numbers (X, Y, and Z) is called a Tristimulus values, and is given in

16

equation (2.4). They compute a colour by defining the amounts of the red, green and blue CIE primaries required to match a colour by the standard observer under a particular CIE illuminant and viewing conditions. These are the integration of the products of the functions in three components over the visible spectrum (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

X = k  S ( ) R( ) x ( )d Y = k  S (  ) R (  ) y (  ) d Z = k  S (  ) R (  ) z (  ) d
The k is the normalisation constant was chosen so that Y=100 for the sample so that it reflects 100% at all wavelengths. The normalisation constant introduced here makes the system suitable to use relative spectral distributions for the illuminant rather than the absolute one. If CIE 1964 supplementary standard colorimetric observer is used in equation (2.4), then all terms except S () and R () should have a subscript of 10. (2.4)

2.5.3 Chromaticity Diagram
The colour of a stimulus can be specified by a triplet of Tristimulus values. To provide a convenient two-dimensional representation of colours, chromaticity diagrams were developed. The transformation from Tristimulus values to chromaticity coordinates is provided through a normalisation that removes luminance information. Chromaticity coordinates are calculated by

X X +Y + Z Y y= X +Y + Z Z z= X +Y + Z x=

(2.5)

17

Since there are only two dimensions of information in chromaticity coordinates, the third coordinate can always be obtained from the other two because the three always sum to unity, namely

x + y + z =1

(2.6)

Figure 2-7 CIE chromaticity diagram for the 1931 standard colorimetric observer [Source: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/CIExy1931.png/325pxCIExy1931.png ]

Figure (2-7) shows the CIE chromaticity diagram for the 1931 standard colorimetric observer. In the chromaticity diagram, region of all perceptible colours is surrounded by the horseshoe-shaped locus of pure spectral colours with a straight line connecting the chromaticity co-ordinates of extreme red and blue. Whites lie near the centre of the diagram, and colours become more saturated towards the periphery. Tristimulus values and chromaticity co-ordinates are measured for colour specification. However, they do not describe a colour appearance attributes such as lightness, saturation and hue. In other words, it is difficult to visualize a colour accurately using these measures (Fairchild, 1998).

18

2.5.4 Colour theory and human colour perception
Colour is defined as an intensity invariant property, it is necessary to find what properties of light are intensity invariant. Light is described by a spectral power distribution S() which gives the power of the light at each wavelength . An intensity invariant measure of S() is the normalized distribution function SN(), which is given by dividing S() by the total power,

S N ( ) =

S ( )

 S ()d

(2.7)

Even if S () changes by a multiplicative factor (i.e. a change in intensity) then SN () remains unchanged. The colour is defined by

760

C=

360

 S ( ) A( )d

(2.8)

where the function A () is the colour matching function, which is also intensity invariant. It is to be noted that intensity invariance cannot be the only criterion to apply to colour vision. A colour description should also be able to distinguish between two spectral power distributions that differ by something other than a change in intensity. The ability to distinguish such distributions depends on the number of invariants that are computed. The colour perception theory and human colour perception is compared here. The colour descriptor equation (2.7) and the human colour system are similar(Sangwine and Horne,1998). The computation of descriptor equation can be broken into two stages: · · the integration of S () with A(); a integral along the visible spectrum

19

Each stage has a corresponding role in the human visual system. The integration step of S () with A() interprets the absoprtion of light and non-linearity response that occurs in the retina, and the opponent process channels of cone responses, which are implemented in the cortex, are defined by intergral along the visbible spectrum.

2.6 Colour Measurement Instruments
Colour measuring instruments are designed to measure colours in terms of reflectance, radiance and the CIE colourimetric values such as Tristimulus values. Different types of instruments are available accordingly they can measure different forms of colour, i.e. self-luminance, surface colours or both. The instruments are also designed based upon the illuminating source, viewing and illuminating geometries. These instruments are categorized into three types (Sangwine and Horne, 1998): · · · Tristimulus Colorimeter Spectroradiometer Spectrophotometer

2.6.1 Tristimulus Colourimeter
Tristimulus colourimeters are developed to measure the tristimulus values of colour under a predetermined set of illuminant source and observer conditions, e.g. D65/2°. They are very useful for determining the colour difference between pairs of colour samples for colour quality control purpose and they are cheaper than spectroradiometers and spectrophotometers. This instrument is mainly used for two purposes: measuring surface colours and measuring self-luminous colours. In case of surface colours measurement set up needs light source, integrating sphere and the detector, whereas for self luminous light source is not needed e.g. TV monitor. The detectors in this instrument use filters, they provide a close match to the CIE colour matching functions. The instrument also produces

20

the output which is closely related to the Tristimulus values equations. The ageing of filters is the only advantage of tristimulus colourimeter.

2.6.2 Spectroradiometer
Spectroradiometers are developed to measure spectral power distribution of the light source. They are expressed in radiometric quantities such as irradiance (in units of W/m²) or radiance (in units of W/m²Sr). Spectral power distribution is measured over the visible spectrum with a fixed interval of 5 nm, 10 nm or 20 nm. Their colourimetric values are expressed by luminance (cd/m²) and illuminance (lux) for radiance and irradiance respectively. The tele-spectroradiomter (TSR) is the most commonly used instrument. The essential components of spectroradiometer are a telescope, a monochromator, input optics and a detector. The TSR is used to measure of the distant object in its usual observing position and common viewing conditions. The measurement results correspond to the actual conditions of viewing is the advantage of this system. Similar to colourimeter it can also measure both surface and self-luminous colours. This is useful in matching the image displayed on a monitor with the output from a printer and the process is called cross-media colour reproduction (Sangwine and Horne, 1998).

2.6.3 Spectrophotometer
Spectrophotometers are commonly used for measuring surface colours and are intended to measure the ratio between the incident beam and the light reflected from the measured surface across the visible spectrum with a fixed interval of 5 nm, 10 nm or 20 nm. The results are expressed by reflectance of surface colour. The components of the spectrophotometer are a light source, a monochromator and a detector. As recommended by CIE, geometry of illuminating and viewing conditions should be considered while taking measurements. In pra