Oil Spills in New Zealand's Territorial Sea
A Fence at the Top of the Cliff?

by

Veronica Anne Hoeberechts

Being a Thesis submitted to the University of Waikato in fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Social Sciences

2006

ABSTRACT
Over the last four decades, there have been many catastrophic oil spills in the marine environment and these larger oil spills have often caused environmental devastation especially if they occurred in the coastal marine area. Serious

ecological damage can also be caused from operational discharges, ballast and bilge water, from ships within territorial waters. Until now New Zealand has only had relatively minor oil spillages in its coastal waters, primarily from ships' discharge or accidental leaks in port. The possibility however of a major oil spill occurring within our coastal area is considerably higher today than 20 years ago as there has been a significant increase of all types of oil tankers/bulk carriers/container ships to New Zealand.

New Zealand is an island nation that relies heavily on the marine environment for commercial operations such as fisheries and tourism and many New Zealanders enjoy recreational, aesthetic and spiritual ties to the coastal marine area. The sustainability of our territorial sea is therefore of paramount importance. A major oil spill could cause widespread ecological damage, cripple or destroy marine/tourism operations and ensure that the human values associated with the coast are lost, possibly for many years. The research reported here addresses the issue of oil spill preparedness and response in New Zealand's waters. A

combination of a review of New Zealand's international commitments and domestic legislation and two case studies of high profile oil spills: the Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve and the Jody F Millennium are used. The

research identifies whether the present environmental legislation, that promotes sustainable management, is proactive in the prevention of a major oil spill and concludes that the New Zealand approach reflects a relatively strong Sustainable Imperative position rather than one of Sustainable Development. In

implementation it relies heavily on co-management integrated at the regional council level.

ii

Acknowledgements

To my two supervisors, Hamish Rennie and Anne-Marie d'Hauteserre I thank you for your supervision, encouragement and knowledge and the time, even on the weekends, that you have given me to have this thesis finished. To the staff of the Geography Department, I am grateful that you put up with me for so long and a special thanks to Max Oulton for his cartographic skills and Brenda for always having a smile on her face to cheer me up. To the people who allowed me to interview them and others who kept answering my emails and phone calls with the queries I had, I wish to thank you. The experiences, opinions and information you all shared with me were of great value to this research and for this I am indebted to Ian Niblock, Hans Wetendorf, Hori Parata, John Lee-Richards, Ken Murray, Mike Price and the MNZ staff of Te Atatu. To the friends I have meet and kept along the way, thank you for the support that you have shown me throughout this `thesis' process, the enthusiasm and so often the laughs, Toni with an extra special thank you to Kat for your unbelievable generosity of spirit and to Sarah for if it hadn't been for your insight a major stumbling block would not have been overcome. Two others have also got my undying thanks and they are Bethea Weir and Margaret Dobson, for again without your wonderful support over the last six months I would never have got to this point. To my family and my `old' friends, whom I often did not see very much, thank you for your support even if from afar I knew your thoughts were with me and Georges, your kindness still blows me away, thank you.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract Acknowledgement Table of Contents List of Figures List of Boxes List of Plates List of Abbreviations and Acronyms Chapter One: Introduction 1.1 1.2 1.3 Research Motivation Introducing the Research Question and Objectives 1.2.1 Research Question and Objective Thesis Structure ii iii iv vi vi vi vii 1 3 3 5 6 9 9 11 11 13 15 17 17 18 21 24 26 26 27 29 29 30 31 32 33 35 37 40 41 41 43 44 46 48
iv

Chapter Two: Theoretical Framework 2.1 2.2 Sustainable Development ­ The Evolution Economics and Sustainability 2.2.1 Capitalism 2.2.2 Weak Sustainability 2.2.3 Strong Sustainability Alternative Sustainability Principles 2.3.1 Why the Imperative? 2.3.2 Sustainable Development v Sustainable Imperative 2.3.3 The Precautionary Principle Chapter Summary

2.3

2.4

Chapter Three: Methodology and Methods 3.1 3.2 3.3 Methodology Research Design Research Limitations 3.3.1 Researcher's Position 3.3.2 Non-acquiescence of Key Informant/Stakeholder 3.3.3 Time Constraint Methods 3.4.1 Case Studies 3.4.2 Interviews 3.4.3 Discourse Analysis Chapter Summary

3.4

3.5

Chapter Four: Contextual Framework 4.1 4.2 Introduction International Maritime Agreements 4.2.1 UNCLOS III ­ The General Principles for the Prevention and the Protection of the Marine Environment. 4.2.2 The London Convention 4.2.3 MARPOL 73/78

4.3

4.4

4.2.4. Oil Pollution Liability 4.2.5 Soft-Law MEAs: Rio Earth Summit 4.2.6 Summary of International Treaties New Zealand's Coastal and Marine Legislation 4.3.1 Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA) 4.3.1a Evaluation of RMA 4.3.2 Maritime Transport Act 1994 (MTA) 4.3.2a Evaluation of MTA 4.3.3 Marine Reserves Act 1971 (MRA) 4.3.3a Evaluation of MRA 4.3.4 Regional Council Responsibilities 4.3.4a Evaluation of Regional Council Responsibilities Chapter Summary

51 52 54 55 57 60 61 63 64 65 65 66 66 68 68 71 71 72 74 79 82 87 90 92 92 93 93 94 95 96 96 97 99 101 103 103 103 104 104 105 106 107 108

Chapter Five: The Case Studies 5.1 5.2 Introduction Case Study ­ Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve 5.2.1 Maori History of the Poor Knights Islands 5.2.2 How the Poor Knights Islands became a Marine Reserve 5.2.3 Oil Spill at the Poor Knights Islands 5.2.4 Prosecution Proceedings 5.2.5 `No-go' Area for the PKIMR Desk-top Case Study ­ Jody F Millennium Chapter Summary

5.3 5.4

Chapter Six: Research Findings 6.1 6.2 Introduction Analysis of Case Studies 6.2.1 PKIMR and the MATBA 6.2.2. PKIMR and the Jody F Millennium 6.2.3 The JFM Grounding Responses to Objective One and Two 6.3.1 Civil Liability for Oil Spill Pollution from Ships 6.3.2 IMO Mandates Integrated Coastal Management (ICM) Chapter Summary

6.3

6.4 6.5

Chapter Seven: Conclusions 7.1 Thesis Findings 7.1.1. Objective One 7.1.2. Objective Two 7.1.3. Answer to the Research Question Sustainable Development v Sustainable Imperative Research Limitations Revisited Guidelines for Future Research Final Comment

7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5

Bibliography

109
v

LIST OF FIGURES Figure One Figure Two Figure Three Figure Four Figure Five Figure Six Figure Seven Figure Eight 7 18 18 19 20 56 74 86

LIST OF BOXES Box One Box Two Box Three Box Four Box Five Box Six Box Seven Box Eight Box Nine Box Ten Box Eleven Box Twelve Box Thirteen Box Fourteen Box Fifteen Box Sixteen 22 23 28 36 50 52 53 54 58 59 60 62 79 80 81 88

LIST OF PLATES Plate One Plate Two Plate Three 73 76 77

vi

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Australian Maritime Safety Authority AMSA Coastal Marine Area CMA Contract regarding an Interim Supplement to Tanker Liability for Oil Pollution (1968) CRISTAL Department of Conservation DOC Exclusive Economic Zone EEZ International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (1973) and subsequent Protocol (1978) MARPOL 73/78 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (1954) OILPOL International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage (as amended) (1969) CLC International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation (1990) OPRC International Maritime Organisation IMO International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources IUCN Mandatory area to be Avoided MATBA Marine Reserves Act 1971 MRA Maritime Safety Authority (as of July 2005 ­ Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MSA Maritime Transport Act 1994 MTA Multilateral Environmental Agreement MEA Ministry for the Environment MFE New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement NZCPS Northland Regional Council NRC Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment PCE Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserve PKIMR Regional Coastal Plan RCP Regional Policy Statement RPS Resource Management Act 1991 RMA South Pacific Regional Environmental Program SPREP Tanker Owners Voluntary Agreement Concerning Liability for Oil Pollution (1968) TOVALOP United Nations UN United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea UNCLOS Voluntary Vessel Routeing Code VVRC

vii

Chapter One: Introduction
Oil is the life blood of our modern industrial society. It fuels the machines and lubricates the wheels of the world's production. However, when that vital resource is out of control, it can destroy marine life and devastate the environment and economy of an entire region ... (Max, 1969 citied in Aynechi, 2004 1).

The above quote could have been written yesterday instead of over 30 years ago, as it is just as relevant today. Oil continues to be the life blood of the modern world and the demand for it is increasing. Consequently, the marine

transportation of it has also been amplified and this is demonstrated by the available figures, produced by the International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation (ITOPF) (2004), which show that in the 1990s over 7000 oil tankers transported more than 1.5 billion tonnes of crude oil/oil products. This escalation of oil tanker traffic has ensured that the proclivity for oil spills in the marine environment continues to be a great threat.

According to Doerffer (1992) a major oil spill is one that is 700 tonnes or larger, while a minor oil spill is below seven tonnes, thus a medium oil spill is anything in between. Most minor marine oil spills, as they occur fairly frequently, are not reported beyond the country they occur in. This also appears to be the case for many medium-sized oil spills and may be due to a variety of factors such as; the amount spilt, whether the spill is in a significant/sensitive ecological habitat or that the oil spill was quickly contained and/or cleaned up. Hence, it is often only the major oil spills (>700 tonnes) that receive international media attention.

The first such major oil spill from an oil tanker, to be given worldwide coverage, occurred in March 1967 with the grounding of the `Torrey Canyon' on Pollard's Rock in the Seven Stones reef between the Scilly Isles and Land's End, England. The tanker leaked approximately 119,000 tonnes of crude oil into the marine environment, devastating the coastal marine area (Draffen, 2004; Petrow, 1968; Smithsonian Institute, 2004).

1

Sadly the `Torrey Canyon' was not the largest oil spill to have eventuated. Records differ regarding both the number and size of the major oil spills that have happened since. For example, according to The Mariner Group (2006) only seven major spills occurred in the 1970s while the ITOPF (2004) recorded 252 oil spills greater than 700 tonnes during that period. The ITOPF also state that the number of major oil spills has dramatically lessened throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century. There are various reasons for this reduction that ranges from The essential

enhanced navigational technology to double hulled tankers.

component that aided the decrease of major oil spills nevertheless, was the nearly universal acceptance of `sustainability' of the oceans. This has ensured that many maritime nations, including New Zealand, have ratified international, regional and/or bilateral agreements and implemented domestic laws regarding the transportation of all oil products (Doerffer, 1992; ITOPF, 2004).

Despite the fact that larger oil spills have lessened in recent years, they still happen. An example is the 10,000 tonnes of oil that smothered 400 kilometres of Brittany coastline in December 2000 or the 77,000 tonnes of oil that was leaking from an oil tanker that sank off the North western coast of Spain in November 2002 (Doak, 2002; The Mariner Group, 2006). Both of which if they had occurred in New Zealand's territorial waters would probably have had extremely detrimental environmental and economic repercussions for the coastal communities affected.

Apart from the scale of damage that can occur from thousands of tonnes of oil if it is spilt in coastal waters, smaller spills (minor to medium) can also be biologically devastating. Further to this serious ecological damage can also be caused from operational discharges from ships within territorial waters. Up to now New

Zealand has not been the recipient of a major oil spill, with most of the oil pollution in our coastal waters being from ship's discharge and/or accidental spills in port/harbours. Though, with the sinking of the cruise liner the Mikhail

Lermontov in 1986 and the grounding of the Jody F Millennium in 2002, New Zealand had to deal with the possibility and reality, respectively, of medium sized oil spills. Notwithstanding these `accidents' the main reason New Zealand has not had to cope with a major spill is that we are not on any significant oil tanker routes. Despite this the possibility of an oil spill occurring within our coastal area
2

is considerably higher today than 20 years ago as there has been a substantial increase of tankers, bulk carrier/container ships and other large vessels to New Zealand (Doerffer, 1992; Iversen, 1996).

1.1 Research Motivation
My personal interest for this thesis topic originated after a small oil spill occurred between the Poor Knights Islands Marine Reserves and the Northland coast, two days prior to a diving trip that I was to take at the reserve. Initially, the relevant authorities forecast that the spill could take about two weeks to clean up and the environmental damage that might occur could destroy the dive site for many years to come.

The oil spill was cleaned-up a lot sooner than the estimated two weeks and though it has been just over five years since the incident, it appears that little long-term ecological damage has occurred. Nevertheless, all the tour and dive operators still lost at least a week's business at the height of the season and signs of the oil spill are still visible in the caves and archways of the islands. As a diver I was annoyed that my attempt to dive at the Poor Knights had been prevented, but as an environmentalist I was very angry that the reserve could have been destroyed for the foreseeable future.

I recognize that my feelings of annoyance and anger might have had the potential to create a bias in my research. However, I will state now that both emotions were neutralized by the favourable outcome, of the oil spill, and with the passage of time. Secondly, as I explain in the Methodology Chapter I reflect upon my worldview and undertake to guard against any bias.

1.2 Introducing the Research Question & Objectives
Sustainability is a concept that has emerged from the environmental sciences and global development agencies and stems from the theory of Sustainable Development which is detailed in Chapter Two. Nevertheless, a brief explanation of Sustainable Development is warranted here and is provided for by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) (1987 43) as
3

"development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations".

This outline of Sustainable Development is non-specific and therefore can be interpreted in different ways. The same could be said for sustainability, albeit possibly not to the same degree. An example of this is the two subsequent definitions. Both originated from the same source and although they are similar, the first suggests a much broader remit than the second. The first is

"sustainability may be defined as having four elements: to conserve the stock of natural assets; to avoid damaging the regenerative capacity of ECO-SYSTEMS (emphasis in the original); to achieve greater social and economic equality; and to avoid imposing risks and costs on future generations" (Bullock et al. 2000 849). The second description of sustainability is that it "... refers to management practices that are designed to ensure that the exploitation of resources is conducted in a manner that protects the resource base for use by future generations" (Bullock et al. 2000 849). Thus, to put more succinctly,

sustainability entails resource and/or environmental preservation and intergenerational equity. As such it denotes a far more eco-centric perspective than Sustainable Development, which implies development as the primary objective.

Another variation of Sustainable Development is sustainable management. To a greater extent sustainable management is aligned to the concept of sustainability and is the fundamental tenet of the Resource Management Act 19991 (RMA), New Zealand's principal environmental legislation. The RMA governs natural and physical resources, and as such has a definitive role in protecting the oceanic environs of New Zealand (Memon et al. 1995; Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment (PCE), 1999).

The citizenry of New Zealand rely heavily on the marine environment for commercial operations such as fisheries and tourism; also many enjoy recreational, aesthetic and spiritual ties to the coastal marine area (CMA). Accordingly the sustainability of the CMA could be considered vital to the economic and socio-cultural well-being of New Zealanders. A major oil spill which could cause widespread ecological damage, cripple or destroy marine and tourism operations and ensure that the human values associated with the coast are
4

lost, possibly for many years is unthinkable. For this reason, a proactive stance towards the prevention of a major oil spill would appear advisable. Consequently it will be the legislation that regulates New Zealand's marine environment and what preventative measures to marine oil spills that feature in our laws that will be the main subject of this research.

1.2.1 Research Question and Objectives

The research question is:

How does New Zealand's legislation prevent oil spills in its territorial waters?

To realize the research question two main objectives need to be answered. They are;

Objective One: to explore whether the cause of New Zealand's marine oil spills are due to the oil tanker/shipping companies business operation and/or ideology.

Objective Two: to establish what governmental measures are in place to lessen the impact of an oil spill in New Zealand.

To accomplish the objectives and answer the research question, three central issues will be investigated. Firstly, New Zealand's proactive and reactive

strategies to oil spills in response to international and national environmental and shipping legislation, agreements and/or protocols will be considered. Included in this analysis of domestic law will be whether the precepts of the Precautionary Principle is recognized and upheld. The reason for this is that many international treaties that New Zealand is signatory or party to incorporate these precepts. Secondly the current laws, policies and regulations regarding the risk of a major oil spill in New Zealand's coastal marine environment will be examined. Thirdly, to verify the extent to which reality reflects legislative intent, two cases of oil spill incidents in New Zealand waters will be analysed and the findings presented.

5

1.3 Thesis Structure
Chapter Two discusses the theoretical perspectives relevant to this research. Three main concepts will be examined; first Weak versus Strong Sustainability, two macroeconomic versions of Sustainable Development, then the Sustainability Imperative, followed by the Precautionary Principle. Two other processes,

`ecological footprint' and `integrated coastal management' will be outlined with respect to the significance that these processes and theories have in both New Zealand's international and national environmental legislation and with consideration to oil spills.

Chapter Three describes the methodology and methods that were used in this research. The research design is defined and includes the author's approach to the research and other possible limitations are explained. The qualitative research methods of case studies, interviews and discourse analysis will also be discussed.

Chapter Four introduces and reviews New Zealand's statutory environmental framework that governs the coastline and territorial sea. This consists of the identification of the international and regional treaties, protocols and agreements, which pertain to the marine environment, that New Zealand is a party or a signatory to and analyses our national maritime statutes and policies as to whether they are proactive or reactive.

Chapter Five presents the case studies. This chapter considers two cases, the first and major case study of this thesis happened in December 1999 off the Northland coast. Although it was a small oil spill, it caused major concern as it occurred within the boundaries of a sensitive marine eco-system and could have caused extensive environmental damage. The other case study presented is a desktop review of an oil spill off the Gisborne coast in February 2002 (Figure One).

6

Figure One: Location of case study areas (Oulton, 2006).

In Chapter Six the author focuses on the analysis of the major issues that have emerged from the research. The legislative influences and authority that govern the management of the coastal marine area are examined through the information collected from the case studies. In addition, this chapter speaks to the question of integrated coastal management.

7

In Chapter Seven the conclusions of the research are presented.

The two

objectives are examined through the review and analysis of the international and national legislation and two case studies and the research question is answered. A brief summing up of the main theories is given and the research limitations are revisited. Finally, suggestions for further research will be proposed.

8

Chapter Two: Theoretical Framework
The objective of this chapter is to establish the meaning of Sustainable Development and environmental sustainability as relevant to this research. The basis for evaluating the following theoretical framework is that Sustainable Development and economic progress underpin several, if not all, of the international and regional treaties that regulate the use and protection of New Zealand's maritime domain. Further these treaties may have greatly influenced New Zealand's national oceanic environmental standards. Should this be the case they might have enhanced New Zealand's ability to counteract an oil spill in the CMA, thereby strengthening the sustainability of our marine environment. A

review of these theories begins with a description of the evolution of Sustainable Development. Then the dominant economic paradigm of the western world and the two major economic theories of Weak and Strong Sustainability are discussed. Next the Sustainability Imperative will be explored with respect to the perception that environmentalism and economic development are a progression from independence to dependence. Also under this ideology the problem of

understanding Sustainable Development in context is recognized as an epistemological shift. Finally, consideration is given to sustainability as a radical and holistic concept under the prerequisite of the Precautionary Principle.

2.1 Sustainable Development ­ The Evolution
Acknowledgment that the earth may be facing significant environmental difficulties came to the attention of the general population with the publishing of Silent Spring (Carson, 1962). insectivorous animals were Carson recognized that birds and other ingesting the pesticide dichloro-diphenyl-

trichloroethane (DDT), used to control insects. Rather than breaking down or being egested, the pesticide was bioaccumulating in the birds and animals, causing detrimental health effects and/or death. The residue from the DDT had previously been thought to have negligible side effects and the occurrence of bioaccumulation was unrecognised.

9

The Population Bomb by Paul Ehrlich in 1970 sounded another alarm. He drew our attention to the fact that the human population, after centuries of extremely slow growth, had shifted into a period of geometric growth that was, and to some extent still is, considered explosive. The two main messages that Ehrlich wanted to warn the public of was that the earth could not withstand this continual growth of the human population and that such escalation would be very difficult to reverse. In the years since Silent Spring and Population Bomb, both the

accumulation of `insignificant' environmental side effects and the ever increasing human population have been recognized as serious causes of environmental stress.

Consequently, these two publications, along with the continual escalation of environmental damage, were arguably the catalyst for a myriad of environmental, economic and social research. Through this research several new development

ideologies emerged, of which the most well known is Sustainable Development, which either just included the protection of the environment as one of the many issues to be considered focused on ecosystem preservation. Thus, Sustainable Development diverged, sometimes dramatically, from the dominant development template of capitalism and industrialism utilized by many, if not all, `first world' nations in the twentieth century (Esteva, 1992; Watts, 1993).

Although Sustainable Development, as a theory, grew during the 1960s and 70s it did not come to the world's attention until 1987 with the Brundtland Report by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) to the United Nations (Dryzek, 1997). This report promoted the concept of Sustainable

Development and advanced understanding of the need for societies to protect the environment and natural resources. The overall vision of the report and the most widely quoted definition of Sustainable Development, is Brundtland's own, "Humanity has the ability to make development sustainable ­ to ensure that it meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs" (WCED, 1987 8). Hence, the notion of nature in-relation to humans and the environmental debt that will be owed to future generations are the foundations of Sustainable Development theory (Bullock et al. 2000).

10

Two opposing economic representations of Sustainable Development are Weak and Strong Sustainability. The proponents of Weak Sustainability adopt the

position that humans can use/abuse every resource because technology will provide for future generations (Pearce, 1993). In contrast advocates of Strong Sustainability submit that natural capital must be preserved for future generations (Costanza et al. 2001). Both these models and other ideology regarding the concept of resource/environmental use/conservation will be investigated to discover where New Zealand's environmental legislation is theoretically centred and whether the direction secures the sustainability of New Zealand's marine environment. Firstly, the economic blueprint of capitalism practiced by mature industrialised nations will be explored.

2.2 Economics and Sustainability
2.2.1 Capitalism
Capitalist ideals measure development and progress mainly in economic terms such as productivity and profitability and often with little regard to either the damage inflicted on the environment, sustainability or the people who will follow (Brune et al. 1997). One of the main assumptions of capitalism is that continuing economic growth is possible. Further, resource depletion, pollution and other environmental impacts of economic activity are treated as externalities (Bottomore et al. 1985; Hutton et al. 2000).

Capitalism or the free enterprise system is distinguished by three properties; · · ·

Its continuous effort to expand wealth is exercised by both private enterprise and individuals ...; and Capitalism is coordinated by a network of markets ... [and these] markets are the source of unprecedented adaptability; and Capitalism is uniquely characterised by a dual system of power. Rather than answering to a single political authority, capitalism has a private sector dominated by the decisions of business enterprise. The judgements of consumers, a public sector and
11

government which exercises its traditional powers are a limited but important regulatory influence over the private sector (Bullock et al. 2000 103).

Certain characteristics of capitalism seem to apply to the economic principles of many governments, including New Zealand, and many businesses such as the oil transportation sector. Although the marketplace and consumerism of many countries drive the production and transportation of oil and oil products, it is often the inadequate or negligent business practices or behaviour of the oil industry that appear to be responsible for most of the major oil spills in the marine environment. A variety of reasons could account for these inadequacies however, but for a notable number of companies it is probable that the profit margin often dominates over other business requirements (Ross, 1973). Inside the oil industry, though more specifically the tankers, this capitalist philosophy has led to certain operational shortcomings. Examples of poor commercial procedures are; the continued use of tankers that are well past their prime; low or no maintenance of vessels; and communication difficulties between officers and crew (Doak, 2002; Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC), 2003). Consequently, any one of these failings or a combination of them or other faults most probably cause the majority of oil spills in the marine environment.

Accordingly, my research will explore whether the cause of New Zealand's marine oil spills are due to the oil tanker/shipping companies business practices and/or ideology.

Before summarising the differences between Weak and Strong Sustainability, a definition from an economic viewpoint of Sustainable Development is necessary. Supporters of the economic view of Sustainable Development accept that development can be defined as "sustainable if it does not decrease the capacity to provide non-declining per capita utility for infinity" (Neumayer, 1999 9). Roughly translated this means that future generations are left with no less an amount of `capital' then the present generation enjoys. Capital in this case is recognised to include; human capital - our knowledge and skills; humanproduced capital - the built environment and machinery; and natural capital - all

12

things that are produced by or exist in nature that is not human-made (Turner et al. 1994).

The problem of Sustainable Development however, is that there are many often conflicting definitions. The reasons for this could be that ethics/values/views differ among people, industries, non-government organisations (NGO) and governments on what Sustainable Development means and also how to achieve it. This is the case with the advocates on either side of the Weak or Strong sustainability scale. Both accept the definition, as put forth above, but then they part company. Strong Sustainability, a more eco-friendly economic model, is espoused by many environmentally committed scientists, ecological economists, NGOs and individual environmentalists (Pearce, 1993; Turner et al. 1994). While promoters of Weak Sustainability include many organisations that believe in the `free enterprise' system for economies, such as multi-national corporations, some governments and the World Bank (Harris, 2003).

2.2.2 Weak Sustainability
Weak Sustainability is an economic model that is based on the work of two neoclassical economists, John Hartwick a resource economist and Robert Solow, a Nobel Laureate. For this reason, Pearce (1997) renders Weak Sustainability as neoclassical economics. Hartwick et al. (1998 394) do not consider the economy of Sustainable Development as Weak Sustainability, rather they regard the "... idea of Sustainable Development as an economy in a steady-state ...". In this economic model the management of renewable and non-renewable resources are treated differently. For non-renewable resources the process is similar to the `green' solution (i.e. use replenishable forms of energy, recycle if applicable (although this has limits) and lessen the demand o