The Fast and the Spurious: Geographies of Youth Car Culture in Hamilton, New Zealand

by Paul Beere

A Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Social Sciences

University of Waikato

2007

ABSTRACT

"Boy racers" or "hoons" attract extensive media attention and are often the focus of public concern. Discourses about "hooning" often focus on notions of public safety and illegal behaviour. What is largely absent from these debates is alternative explanations as to why young people choose to engage in "hooning" behaviour, what drives them to congregate in public spaces and why they choose to express themselves through an "autocentric" culture. When these issues are addressed it is usually within broader policy frameworks which seek ways of dissipating youth activities in spaces constructed as "trouble spots". This thesis represents an attempt to provide a reverse discourse about youth car culture and young people's presence in public spaces. Criminal activity not withstanding, youth car culture behaviour in this context is treated as a legitimate form of cultural expression that has the same social validity as other non-mainstream phenomena. Through feminist and poststructuralist understandings of identities, landscapes and place, the complexities of youth car culture will be unpacked in an attempt to expose "concerns" which may turn out to be little more than moral panic. Key terms: boy racers, hoons, hooning, youth, identities, masculinities, cars

i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

First and foremost I would like to thank all the people that gave their time to participate in this research project. In particular, I would like to thank Inspector Leo Tooman and the Rotor Dynamic, Brothers, Chosen Few, Ruff Rhydaz and Kronik Performance car clubs. I also would like to thank all the other youth car culture enthusiasts I spoke to at T' Straight that were not members of a car club. Without the support of all the aforementioned people, this thesis and the insights therein would not have been possible. This thesis would not have been possible without the unfaltering support of Robyn Longhurst, not only during the supervision of this thesis, but all through my undergraduate study as well. The inspiration you provide has been a beacon during difficult times. Thank you to my dad for just about everything. It was you who, through teaching me how to fix things, showed me that there is always a solution. These are the skills that have made research so much fun. To my son Ocean, thanks for helping me keep it real and not lose touch of the importance of playing. Without the flexibility and understanding of Russell Kirkpatrick, my friend and employer, I would not have been able to complete this thesis on time. Your generosity with time off, golf lessons and general advice are duly noted. A big thank you goes out to Helen McCormick for helping with the final draft and for being so patient. You are good one. I would also like to thank Megan Davies for her support as a friend. The advice you have given me over the last year has helped me so much. Thanks go out to Maria Drinkwater at the Transport Registry Centre for helping not only with the supply of data, but in ensuring that the integrity of the data was robust. Finally, I would like to thank the rest of the staff and students I have studied with in the Department of Geography, Tourism and Environmental Planning at the University of Waikato. Each of you (you know who you are!), in your own way, have helped make studying fun.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract

i

Acknowledgements

ii

Table of Contents

iii

List of Figures

v

Glossary of Terms

vi

1. Introduction Historical Context A Definition of Youth Car Culture Youth Car Culture and the Law Thesis Outline

1 2 3 6 9

2. Literature Review and Theory The Construction of "Youth" and Youth Identities Gendered Identities and the Problematic Study of Youth Cultures Difference The Importance of Scale Summary

12 13 20 23 24 28

3. Methodology Autoethnography Recruiting Participants Interviews Participant Observation Critical Readings of Media Texts Summary

30 31 38 41 46 49 52

iii

4. Situating Hamilton's Youth Car Culture Hamilton's Youth Car Culture in the 1980s Hamilton's Satellite Towns Surveillance and the "Threat" of Youth Car Culture The Role of Technology in Youth Car Culture Codes of Conduct T' Straight "Out of Towners" Summary

53 54 57 59 63 64 65 77 78

5. Identity and Youth Car Culture in Hamilton The Car and the Identity Project Identity and Mobility Youth Car Culture, Identity and History Identity and Belonging Youth Car Culture, Identity and Gender Symbology and Youth Car Culture Ethnicity and Authenticity Summary

80 81 83 86 87 93 99 102 107

6. Youth Car Culture, Discourse and Materiality "Boy Racers" and the News Mass Media "Boy Racers", Mass Media and Statistics Mass Media, Youth Car Culture and Consumerism The Embodied Car The Driver/Car Summary

109 109 117 122 125 127 132

7. Conclusion

134

Endnotes

143

Appendix

145

References

150

iv

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: Figure 2: Figure 3: Figure 4: Figure 5: Figure 6: Figure 7: Figure 8: Figure 9: Figure 10: Figure 11: Figure 12: Figure 13: Figure 14:

Hamilton Billboard Relative Scale Relationships Interview Research Matrix South and North-bound "Lap" Traffic Hamilton's Lap Circuit 1988 Rural Youth Car Culture Spaces Hamilton's Satellite Towns T' Straight and Surrounding Area

8 26 42 47 55 56 58 66

Members of the Brothers Car Club and Their Cars 89 Father and Son at T' Straight Example of Playboy Bunny Motif Car Club Logos Percentage of Drivers Aged 15-24 Years Fatal Car Crashes by Age of Driver in New Zealand 1975-2005 Reckless/Dangerous Driving Convictions for New Zealand by Age, 1980-2005 Convictions for Excess Breath Alcohol in New Zealand 1980-2005 91 100 101 118

118

Figure 15:

119

Figure 16:

121

v

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Burnouts

Spinning the tyres of a car whilst remaining relatively stationary. The result produces a plume of acrid, blue smoke. Also known as wheel spins or wheelies. Performing a tight, circular burnout. To pour diesel on a concrete or asphalt surface to assist the ability to do burnouts. Also known as "laying down diesel". Colloquial term for "boy racer" specific to New Zealand and Australia. Encompasses driving behaviours ranging from cruising within the road rules to illegal activities. Used both as a negative marker by the wider community and as a positive description by youth car culture enthusiasts e.g.: "Went hooning in the weekend, it was great." Driving in a circuit around urban streets. Usually, but not exclusively, in the CBD and often in convoy with a number of other friends/acquaintances. Land Transport Safety Authority. To congregate in a place suitable for socialising. Engine with a rotary rather than plumb piston system. Most often associated with the Mazda brand. Reference to modifications and/or specifications of motor. Any work done to the motor is often referred to as work done under the hood. Large engine with six or eight cylinders respectively.

Donuts Drop the diesel

Hoons

Hooning

Laps/Doing laps

LTSA Park up/Parked up Rotary

Under the hood

V6/V8

vi

1. INTRODUCTION

Here in my car I feel safest of all I can lock all the doors It's the only way to live In cars Gary Numan, Cars

America is all about speed. Hot, nasty, bad ass speed. Eleanor Roosevelt, 1936

For almost as long as the existence of cars, youths (almost exclusively male) have challenged hegemonic discourses relating to how urban spaces are used. These dominant discourses tend to construct all youth car culture enthusiasts as lawless, public menaces whose behaviour impacts on the financial economies and "safeness" of spaces and places. These discourses often revolve around notions of excessive speed and sound pollution (loud exhausts, stereo systems). Police, vested interest groups (hoteliers association), and central and local authorities have instigated a number of initiatives to curb the impacts of hooning behaviours (harsher legislative penalties, modifying hooning landscapes, surveillance, providing supervised hooning spots and activities). Overall hooning activity appears to have remained constant, if not increased, in spite of actions taken by authoritative bodies.

-1-

Historical Context As someone who was once actively involved in the scene, the resistance of youth car culture in spite of legislative intervention fascinates me. It is now 20 years since I first became interested in cars and the youth car culture community in Hamilton has undergone a number of changes. The most noticeable change is the proliferation of modified cars visible within Hamilton. Whilst Hamilton's population has increased by 12.66 percent from 114,725 in 1986 to 129,249 in 2006 (Statistics New Zealand 2007), this growth is less than the growth in youth car culture participation. Throughout the mid to late 1980s, Victoria Street (the main street of Hamilton) on Friday and Saturday nights was certainly the domain of young people and their cars. However, the financial challenges of getting a car were far greater than today. Unless you were lucky enough to have a car bought for you by your parents, working and saving was the only legal way to gain automotivity.

The introduction of imported second hand cars from Japan in the mid 1980s drove down the cost of cars in New Zealand. This had little impact for my peers and I at the time as prices often remained too high. Even if you could afford one, the cost of modifying the cosmetic and/or performance of the car was only accessible to the wealthy or truly committed and mostly older car enthusiasts. Today, it is possible for young people to obtain loans from finance companies with relative ease. The modifications necessary to produce an "outstanding" vehicle can cost anywhere from $20,000 upwards. Some of the people spoken to during this research had spent at least that much on the engine alone. -2-

Whilst change has occurred, there are still many parallels between youth car culture today and that of 20 years ago. "Laps" still occur in the same places, males dominate the culture and spaces are contested and negotiated within the bounds of surveillance, public opinion and the law. There have also been a number of changes from twenty years ago. For instance, there are now greater numbers of women participating in youth car culture. Technologies such as the Internet and mobile phones are now commonplace, whereas they were completely absent when I was a youth car culture enthusiast. The types of cars and the range of modifications have also changed significantly. In light of these changes (and continuities), and as a means to provide a benchmark to highlight competing discourses of youth car culture, it is necessary to define what youth car culture is within the context of this thesis.

A Definition of Youth Car Culture Providing a definition of youth car culture is highly problematic. This in part is due to the difficulties of not only what "culture" means but also because of the slippery nature of the term "youth" (Holloway and Valentine 2000, Serafica and Vargas 2006 591). There are likely to be as many definitions as there are youth car culture enthusiasts. My own shifting positionality over the last 20 years, and the fluidity of youth cultures in general (Massey 1998), made me uneasy about settling on a definition of youth car culture. Instead, I have drawn on my historical and contemporary experiences to offer a definition of what youth car culture enthusiasts are. In this way, I hope to demonstrate what youth car culture can be rather than what it is. -3-

For the purposes of this thesis, I draw on Peter Kloos' (1991 15 cited in Advisory Council on International Affairs 1998 9) definition that states `culture means the entire set of customs, institutions, symbols, conceptions and values of a group. Culture includes not only learned behaviour, but also language, and hence whatever can be thought and uttered.' In relation to the use of the term youth, it is not used here as a reflection of the chronological age of the bodies of youth car culture participants per se. Instead, youth is used to describe the attitudes of participants, the distinct markers that dominate youth car culture, and the discursive

representations of youth car culture.

There are four main reasons that inform my use of the term youth car culture. Firstly, the youth car culture scene is dominated by people under 25. However, regardless of age, it is the attraction of owning and modifying imported Japanese cars that is a far more significant marker than age. Secondly, the types of modifications are also generally a departure from other car culture enthusiast groups. Rather than trying to maintain the original look and condition of a car such as for classic car enthusiasts,1 performance and cosmetic modifications synonymous with youth car culture often alter the car so much that it is difficult to determine what the make of the car is. Modifications such as lowering the car's profile and removal of brand badges, whilst not unique to youth car culture, occur more often than not. Thirdly, it is the spaces and places occupied, and the social practices of youth car culture enthusiasts that also set them apart. This will be discussed at length in chapters 4 and 5. Fourthly, broader discursive understandings of the modified Japanese -4-

import scene generally position youth car culture as something that young people "do". However, the term normally applied to youth car culture enthusiasts is "boy racers". The use of the term youth car culture enthusiasts represents a conscious departure from dominant discursive understandings, whilst still retaining meanings relevant to the lives of this group. This definition is treated as problematic, as the `activity of representing a culture, subculture, or indeed any coherent domain of collective activity is always strategic and selective' (Clifford 1999 66). It is important to acknowledge that this definition is far from exhaustive. Further, even though the term culture is vague, it is not redundant. Clifford (1999) argues it is still necessary to be able to refer to a culture holistically, such as youth car culture, as a differentially coherent entity.

In this thesis I have chosen to avoid the use of the term subculture as it tends to set one group up as "other" to the dominant cultural norm. By problematising the use of the term subculture, the extent to which young people's activities are constructed as oppositional or resistant to dominant cultural forms is necessarily suspended (Carrabine and Longhurst 2002 186). Therefore, youth car culture will not be treated as an aside or a "quirky" stream within a larger cultural umbrella, but rather as an integral part of what makes up Hamilton's cultural landscape. However, as Carrabine and Longhurst (2002 185) argue, the term subculture is not bankrupt, `rather it has been worn out through over use and is burdened under a weight of connotation, when deployed in the service of making sense of what it is to be young.'

-5-

Youth Car Culture and the Law On May 2nd 2003, the Land Transport Unauthorised Street and Drag Racing Amendment Act 2003 (herein referred to as the Act 2003) was passed, giving police the power to impound vehicles they suspect have engaged in street racing or sustained loss of traction (also known as wheelspins or burnouts). The intention of the Act 2003 was to reduce the number of deaths and accidents resulting from "organised" illegal street activity involving cars. However, from

May 2002 to April 2003, racing contributed to 55 crashes, including five fatal accidents, compared to 39 crashes (including four fatals) between May 2003 and April 2004. In the year leading up to the bill, wheelspins contributed to 21 crashes and no deaths; in the year after the Act, wheelspins contributed to 19 crashes and one death. (Sunday Star Times, 12th September 2004 9)

It is clear then that the Act 2003 has not achieved its objective. The failure is often attributed to offenders finding new ways of `dodging the law - in particular, by monitoring police movements with scanners and alerting other racers by text messages. "All these guys are doing is thumbing their noses at the law."' (Sunday Star Times, 12th September 2004 9).

The Act 2003 has been criticised by other road users as well. A number of innocent drivers and car club members have fallen prey to the new legislation. In one instance, a man had his car impounded after he lost traction in his car after pulling away from traffic lights in heavy rain. The Act 2003 has also penalised class A (road legal) rally car owners as

-6-

exhaust modifications necessary for increased race performance had been outlawed (The Press, 20th May 2003).

Since coming into law, a number of local authorities including the Hamilton City Council have noted no decline in the incidence of activities the Act 2003 was designed to curb. Letters to newspapers continue to lambaste the actions of young people driving cars with loud exhausts and sound systems. Public scrutiny and surveillance is often directed at young people for no other reason other than they are in a "hoon car" or they have congregated in a "hoon space". However, narratives of young people (Dawes 2002) and the police tend to suggest perpetrators are in the minority.

Much of the focus from the police, city councillors and other groups has focused on legal transgressions and the rights of citizens to be free from the impacts of excessive noise. While it is important for citizens to operate within the road laws and rules, what is largely missing from the debates is an understanding of youth car culture as a valid means of cultural expression. This is particularly evident in the media where the positive contributions of youth car culture are often overshadowed or become confused with illegal behaviours.

Through channels such as the news media, I argue understandings of young people and their means of expressing themselves have been skewed to such a degree that young drivers are arbitrarily demonised. The dismissive caption in the Tui billboard shown in Figure 1 is a clear -7-

example of this. Mass media sources such as the film The Fast and the Furious2 have also been blamed for encouraging negative driving behaviours in young people. Ignoring the cultural depth of youth car culture and the role cars play in the construction and maintenance of young people's lives and identities not only leads to young people being demonised, but also impoverishes our understandings of youth culture. It is not only young people who become disadvantaged through this process as there are very real implications for policy makers, law enforcement officials and the wider community.

Figure 1:

Hamilton Billboard 12th October 2006.

By allowing legality to dominate debates, ironically the efficacy of legislative initiatives has been rendered virtually impotent. This, in part, can be traced to the absence of direct engagement with the role car culture plays not only in young people's lives, but also in Western societies

-8-

as a whole. Whilst at first it seems this is a sweeping generalisation, the cultural specificities that have emerged in youth car culture in Hamilton have their origins in a global culture of autocentricity. Most of the rhetoric focuses on stamping out the "boy racer" menace. Very few initiatives designed to achieve this goal have succeeded. Reasons given are that, through the use of communications technology, the "perpetrators" have become more resourceful in avoiding detection. I argue this perspective misses the point altogether. As Sheller and Urry (2000 cited in Sheller 2004) argue, solutions to issues relating to car usage are dealt with in normative and disembodied ways. The resilience is not simply a sign of what is often constructed as traditional youth rebellion but also it is evidence that youth car culture is a deeply entrenched and complex culture in Hamilton. Given the level of emotion hooning engenders, this view may be somewhat unpopular. However, the questions remain - what is it that compels young people to express their identities through cars? How is youth car culture shaped by and shaping Hamilton's cultural landscape? These two questions are the focus of this thesis.

Thesis Outline Using a combination of a key informant interview, semi-structured interviews, participant observation and critical readings of key mass media texts, I explore Hamilton's youth car culture with the intention of providing a more nuanced account than what is currently present in mainstream media sources. The intention is to tease out how and why young people shape their identities in and through cars and how cars feed back into -9-

young people's embodied and social experiences. In chapter 2 I review theoretical debates relating to youth and the identities of young people. I then further this review by focusing on issues relating specifically to gender, youth cultures and difference. The importance of geographic scales as mechanisms of social control is then discussed to illustrate the role spaces and places play in the identity politics of youth car culture enthusiasts.

Chapter 3 discusses the methodological considerations that have informed and shaped this thesis. After a brief discussion on the part

autoethnographic methodology played in this thesis, I explain how participants were accessed, why they were sought and how they were involved. I then move on to explaining the use and shifting priority of participant observation in this project.

Through discussing historical and contemporary spatialities of youth car culture, chapter 4 focuses on geographic factors that have been shaped by, and shape Hamilton's youth car culture scene. Particular attention is paid to issues relating to Hamilton's location, surveillance, technologies and youth car culture places. The focus shifts in chapter 5 on to identities and embodiment. I first introduce the role cars play in the "identity project", and then discuss how mobility, historical changes, belonging, gender and symbology contribute to the identities of youth car culture. The last section of chapter 5 highlights issues relating to ethnicity and the hierarchy of authenticity that exists within youth car culture.

- 10 -

Drawing on wider debates relating to representation and materiality, in chapter 6 I discuss the construction of youth car culture within national and global discourses. In particular I examine the role the mass media play in the construction and maintenance of hegemonic understandings of youth car culture. Prior to concluding I explore the embodied experience of automotivity and the driver/car relationship. This is vitally important in understanding youth car culture.

- 11 -

2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY

Youth car culture permeates many social spheres and can be examined at a range of geographic scales. Even a cursory examination of television and newspaper reports and letters to the editor suggest almost all communities and towns in New Zealand are touched by the social practices of young people and their cars. Excessive speed, street racing, burnouts, noise from exhausts and sound systems, and congregation practices all prompt communities to feel anxious. Individuals or groups who engage in any or all of these behaviours are often referred to as "boy racers".

As a signifier, the term "boy racer" is highly problematic. Its use tends to erase difference within and across complex social spectrums. The most obvious example of this is that not all people who engage in the aforementioned behaviours are boys. Data collected during my research shows many youth car culture participants are women (up to 25 percent) or are over the age of 25 (10 percent).3 This is further complicated by the fact that not all boy racers are youth car culture enthusiasts. This begs the question, what is a youth car culture enthusiast? Drawing on poststructuralist and feminist theory, I address this question and situate it within broader debates relating to youth, identity, embodiment and the moral contestation of space.

- 12 -

The Construction of "Youth" and Youth Identities Contemporary media discourses often draw on the categories of "youth", "teenager" and "adolescent" when referring to the effects of young people and their driving behaviours. These terms have their own "cultural baggage" and their use is rarely problematised in media debates, if at all. This absence is reflected in almost all debates relating to young people. It is important to understand to whom these categories actually refer as they have been implicated in the construction and maintenance of unequal power relations.

Critical feminist research on the construction of youth and adolescence (for example, see Aitken 2001, Holloway and Valentine 2000, Massey 1998, Nayak 2003, Skelton and Valentine 1998, and Valentine 1996) has revealed a plethora of "youth" voices that up until very recently have been largely ignored in academic discourses. It is through these debates that new understandings have emerged that problematise the ways in which young people are constructed. These debates have opened up new understandings of youth identities, young people's use of spaces and places, and the moral landscapes they negotiate.

Historically, the notion of childhood in Western societies is a fairly recent construct. As the historian Aries (1962 cited in Valentine et al. 1998) notes, "children" were absent from medieval iconography. This was because beyond infant dependency, children were treated as "miniature adults", rather than as being discursively different from adults. It was not until the fifteenth century that "children" began to be represented as - 13 -

separate from the adult world with needs distinct from adults. Through the introduction of mass schooling,4 a universal understanding of "childhood" emerged that was personified by notions of innocence and freedom from the responsibilities of adults. Thus, the age of physical bodies became part of what defines us, and informed interpretations of our identities and actions (Valentine et al. 1998 2-3).

The concepts of adolescence and teenager (or youth) have been uncovered in much the same way childhood was. From the early eighteenth century the distance between youth and adulthood widened. Aries (1962 cited in Valentine et al. 1998) argues this was a result of the emergence of industrial capitalism. Middle class parents felt the need to extend the length of their children's education to better prepare them for the demands of the new economic environment. This period became known as a time of maturation, through which young people would become adults. The length of this "quarantine" period continued to grow into the nineteenth century and was intertwined with the anxieties of the ruling elite and the middle class over the need to control the unruly nature of the working class and their offspring (Valentine et al. 1998 4).

It is in this process that we find the origins of moral panics that continue to resonate through debates relating to young people. Here, youth (and in particular, working class youth), are constructed as undisciplined and in need of control. By the 1950s, an almost counter discourse of young people emerged as a result of the relative affluence people in many Western societies were afforded. Through a shift to an emphasis on - 14 -

consumer culture, imaginings of young people (as a market niche) changed to that of "youth as fun". These competing discourses intersected in complex ways (Valentine et al. 1998 4), and still are prevalent in contemporary debates.

It is important to understand the history of how understandings of youth have come about as it exposes "youth" as a hegemonic construction, thereby problematising its existence and use. This "crisis of

representation" (Aitken 2001 5) is particularly relevant to this research as the discursive origins of "youth" continue to resonate through and shape the spatial practices, identities and dominant imaginings of youth car culture. Sibley (1995) offers a useful inroad or point of departure by arguing adolescence is a liminal stage which positions people

ambiguously between childhood and adulthood. Depending on who is doing the categorising, adolescence can be mobilised in multiple ways that can liberate, subjugate, or both at the same time. Adolescents simultaneously are denied access to the adult world whilst often maintaining links with childhood. Through attempting to distance themselves from childhood, adolescents threaten adulthood by

destabilising the child/adult binary, positioning them as out of place in "adult" spaces (Sibley 1995 34-35).

Sibley's (1995) point relating to adult space introduces a pivotal theme that underlies the foundations of this research. Aitken (2001), Holloway and Valentine (2000), Sibley (1995), Skelton and Valentine (1998) and Valentine (1996) expose the ways in which public space is produced and - 15 -

maintained as adult space. Dominant constructions of youth position young people as incomplete adults who are in the process of becoming adults (Valentine et al. 1998). Public space can be understood as adult space as young people are allowed to access public space only after they have been socialised into appropriate "adult" ways of being (Holloway and Valentine 2000).

This regime of spatial control is part of the process that creates "youth" as a category. Discourses informing the rules of spatial ordering are bound up in assumptions relating to identity and socially appropriate youth identities. A perplexing array of age related distinctions are imposed on people under the age of 18. In New Zealand, a person can be charged with murder but cannot buy fireworks or be home alone until the age of 14. At 14, person is recognised as a young person (rather than as a child). At 15, one is permitted to begin driving a car. The age of sexual consent is 16. Further, parents are no longer held legally responsible for their children's actions once their children have turned 16. You can go to prison or die serving your country in the armed forces from the age of 17 but are not allowed to consume alcohol, enter a premise licensed to serve alcohol, gamble, smoke cigarettes or vote until the age of 18 (Napier Youth Council 2006). Drawing these age lines and the subsequent spatial control explicit and implicit in these distinctions plays a major role in the production of an "age group", the social category of youth and what is deemed acceptable behaviours for that group (Massey 1998 127).

- 16 -

As researchers, it is important to avoid essentialising the concept of youth. As Wyn and White (1997: 25) aptly put it, `young people do share in common their age, but the social, economic and cultural significance of this physical reality are far from common.' From this point of view, concepts such as adolescence and teenage years can misleadingly suggest a homogeneous social and cultural experience that hardly corresponds to the richness and range of real-life diversity of young people.

These discourses about young people appear to be embedded in implicit themes of the moral ordering of space and the maintenance of dominant socio-economic paradigms where the child is made and remade to reduce them to being a threat to order. The assertion of these discourses establishes and maintains adult authority and control (Valentine 1996; 2000). These mechanisms of control are not one-way, and as discussed in the next section, young people are not passive agents in these power relations (Panelli et al. 2002).

The maintenance of public space as adult space is particularly relevant to this research as youth car culture manifests almost exclusively in the public domain. Whilst private events, interactions in cyberspace, television shows and other related media all reside within the rubric of youth car culture, I argue it is the activities played out in the public sphere that have solely informed the discursive construction of the "boy racer". Often public spaces, and in particular the space of the street, are the only place young people are able to act autonomously (Valentine 1996a 213). - 17 -

The claim to spaces such as Te Rapa Straight,5 or T' Straight as it is sometimes known, apparently confirms the public/adult space narrative by demonstrating the lengths that young people will go to to carve out a niche for themselves as far from the surveillant gaze of adults as possible. Further, the