Drying characteristics of New Zealand chestnuts

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Materials and Process Engineering at The University of Waikato by

ANILA BIJU CLETUS

2007

Dedicated to Biju & Belcita

ii

Abstract
Chestnut is a relatively new nut crop to New Zealand and they do grow well in New Zealand conditions. Research to date in New Zealand indicated that New Zealand chestnuts present some unique features compared to chestnuts world wide. The two main unique problems with New Zealand chestnuts are the susceptibility to fungal disease Phomopsis (accounting for 40% loss of nuts at the wholesale markets) and the difficulty in the removal of the inner skin called the pellicle. No systematic drying trials had been performed on New Zealand chestnuts and therefore this research investigated the drying characteristics of New Zealand chestnuts to establish optimum drying conditions. The study also investigated the influence of the shell and pellicle on the drying process and the efficacy of shell and pellicle removal of New Zealand chestnuts under a range of moisture contents since the moisture content is a key factor which determines this efficiency. The drying trials were carried out at a temperature of 30°C because preliminary studies indicated that higher temperatures resulted in extensive surface deterioration. Experimental drying curves are considered the only adequate preliminary step for determination of drying characteristics of a food material and the curves clearly indicated that there are two distinct falling rate periods. It was concluded that the first falling rate period corresponded to the period during which the surface of the nut reaches equilibrium moisture content and the second falling rate period occurred as the moisture movement from interior of the nut to the surface was the rate limiting factor. Hence a diffusion based model was used to estimate the apparent moisture diffusivity in chestnuts. The average apparent moisture diffusivity in chestnuts obtained at 30°C was 6.21x 10-11m2s-1. The study revealed that the pellicle is the most significant barrier to mass transfer; considerably more so than the shell. The shelling and peeling efficiency of New Zealand chestnuts were carried out at various moisture contents using a custom-made mechanical shelling machine. The mechanical shell removal of New Zealand chestnuts was accomplished with an efficiency of 94% at the desired storage moisture content of 40%. However mechanical pellicle removal of New Zealand chestnuts proved practically impossible although American varieties (Carolina and Revival) exhibited 100% peeling efficiency.

iii

Acknowledgements
I am greatly indebted to my supervisor Dr James Carson for your guidance, neverending encouragement and enthusiasm. I am grateful for your extraordinary kindness, support and above all for imparting so much knowledge. You were more than a supervisor right from the very beginning, helping me with harvesting chestnuts to the very little things that I was unaware of. I could not have wished for a better supervisor. The Department of engineering is gratefully acknowledged for providing me with a scholarship to undertake this research. I am grateful to Professor Janis Swan, for your constant encouragement, support and kindness you have always shown me. My sincere thanks to Dr David Klinac for all the knowledge you passed on with chestnuts. To Stuart Rentoul at Waikato Research Orchard we thank you for providing chestnuts. My thanks also go to Ray Knowles for all your valuable information on chestnuts. To all the technicians at the Department of Engineering, I thank you all for providing the necessary help at the required time especially Brett Nichol, Yuanji Zhang, Paul Ewart and Indar Singh. To all my friends at LSL, thanks for all the support and encouragement you have given me. Your friendship and assistance are much appreciated. Finally, to my family: To my parents and in-laws, thank you for your love, support and prayers throughout the years. To my dearest daughter Belcita, thank you for your big smiles and words of warmth that kept me cheerful throughout this work and my husband, you always stood beside me with love and respect that have lead me to where I am.

iv

Contents
Abstract Acknowledgements Contents List of Figures List of Tables List of Nomenclatures List of Abbreviations Chapter 1 ­ Introduction
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Chestnuts Chestnuts in New Zealand New Zealand chestnut industry History of New Zealand chestnut research iii iv v viii xi xii xiii 15 15 16 16 17 20 20 21 21

Chapter 2 ­ Literature Review
2.1 2.2 Introduction Chestnut drying 2.2.1 2.2.2 Processed chestnut products Drying kinetics of different chestnut varieties and influence of temperature, air velocity and relative humidity 2.2.3 Osmotic dehydration 2.2.4 2.2.5 2.2.6 2.2.7 Influence of the natural chestnut shells on drying Isotherms Mathematical modelling Effect of temperature on the physical and chemical properties of chestnuts 2.3 Unique features of New Zealand chestnuts 2.3.1 Varieties in New Zealand v

22 23 23 24 24

25 26 27

2.3.2 2.3.3

Harvest in New Zealand Yields and returns

27 28 28 30 31 33 33 33 33 34 34 35 37 38 38 39 40 41 41 41 41 41 42 43 47 47 47 48 51

2.3.4 Diseases and pests 2.3.5 Difficulty in shelling and peeling 2.4 Summary

Chapter 3 ­ Materials and Methods
3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 Introduction Overview of experiments Floatation grading Determination of moisture content 3.4.1 3.4.2 3.5 Standard procedure for moisture content determination Initial moisture content of freshly harvested chestnuts

Preliminary Drying Trials 3.5.1 3.5.2 Drying at different temperatures Test for texture (120 hour duration)

3.5.3 Test for texture 240 hour duration 3.6 Drying trials at 30°C 3.6.1 Individual chestnut drying trials 3.6.1.1 3.6.1.2 3.6.1.3 3.6.2 3.6.3 3.7 Trials 4&5 Trials 6&7 Trial 8

Influence of the shell and pellicle on the drying process Bulk drying trials

Shelling trials

Chapter 4 ­ Results and Analysis
4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 Introduction Moisture content of floaters and sinkers Measurement of initial moisture content of chestnuts Influence of temperature on nut quality and drying process

vi

4.5 4.6

Change of texture during drying ­Qualitative Assessment Drying curves 4.6.1

53 57

Influence of the chestnut shell, pellicle and edible kernel on drying Kinetics 60 Comparison of bulk drying curves with individual chestnut drying curves 62 64

4.6.2

4.7 4.8

Determination of apparent moisture diffusivity

Shelling efficiency of New Zealand chestnuts using customised mechanical shelling machine 69

4.9

Shelling and peeling efficiency of New Zealand chestnuts and other exotic varieties ­ A comparison 72 78 78

Chapter 5 ­ Discussion
5.1 5.2 Introduction Comparison of drying characteristics of New Zealand chestnuts with other cultivars 5.3 5.4 5.5 Analysis of drying curves Analysis of shelling trials Implications for New Zealand chestnut processors

78 80 80 81 84 84 85 88

Chapter 6 ­ Conclusions and Recommendations
6.1 6.2 Conclusions Recommendations for future research

References Appendix Appendix 1 2
Raw Drying Data Time Temperature Profiles

97 99

vii

List of figures
Figure 3.1: Figure 3.2: Figure 3.3: Figure 3.4: Figure 3.5: Figure 3.6: Figure 3.7: Figure 3.8: Figure 4.1: Figure 4.2: Figure 4.3: Figure 4.4: Figure 4.5: Figure 4.6: Chestnuts with burr opened Chestnuts from the ground without burr Arrangements of groups A, B, C & D for initial moisture content Chestnuts arranged for 120 ­hour trial Chestnuts arranged for 240 ­hour trial Chestnuts with shell, without shell and without shell & pellicle Chestnuts arranged for bulk drying trials Custom-made mechanical shelling machine Moisture content (dry basis) of floaters and sinkers Initial moisture content for the four groups of the variety 1015 Relative Drying rate as a function of time at 20, 30 & 40° C Chestnuts dried at 40° C Chestnuts dried at 30° C Chestnuts after 24 hours of drying at 30° C with average moisture content of approximately 47 % (wet basis) Figure 4.7: Chestnuts after 60 hours of drying at 30°C with average moisture content of approximately 36 % (wet basis) Figure 4.8: Chestnuts after 120 hours of drying at 30°C with average moisture content of approximately 25 % (wet basis) Figure 4.9: Chestnuts after 192 hours of drying at 30°C with average moisture content of approximately 18 % (wet basis) Figure 4.10: Chestnuts after 216 hours of drying at 30°C with average moisture content of approximately 13 % (wet basis) 56 55 55 54 54 36 36 37 39 40 42 43 45 48 50 51 52 52

viii

Figure 4.11: Chestnuts after 240 hours of drying at 30°C with average moisture content of approximately 12 % (wet basis) Figure 4.12: Relative Drying rate as a function of drying time at 30°C for Individual trials Figure 4.13: Relative Drying rate as a function of time at 30°C 58 59 56

Figure 4.14: Relative Drying rate as a function of moisture content at 30°C Figure 4.15: Drying rate as function of time for chestnuts with shell, without shell and without shell and pellicle Figure 4.16: Drying rate as a function of moisture content for chestnuts with shell, without shell and without shell and pellicle Figure 4.17: Drying rate as a function of time for Individual and Bulk trials Figure 4.18: Drying rate as a function of moisture content for bulk trials and individual trials Figure 4.19: Moisture ratio as a function of drying time Figure 4.20: Chestnuts shelled at 53% moisture content (wet basis) Figure 4.21: Chestnuts shelled at 45% moisture content (wet basis) Figure 4.22: Chestnuts shelled at 40% moisture content (wet basis) Figure 4.23: Chestnuts shelled at 36% moisture content (wet basis) Figure 4.24: Carolina-4 at 41.17% moisture content (wet basis)

59

61

62 63

63 67 70 70 71 71 74

ix

Figure 4.25: Revival m.hybrid at 40.79% moisture content (wet basis)

74

Figure 4.26: 1015 at 42.23% moisture content (wet basis)

75

Figure 4.27: Buffalo Queen at 38.72% moisture content (wet basis) Figure A2.1: Continuous temperature monitored during bulk trials

75 99

Figure A2.2: Continuous temperature monitored during individual drying trials 100

x

List of Tables
Table 4.1: Mean moisture content and standard deviation for the four groups of the variety 1015 Table 4.2: Table 4.3: Table 4.4: ANOVA results for the variety 1015 Average radius of individual chestnuts Apparent moisture diffusivity for chestnuts under various drying conditions Table 4.5: Table 4.6: Shelling efficiency for chestnut variety 1015 Shelling and peeling efficiency of 23 different varieties of chestnuts Table A1.1: Raw data of "individual" trials (1-4) performed at 30°C 76 97 67 72 49 50 66

Table A1.2:

Raw data for individual trial 5 performed at 30°C

97

Table A1.3:

Raw data of all "bulk trials" performed at 30°C

98

Table A1.4:

Raw data of trials performed at 20°C

98

Table A1.5: Raw data of trials performed at 40°C

98

xi

List of Nomenclature
M M0 Me Mdb Mwb Dapp D r t a, b, c Moisture content (dry basis) Initial moisture content (dry basis) Equilibrium moisture content (dry basis) Moisture content dry basis Moisture content wet basis Apparent moisture diffusivity (m2s-1) Moisture diffusivity (m2s-1) radius of chestnut (m) time (hours, seconds) Lengths of the three semi axes in chestnuts Confidence interval Mass Biot number Heat transfer coefficient (Wm-2 K-1) Mass transfer coefficient (kg m-2 s-1) mass of chestnuts at any time Initial mass of chestnuts


BiM h km m m0

xii

List of abbreviations
ANOVA NZCC MAF DSIR CENZ SS DF MS Analysis Of Variance New Zealand Chestnut Council Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Department of Scientific and Industrial Research Chestnuts Exports New Zealand Limited Sum of Squares Degree of Freedom Mean Squares

xiii

Chapter 1: Introduction

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Chestnuts

Chestnuts are a widely accepted food throughout Europe, America and some parts of Asia. They have quite a remarkable nutritional composition that sets them apart from all other nuts and makes them an outstanding nutrition source which can be a dietary staple [38]. Freshly harvested chestnuts contain approximately fifty per cent water and the remainder is mainly carbohydrates with traces of fat and protein. They are often referred to as "grain growing on a tree" [72]. Unfortunately the high carbohydrate and water content makes long-term storage difficult. In practice, chestnuts store more like a vegetable or fruit than a typical nut. Chestnuts belong to the family Fagaceae and the genus Castanea. There are mainly four commercial chestnut species used for human consumption [72]. They are: 1. Castanea mollissima (Chinese origin) 2. Castanea crenata (Japanese origin) 3. Castanea sativa (European origin) 4. Castanea dentata (American origin) The main chestnut-producing countries, world-wide, are China, Japan, Korea, Spain, Portugal, France, and Italy. The new chestnut growing countries are New Zealand, Australia and Chile. Worldwide, demand exceeds supply and therefore there is much potential for New Zealand chestnut industry to fill the gap because New Zealand chestnuts are relatively pest and disease free, with fast growth rates and high yields [37].

15

Chapter 1: Introduction

1.2

Chestnuts in New Zealand

The information in this section about New Zealand chestnuts and the industry is based upon that provided by New Zealand chestnut council (NZCC) through unofficial reports and personal communication. Chestnuts were first introduced to New Zealand by some of the earliest European settlers in the 1800s and planted throughout New Zealand, mostly as specimen and ornamental trees. Most of the New Zealand chestnuts are hybrids of Japanese and European varieties. Chestnuts grow well in New Zealand conditions, but they present certain processing difficulties. New Zealand chestnuts are highly susceptible to fungal rots and the pellicle (an "inner skin") is very difficult to remove.

1.3

New Zealand Chestnut Industry

Commercial chestnut orchards came into existence in New Zealand during the late 1970s and the early 1980s, with chestnut enthusiasts rediscovering and evaluating some of the old trees, propagating the best and growing grafted trees for sale. Most of this early work was done by the New Zealand Tree Crops Association. Later, regional chestnut growers association and chestnut marketing associations were set up throughout New Zealand, as a spin-off from the New Zealand Tree Crops Association. As chestnut growing became more widespread, the various regional chestnut growing associations amalgamated into a single national body, the New Zealand Chestnut Council (NZCC), which was established in the early 1980s. This has remained the national chestnut body ever since, publishing newsletters, running field days and seminars, setting national grade standards, funding research etc. The stated aim of the NZCC was to promote the growing of chestnuts throughout New Zealand and to support the establishment of a successful commercial industry.

16

Chapter 1: Introduction The New Zealand chestnut industry was at its height during the 1990s with 200300 grower members. Good profits were made in the early years and the demand was high. Despite Australia having a larger chestnut industry of its own, and often better varieties, New Zealand was consistently able to provide better quality chestnuts earlier and at a cheaper price. The main limitation was the shortage of dedicated chestnut handling, grading, sorting and exporting facilities. NZCC addressed this problem by forming Chestnut Exports New Zealand Ltd (CENZ), which was a single-desk selling and marketing operation, based in Hamilton. All growers supplied to this single pack house where nuts were graded, sorted, stored, packed and exported. Each year CENZ provided standardized packing materials, handling instructions, chemicals (for surface sterilization) etc. and they stored all nuts in its own cool stores. At the end of the year all supplying growers in the CENZ pool were paid according to tonnages submitted and prices received. All suppliers had to be members of the NZCC and follow their guidelines and CENZ therefore acted as the commercial arm of NZCC. CENZ was generally very successful, but there were problems. The main problem was the rise of independent, competing pack-houses and exporters which often exported an inferior product, undercutting CENZ, discouraging overseas customers and giving New Zealand chestnuts a bad reputation. Moreover the export of fresh chestnuts was, and still is a complicated process, due to the susceptibility of chestnuts to fungal rots. This eventually forced the closure of CENZ in the late 1990s and prompted a major change in direction away from fresh exports towards processed value-added products. This made good commercial sense, but the change from fresh export to processing has proven a slow and difficult process, not yet successfully resolved.

1.4

History of New Zealand Chestnut Research

Initial research in 1970s concentrated on evaluation of new cultivars and focussed on nut size, tree yield, growth rate etc. Several attempts have also been made to breed an easy peel cultivar which has proven unsuccessful so far. During the 1980s, as the first commercial orchards were established, the first problems

17

Chapter 1: Introduction appeared with pollination, pests and diseases. However there is a lot more to be studied about chestnut pollination in New Zealand. Pests and diseases are mild in New Zealand compared to most of the world, but there are still problems with Phytopthora root-rot, graft incompatibility and nut rots. None of these problems have yet been adequately studied in New Zealand. During the 1990s when nut rot became more serious, much work has been done into fungicide spraying, post harvest chemical dips, modified and controlled atmosphere storage, cool storage, hot water treatment, novel packaging materials and so on. Later on when fresh exports gave way to processed nuts, difficulty with pellicle removal and fungal rots during storage became the serious issues and are still the most serious problems. Chestnut moisture content has a very significant effect on the two major obstacles to New Zealand chestnut processing (susceptibility to fungal rots and difficulty with pellicle removal). In general, the drier the chestnuts are the lower the incidence of fungal rots and greater the ability to shell them. They undergo loss of moisture either actively as part of a drying operation or passively under storage. However New Zealand chestnuts are susceptible to fungal rots under cold storage and therefore have to be dried to a certain moisture content of 40%. This research embraces the following objectives: 1. To determine the drying characteristics of New Zealand chestnuts. 2. To estimate apparent moisture diffusivity at optimum drying temperature, so that drying times may be predicted using diffusion based models. 3. To establish guidelines for effective shelling of New Zealand chestnuts using the customised shelling machine.

18

Chapter 2: Literature review

Chapter 2
Literature review
2.1 Introduction

Drying as a means of preserving the safety and quality of foods has been at the forefront of technological advancements in the food industry. It has greatly extended the consumer-acceptable shelf life of commodities from a few days and weeks to months and years. The lower storage and transportation costs associated with the reduction of weight and volume due to water removal have provided additional economic incentives for widespread use of dehydration processes. The expanding variety of commercial dehydrated foods available today has stimulated unprecedented competition to maximise their quality attributes [56]. Dehydration involves simultaneous transfer of heat, mass and momentum in which heat penetrates into the product and moisture is removed by evaporation into an unsaturated gas phase. Owing to the complexity of the process, no generalised theory yet exists to explain the mechanism of internal moisture movement [56]. The drying process depends on many factors such as the initial moisture content, desired final moisture content, temperature, relative humidity of drying air, and the air velocity [2]. Knowledge of temperature and moisture distribution in the product is vital for equipment and process design, quality control, choice of appropriate storage and handling practices [51]. The moisture removal processes and their dependence on the process variables are expressed in terms of the drying kinetics, and therefore the determination of the drying rate is an essential factor for development of reliable process models [31]. Chestnuts are generally characterized by high temperature sensitivity (colour, texture), and shrinkage during drying. Chestnut moisture content has an extremely significant effect on several very important aspects of New Zealand chestnut commercial handling, storage and value-added processes. The moisture content has a direct effect on chestnut taste, susceptibility to fungal rots and is a major

20

Chapter 2: Literature review determinant of storage life. Once they are too dry, they can be very hard and brittle and no longer rehydrate adequately [37]. Moreover the moisture content of the shell is a key determinant of shelling efficiency and the extent of drying determines the peelability. This review of literature is comprised of two sections: firstly a brief discussion of the various studies conducted on chestnut drying and secondly, the unique features of New Zealand chestnuts.

2.2

Chestnut Drying

In Southern Europe, chestnuts were traditionally, sun-dried or kiln-dried over a wood fire. Drying was considered complete when the shells were easily separated from the kernels. The draw-back of this method was the often disagreeable smoky flavour the nuts acquired [17]. Forced convection by hot, dry air is now the most common industrial technique to perform food drying [47]. This is an energy intensive operation, and a greater understanding of the drying process is important if drying efficiency is to be increased while maintaining product quality [24]. 2.2.1 Processed chestnut products

With fully processed chestnut products there is greater control over disease and spoilage aspects, and there is a possibility for added nutritional supplements. The consumer appeal of the product may be enhanced by changes to the colour, flavour and texture by use of additives. The simplest processed products are whole peeled, frozen, roasted or canned chestnuts. In processed form, the main usages are in the confectionery and salting trade [36]. Chestnut flour is an ideal alternative in the preparation of soups and cakes for people with intolerance to cereal gluten. The knowledge of nutritional properties of chestnuts could open new opportunities to increase the demand of chestnuts [5]. Processing of chestnuts is a very important activity in France where chestnuts are also known as `marrons'. They are processed as confectionery, whole preserved marrons, frozen peeled marrons, creams and purees [6]. Chestnuts preserved in sugar or syrup known as `marron glace' is a very popular French sweet [32].

21

Chapter 2: Literature review Chestnut flour is an end-product that is still important in Corsica and Italy, which allows the small-sized chestnuts to be preserved and used [6]. The processed chestnut products that are known to have been experimented within New Zealand are canned chestnut paste, puree, sandwich spread, chestnut liquor, vodka, juice, beer, flour and confectionery. Of these the sandwich spread and liquor still remain in production and are New Zealand's most long-lived successful commercial chestnut product [37]. The extrusion behaviour of chestnut flour mixed with rice flour has been studied by Sachetti et al. [58] which showed the negative effect of extrusion temperature on flour colour. Fresh and cured chestnuts showed a structure breakdown upon sterilization while dried and roasted nuts retained their wholeness [57]. In another study by Sachetti et al. [60] a ready-to-eat breakfast cereal was obtained through extrusion cooking of chestnut flour based blend. On the basis of the chemicophysical and organoleptic properties obtained by Pinnavaia et al. [55] it was possible to identify that chestnuts in syrup could be another processed commercial product. 2.2.2 Drying kinetics of different chestnut varieties and influence of

temperature, air velocity and relative humidity The drying characteristics of chestnuts studied by Koyuncu et al. [44] identified that the air temperature was the most important factor that influenced the total drying time. On the other hand, the effect of the drying air velocity had minor influence on the total drying time but significantly influenced the total energy requirement for drying. On analysing the effect of the operating variables several review articles Moreira et al. [50], Chenlo et al. [14] & Kashaninenjad et al. [34] concluded that the velocity and relative humidity of the hot air showed lesser influences on the drying kinetics than temperature. The dehydration behaviour of three different varieties of chestnuts (Longal, Martainha and Viana) was carried out by Guine et al. [30] under isothermal conditions, using ventilated driers at 70, 80 and 90°C. The influence of temperature on the drying rates was again evidenced, with higher drying temperatures corresponding to faster processes. Longal and Martainha showed

22

Chapter 2: Literature review better drying features than the variety Viana, and thus seem to be more suitable for industrial purposes. In contrast, Moreira et al. [50] & Chenlo et al. [14] revealed that the use of different varieties of chestnuts (Famosa, Judia and Longal) did not show significant differences in the drying kinetics of chestnuts. Also the rehydration kinetics of three different Italian chestnut varieties (Marrone di Zocca, Marrone di Alfero and Marrone di Castel del Rio) studied by Sachetti et al. [59] did not differ amongst them for rehydration rate. 2.2.3 Osmotic dehydration

Osmotic dehydration is a pre-treatment used in order to reduce the initial water content, reducing the total processing and air-drying time. It is a very useful technique that involves product immersion in a hypertonic aqueous solution leading to loss of water through the cell membranes of the product and subsequent flow along the inter-cellular space before diffusing into the solution [63]. A number of osmotic dehydration studies have been carried out with chestnuts by Chenlo et al. [10, 11, 12 & 13] and Vazquez et al. [70] using hypertonic solutions of sugar (glucose and sucrose), salt (sodium chloride) and also ternary mixtures with both compounds. However, this research does not focus on the concept of osmotic dehydration and therefore the studies on osmotic dehydration are not discussed in detail. 2.2.4 Influence of the natural chestnut shells on drying

The natural skins of chestnuts (shell and pellicle) protect the fruit from the external environment, but also reduce the water removal rates during drying [50]. These skins prevent the direct contact between the parenchymatic tissue and the air when drying process take place, generating a low water loss-rate [14]. The influence of these barriers on drying kinetics has been studied in detail by Moreira et al. [50] and the study revealed that each chestnut barrier has an effect on the drying kinetics, but the presence of the pellicle causes a significant decrease on water removal rate, being the main resistance for mass transfer. In addition to its physical presence, it has a chemical composition with high quantities of adhesive substances which increase the resistance to water transport and allow it to remain

23

Chapter 2: Literature review adhered to the rough chestnut surface during practically all the drying process [14]. 2.2.5 Isotherms

Each food has a unique set of sorption isotherms at different temperatures. The precise shape of the sorption isotherms is caused by differences in the physical structure, chemical composition and extent of water binding within the food. The sorption isotherm indicates the water activity at which a food is stable and allows predictions of the effect of changes in moisture content on water activity and hence on storage stability. It is used to determine the rate and extent of drying and the optimum storage temperatures. The rate of change in water activity on a sorption isotherm differs according to whether moisture is removed from a food (desorption) or whether it is added to dry food (absorption). The changes occurring during storage strongly affect the design, modelling and optimisation of processing of foods. Therefore, sorption characteristics have to be examined and proper models need to be established, in order to improve the processing quality of the foods [54]. The desorption isotherms of chestnuts was determined by Vazquez et al. [69] in the range of temperatures between 5 and 50°C. The effect of temperature showed a cross over of the desorption isotherms at water activity 0.6. The safe storage moisture content of chestnuts appeared to be 0.06 kg water/kg dry solid which indicated a low water activity to preserve chestnuts. In another study by Demet et al. [20], the safe storage moisture content of raw hazelnuts was found to be 0.048 kg water/ kg dry solid. 2.2.6 Mathematical modelling

Mathematical modelling of chestnut drying kinetics has been reported by some researchers, who consider the phenomenon of water diffusion as the main mechanism of internal moisture transfer. A diffusion based model considering shrinkage of the chestnuts was successfully applied to model the drying kinetics of chestnuts [50]. The consideration of a diffusional model with a constant coefficient of diffusion gave satisfactory results

24

Chapter 2: Literature review for osmotic dehydration studies conducted by Chenlo et al. [10, 11, and 12]. The experimental data was used to predict the effective diffusivity according to Fick's second law equation, assuming that the variation of diffusivity with temperature could be expressed by an Arrhenius type function, and the values of diffusivity obtained ranged from 4.45 x 10-9 to 7.65 x 10-9 m2 s-1 [30]. By comparison drying characteristics of hazelnuts during roasting reported that the effective diffusivity ranged from 2.301x 10-7 to 11.759 x 10-7 m2 s-1 [38]. On the other hand, the effective diffusivity varied from 5.42 x 10-11 to 9.29 x 10-10 m2 s-1 for pistachio nuts [34]. In general, comparisons between diffusivities reported are difficult as they vary considerably because of the complex structure of different foods and the lack of a standard method for determination of diffusivity. The physical structure of the food plays a very important role in the diffusion of water and other small molecules. A porous structure produced by freeze drying, significantly increases the diffusivity of moisture. On the other hand the presence of fats in food significantly decreases the diffusivity of moisture. Diffusion of gases, vapours and liquids in solid media is a more complex process than diffusion in fluids. The solids usually have a heterogeneous structure, and they may interact with the diffusing compounds. As a result, the diffusivity of small molecules in solids is much lower than in liquids, and this may affect the rates of the various physical and chemical processes involving mass transfer [56]. 2.2.7 Effect of temperature on the physical and chemical properties of chestnuts Water, being one of the main food components, has a decisive influence on the quality and the durability of food stuffs through its effects on many physicochemical and biological changes [23]. The influence of temperature on the physical and chemical properties of chestnuts was studied by several authors [28, 26, 45, 49, 61, 33] using various techniques. The technique of freeze drying was employed to extract the glucose, fructose and sucrose contents in different varieties of chestnut and the percentage of different

25

Chapter 2: Literature review sugars were assessed using high performance liquid chromatography [49]. Also Near infrared (NIR) spectrophotometry was used for the determination of sugar and starch content in chestnuts [61]. The chemical composition of chestnuts has been reported to show significant changes even under cold storage [33].

2.3

Unique features of New Zealand chestnuts

The New Zealand climate is well suited to the 