Towards a Theory of Postmodern Humour:
South Park as carnivalesque postmodern narrative impulse

A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts in Screen and Media Studies
at

The University of Waikato

By

BLAIR SCOTT FRANKLYN

The University of Waikato 2006

Abstract The philosopher Martin Heidegger describes humour as a response to human `thrownness' in the world. This thesis argues that there is a form of humour which can be usefully described as postmodern humour and that postmodern humour reflects the experience of being `thrown' into postmodernity. Postmodern humour responds to and references the fears, fixations, frameworks and technologies which underpin our postmodern existence. It is further contended that South Park is an example of

postmodern humour in the way that it exhibits a carnivalesque postmodern narrative impulse which attacks the meta-narrative style explanations of contemporary events, trends and fashions offered in the popular media. South Park's carnivalesque humour is a complex critique on a society in which television is a primary instrument of communication, a centre-piece to many people's lives, and a barometer of contemporary culture, while at the same time drawing attention to the fact that the medium being satirised is also used to perform the critique.

A large portion of this thesis is devoted to examining and interrogating the discursive properties of humour as compared to seriousness, an endeavour which also establishes some interesting links to postmodern philosophical discourse. This can be succinctly summarized by the following: 1. Humour is a form of discourse which simultaneously refers to two frames of reference, or associative contexts. Therefore humour is a bissociative form of discourse. 2. Seriousness is a form of discourse which relies on a singular associative context. 3. The legally and socially instituted rules which govern everyday life use serious discourse as a matter of practical necessity.

2

4. Ambiguity, transgression and deviancy are problematic to serious discourse (and therefore the official culture in which it circulates), but conventions of humorous discourse. 5. Humorous discourse then, challenges the singularity and totality of the official discourses which govern everyday life. Subsequently, humour has been subjected to a variety of controls, most notably the `policing the body' documented in the writings of Norbert Elias and Michel Foucault. 6. Humour can therefore be understood to function in a manner similar to Jean-François Lyotard's concept of little-narrative's, which destabilize the totality of official meta-narratives. Furthermore, this thesis proposes strong links between the oppositional practices of the medieval carnival, as outlined by Mikhail Bakhtin, and the produced-for-mass-consumption humour of South Park. However, it also demonstrates that although South Park embodies the oppositional spirit of the carnival, it lacks its fundamentally social nature, and therefore lacks its politically resistant potency. More specifically it is argued that the

development and prevalence of technologies such as television, video/DVD, and the internet, allows us to access humour at any time we wish. However, this temporal freedom is contrasted by the spatial constraints inherent in these communication/media technologies. Rather than officially sanctioned times and places for carnivalesque social gatherings, today, individuals have the `liberty' of free (private) access to carnivalesque media texts, which simultaneously help to restrict the freedom of social contact that the carnival used to afford. Further to this, it is argued that the fact that South Park, with its explicit derision of authority, is allowed to circulate through mainstream media at all, implies asymmetric conservative action on the part of officialdom. In this sense it is argued that postmodern humour such as South Park is allowed to circulate because the act of watching/consuming the programme also acts as a deterrent to actual radical activity.

3

Table of Contents Chapter Contents
Abstract Table of Contents List of Images Introduction: South Park, Humour and Social Commentary The Postmoderns: a brief introduction Postmodernity Postmodernism Postmodern Thought The Postmoderns: a summary What is Humour? Introduction to a long view A brief etymology of humour Bissociation and serious discourse Humorous discourse Seriousness, authority and control Humour and hermeneutics: Art and the art of authority Frames and cues Political cartoons: Explicit reference based humour Contemporary satire as postmodern narrative impulse Television comedy and the commodification of humour Taking humour seriously Madness, manners, media and confinement Humour is what? Introduction to Humour Scholarship Superiority Theories Incongruity Theories Relief Theories Henri Bergson Mikhail Bakhtin Postmodern Thought and humour: parallels & intersections Postmodern Humour South Park as postmodern humour Aims of Research Methodology Reflexive Statement: Bias in my approach South Park episode 701 `I'm a Little Bit Country' synopsis The paratext South Park's use of children and humour: intersections & insight Analysis Concluding Remarks Endnotes List of Episodes Referred to List of Sources

Page
2 4 5 6 15 16 20 23 24 26 28 31 35 37 40 42 44 49 50 58 62 66 70 70 77 81 86 93 98 105 109 117 118 119 123 124 126 129 154 158 174 175

1.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.10 3.11 3.12 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 5.0 5.1 6.0 7.0 7.1 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.0

4

List of Images
Image 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.10 Description South Parks disclaimer Diagram of Hans Eysenck's personality typology Eric Cartman George W. Bush and Steve Bridges Cartman attempting to force a flashback South Park's townsfolk divided by politics and a painted line Anti-war protesters on stage with pro-war supporters Pro-war supporters Anti-war protesters Mr Slave at the front of the class reading pornography Kenny, Stan, Kyle and Cartman protesting Page 11 29 89 90 131 138 142 147 147 150 151

5

1.0 Introduction: South Park, Humour and Social Commentary
South Park remains among the bravest, most outspoken and most politically aware shows on television. Were it not so dense with insight and observation, it's unlikely any debate would exist on the specific political concerns of its two creators. Lonnie Harris 1 We find just as many things to rip on on the left as we do on the right. Trey Parker, co-creator of South Park 2

Humour is a particularly effective vehicle for publicly expressing controversial views, as evidenced by the long historical association between humour and oppositional socio-political commentary.3 From the ancient myths of trickster gods, to the classical Greek comedies, to medieval jesters, to political cartoons, to South Park, humour has played a vital role in providing a public forum for oppositional voices. In this sense, the

significance of humour cannot be overstated as it enhances our understanding of the world by challenging the stability of the official discourses that shape the truths of our time.

As the recent controversy in New Zealand surrounding the broadcast of the South Park episode `Bloody Mary' (episode 914, first aired 07/12/05) demonstrated, by its very nature as social satire South Park provokes both denigration and celebration.4 In fact ever since the first episode aired on the American cable channel Comedy Central in August 1997, the programme's creators have been both accused of undermining the moral fibre of society and acclaimed for their insightful, relevant, and irreverent humour and social commentary. Although in a recent interview Matt Stone and Trey Parker, the co-creators of South Park did note that the nature of the complaints against the show had shifted in emphasis from their use of scatological humour and profanity, to their social commentary.5

6

Nevertheless, despite the moral outrage that South Park continuously provokes, in the highly competitive world of commercial television the fact that South Park is still being produced is testament to its popularity. In the nine series that have aired to date, the show has addressed many serious and contentious issues, including global warming (episode 302, `Spontaneous Combustion', first aired 14/04/99), racism (episode 408, `Chef Goes Nanners', first aired 05/07/00), consumerism (episode 407, `Cherokee Hair Tampons', first aired 28/06/00) and stem-cell research (episode 702, `Krazy Kripples', first aired 26/03/03), with the later series exhibiting a more overt focus on commenting on current affairs and the media.6 The effectiveness of this form of humour and social critique is due to the currency and familiarity of the targets as well as its oppositional perspective [see section 3.7 for discussion of oppositional political humour]. However, the creators go to great lengths to include (and mock) the multiple perspectives of any issue they address, though there is a marked tendency to inflate the stereotypical characteristics of the two main conflicting arguments. This aspect of South Park's humour is dealt with in greater detail in later sections where it is related to postmodern thought and the writings of Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin and French philosopher Henri Bergson.

South Park is the unpredictable end result of two University of Colorado students, Matt Stone and Trey Parker, being asked to produce a Christmas video card for Brian Graden, an executive at Fox Studios, based on their first film Cannibal the Musical.7 Parker and Stone leapt at the fee-paying opportunity and produced The Spirit of Christmas. The simple stop-motion

7

animation of construction paper cut-outs featured the four boys who went on to become the main characters of the South Park series and landed Stone and Parker a development deal with Comedy Central.

The first episode of South Park, (`Cartman gets an anal probe'), aired on Comedy Central on 13/08/97. It immediately drew attention, as it was the first animated comedy on American television to receive the restrictive `adults only' TV-MA rating.8 Despite its rating and late-night time slot, South Park quickly became (and remains) Comedy Central's highest rating original series and firmly established the channel within the competitive North American cable television market.9 A sanitised version of South Park was screened for the first time on a syndicated television network in the U.S.A. on 19 September 2005.10

South Park is centred around the lives of four small town South-Colorado nine year old boys: Stan Marsh; Kyle Broflovski; Eric Cartman (Cartman); and Kenny McCormick. Stan and Kyle are the animated alter-egos of Parker and Stone respectively and provide a sense of calm in the chaos of South Park, they are also the characters most often used to articulate and deliver the ironically performed, parodic `moral of the story' at the end of each episode, invariably beginning with "You know, I have learnt something today." Cartman is the obligatory comedic fat friend who is made fun of for his weight and outwardly repressed (though actually a sexually promiscuous drug-fiend) mother.11 Cartman can also be

understood as a psychopathic and grotesque elaboration and exaggeration of

8

the Archie Bunker style character, a familiar feature of American situation comedy. Kenny is the comedic side-kick and poor friend who knows a lot about sex, has unemployed, alcoholic parents and is killed in practically every episode of the first five-series. In the same manner as The Simpsons the local townsfolk, teachers, shop owners, and officials also feature to varying degrees in different episodes. However, as it is created for late night broadcast on a cable channel, South Park has a certain degree of license denied to The Simpsons, which is created for prime time broadcast on a free-to-air network. Stone and Parker have stated that the bulk of their inspiration for South Park comes from a satirical view of Hollywood and the television industry, and that they are particularly fond of lampooning celebrities, celebrity, media hype and current events.12 This element of their humour is enhanced by the speed of the technologies that are used for creating South Park.

The South Park creative team have developed an incredibly fast production process, using the computer software MAYA, with which entire episodes can be created in a matter of days, allowing a very quick response to current events and the latest media phenomenon/release.13 Both Parker and Stone maintain that this has become the very foundation of their creative process, because if they do not rush they are not funny.14 The speed of their

production process also ensures that the topics they are addressing are still very much in the media and therefore the popular consciousness of their audience. For instance, eight days after the debacle of the contested 2000 presidential election in America, an episode of South Park aired which

9

depicted an equally-contested kindergarten class election result, delayed due to an undecided voter named Flora (episode 413, `Trapper Keeper', first aired 15/11/00). Another example is episode 715 (`It's Christmas in

Canada' first aired 17/12/03) which showed a bearded Saddam Hussein hiding in a makeshift bunker, and aired a mere three days after his reported capture. The current events that South Park satirises are not restricted to matters of such importance however. Anything that draws media attention is liable to be targeted. In the episode `It Hits the Fan' (episode 502 first aired 20/06/01), South Park characters used the word "shit" 162 times, in response to the huge media debate generated by an episode of Chicago Hope in which a main character said "shit" without being censored/bleeped. They have also devoted entire episodes to mocking celebrities such as: Paris Hilton, Jennifer Lopez, Ben Affleck, Tom Cruise, Barbara Streisand, David Blaine, and the the list goes on and on.

The humour of South Park is constantly situated within resistant readings of other media texts and current events.15 This penchant for playfully

referential of-the-moment-ness is no doubt a source of attraction for many viewers. The humour of South Park is consciously current, self-consciously hip, self-consciously oppositional and the programme as a whole embodies a certain childlike sense of `getting away' with something, which is in some sense enhanced by the use of children as main characters [see section 8.2 for a discussion of South Park's use of children as main characters]. Like its famous predecessor, The Simpsons, South Park has managed the difficult task of attaining both cult-status (sub-cultural credibility) and mainstream

10

success.16 This is possibly due to the highly self-reflexive nature of both series, demonstrating a seemingly subversive `meta-knowledge' of themselves by including in their humour, mockery of the processes of their own production, both as television texts and cultural commodities.17

However, South Park is more than just a parody of television, it exposes televisual limits and reflects on its pervasiveness as a medium for communicating social norms and values. The disclaimer, aired at the beginning introduces of South each episode, self-

Park's

reflexive and critical treatment of the
1.0

character of television. The disclaimer [see image 1.0] also indicates to the viewer that they should interpret the programme humorously, as well as introducing the first notions of a crude production ethic. As a text it is a parody of itself: it fulfils the role of a disclaimer as well as undermining this very role with satiric edge. This form of double-coding is suggested by some writers to be a defining characteristic of postmodern media texts as it questions the familiar modes of representation while simultaneously making explicit and wry reference to the fact that they must be employed.18

The high level of popular culture and media referencing in South Park makes it accessible to a wide international audience despite its parallel predilection for specifically American concerns and sophisticated allusions to "high-culture" through references to literature, politics, history, and

11

religion. The anarchic blending of high and low culture in such a manner is one of the hallmarks of the carnivalesque, a concept developed by the Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin which has become closely associated with postmodernism and academic discussions of popular culture.19 In fact there are many aspects of South Park that lie at the heart of postmodern thought. South Park interrogates institutions and institutional knowledge and erodes the stability of social hierarchies and social distinctions of practically every description. High-culture icons such as the biblical Madonna and Karl Marx are treated with no more or less reverence than the MTV Madonna and Groucho Marx.

Very broadly, South Park's humour attacks the overriding seriousness of everyday life, as distilled and packaged in ostensibly authoritative media representations of contemporary society. In this sense South Park's humour can be considered as analogous to French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard's concept of the little-narrative, which attacks the illusion of certainty and totality of meta-narratives, which in this case are the media circulated explanations of contemporary events and their historical antecedents [see section 2.3]. Furthermore, the television broadcasting of South Park creates an audience who, in the act of laughing at the targets of humour within the show (and therefore implicitly and vicariously laughing with its creators and millions of fans), participate in a vicarious group/cultural experience centered around the subversion of the contemporary consumer culture. Ironically they are also participating in the culture that is satirised by watching/consuming the show.20 This thesis

12

hopes to establish that the act of consuming the socio-politically oppositional action inherent in South Park's contemporary satire, also acts as a substitute to actual political action. This is one of the fundamental assertions of this thesis and it is developed more fully throughout the later sections. However at this stage it is important to note the significant

position that media products and technologies have in contemporary culture. Subsequently, South Park's satire depicts a world of consumerism and commodification populated by parents that are idiotic or absent, which leads the children to construct their own knowledge base in unauthorised arrangements of popular culture, playground knowledge and sound-bite information gained through the media.

Although I have quite casually referred to South Park's humour as postmodern, both humour and postmodern are terms that are in fact very slippery and difficult to define. Interestingly though, many of the words and concepts that have been used in historical discussions of humour have reappeared in discussions of postmodernity. Humour relies on ambiguities, uncertainties and shifts in perspective, as well as playing with the limits of language, logic and representation; these are also key areas of interest in postmodern thought. The following chapter is divided into five sections and offers a very brief introduction to the main ideas associated with postmodernism, postmodernity and postmodern thought as they relate to the study of popular culture and humour. Later sections will take up some of these themes in a more focussed manner. The brevity of the following chapter is due to the standard and abundance of already published material

13

devoted to postmodernism, while also allowing for more space to be devoted to exploring the concept of humour which has been comparatively overlooked and under theorised.

14

2.0 The postmoderns: a brief introduction
The postmodern, its parameters, and even its very existence as anything but a marketable myth for academics and broadsheet art pages remains an active site of disputation and debate. Jason Rutter

21

The postmoderns (postmodern, postmodernism and postmodernity) are notoriously difficult to define. Essentially they provide rubrics for a wide variety of intersecting, competing and overlapping concepts and practices, as British sociologist Dick Hebdige notes: When it becomes possible for people to describe as `postmodern' the décor of a room, the design of a building, the diegesis of a film, the construction of a record...a television commercial, or an arts documentary, or the intertextual relations between them, the layout of a page in a magazine or a critical journal, an anti-teleological tendency within epistemology, the attack on the metaphysics of presence, a general attenuation of feeling,...the "de-centring" of the subject,...the decline of the university,... broad societal and economic shifts into a media, consumer, or multi-national phase,... when it becomes possible to describe all of these things as postmodern... then it's clear we are in the presence of a buzzword.22

Buzzword or not, concepts associated with the term postmodern have influenced practically every sphere of life and for that reason alone it deserves serious attention. Insofar as this Thesis is concerned

postmodernism is important to discuss as it is often associated with South Park, though equally as often what it actually means to be postmodern is left unexplored. Furthermore, it is proposed that South Park as a cultural product of postmodernity reflects the material, cultural and epistemological conditions of the era.

15

2.1 Postmodernity
It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness. Karl Marx 23 Postmodernity is a breaking apart of reason: Deleuzian Schizophrenia. Michel Foucault 24

History used to be divided into periods by historians in order to help describe the past to a contemporary audience, highlighting the perceived successes and innovations of the present as compared to the follies, falsities and inadequacies of the past. However, today the media informs us of entering a new historical era, such as "post-9/11", which (with only slight tongue in cheek exaggeration) seems to occur whenever something is accorded significance by an American politician. Through live-on-location telecasting of current events, journalists are constantly deciding and defining (for us), the significant events of the day and inviting us to `watch history as it happens.' This thesis regards the immediacy of communication and the significant role that the media plays in shaping contemporary popular opinion as fundamental characteristics of today's society. It is a further assumption of this research that we are currently living in postmodernity and that the centrality of the media (industry, conventions and technologies) is reflected and referenced in postmodern cultural products, including humour.

Postmodernity, or post-modernity is the historical era that postdates the historical era of modernity. The modern age, or modernity is generally considered to have begun in the Renaissance and became epitomised in The Enlightenment's `administrative rationalization and differentiation of the

16

social world.'25 There is no doubt of the strong links between the modern and the postmodern, in fact postmodernism has even been described as modernism in its `nascent state.'26 Both modernity and postmodernity are characterised by a challenge to the idea of an objective reality. However, where modern thought lamented the loss of certainty and sought to overcome it using rigour, reason and empirical research, postmodern thought delights in the freedom and plays `merrily in the realm of the intertextual.'27 There is no definitive date for the end of modernity and the beginning of postmodernity, although Charles Jencks has offered the absurdly precise time of 3:32pm 15 July 1972, the exact time that the PruittIgoe housing development in St. Louis Missouri U.S.A. was demolished.28 Generally the postmodern age, or, postmodernity is considered to have begun around the middle of the twentieth century and is characterised by an increasingly global consciousness and acceptance of cultural diversity, due in part to the development of new media technologies.29 It is not all tea and biscuits though - due to the highly mediated nature of the popular culture(s) of postmodernity, the contents of this global consciousness are shaped by the specificities of media themselves as well as the machinations of governmental and commercial imperatives.30 Commenting on this,

Frederick Jameson points out the dominance of American values in the postmodern psyche: this whole global, yet American, postmodern culture is the internal and superstructural expression of a whole new wave of American military and economic domination throughout the world: in this sense, as throughout class history, the underside of [postmodern] culture is blood, torture, death, and terror.31 [my italics]

17

By this view, the dominance of American values, interests and images in the popular culture of postmodernity is a direct result of the pervasiveness of America's international presence and influence in the realms of economics, politics and the military.32 This is however, only one movement of

postmodernity and a growing recognition of local identity, culture and uniqueness is yet another movement. Though importantly, localised

movements, by very definition, never match the mass-media visibility of the American film, television, fashion and music industries.

Postmodernity is often characterised by fragmentation and the breakdown of inherited traditions of family and social structure. This fragmentation

reflects at a socio-cultural level Lyotard's thoughts relating to the breakdown of the grand-narratives, or meta-narratives of modernity (Marxism, psychoanalysis, religion, science, reason) in favour of the littlenarratives appropriate to postmodernity. Little-narratives challenge the

stability and authority of meta-narratives by communicating more specific, local and individual experiences rather than the totalising explanations of meta-narratives.

In the 18th century Italian historian Giambattista Vico identified a four stage cyclical pattern of growth and decline through which a culture progresses, the fourth of which is described as: The age of dissolution and ricorso or recycling. The human origin of institutions and standards is revealed; people no longer revere them, and seek their own private pleasures instead of the public good.33

18

The characteristic psychological state associated with this stage involves `uncertainty about things-in-themselves' and `mimicking as a way of taking action.'34 Bearing in mind that Vico developed his ideas in the 18th century, these sentiments are curiously similar to those used to describe characteristics of postmodernity. Within literary theory Vico's four stage schema of cultural development and decline has also been usefully linked to the dominance of particular modes of speech: metaphor; metonymy; synecdoche; and irony respectively. Irony has long been used for comedic and satiric purposes, but as a dominant mode of expression it poses a variety of challenges to communication and traditional notions of truth. This is due to the very nature of irony itself, which, like humour, attempts to convey information concerning two things at once and is therefore a highly ambiguous form of communication [see sections 3.2, 4.2 and 4.4 for further discussion of humour's capacity for communicating two ideas

simultaneously].

Continuing this line of thought, if we accept the

structuralist position that humans construct meaning through language then it would necessarily follow that if irony was the primary attribute of the language of postmodernity, its inherent indeterminacy would be reflected in its cultural expressions and worldviews. American philosopher Richard Rorty describes the postmodern ironist as someone who fulfils three conditions: (1) she has radical and continuing doubts about the final vocabulary she currently uses, because she has been impressed by other vocabularies, vocabularies taken as final by people or books she has encountered; (2) she realises that argument phased in her present vocabulary can neither underwrite nor dissolve these doubts; (3) insofar as she philosophises about her situation, she does not think that her

19

vocabulary is closer to reality than others, that is in touch with a power not herself.35 For Rorty a person's final vocabulary is `the set of words they employ to justify their actions, their beliefs, and their lives', they are both the means and the limits of a person's understanding of the world.36 A postmodern ironist recognises the presence and validity of other final vocabularies, the limits and partiality of their own final vocabulary, and the absence of an objective reality ­ a postmodern ironist is wryly realistic concerning the conditions of existing in postmodernity. Although Rorty does not

emphasise the point himself, (aside from mentioning books), it is pertinent to note the importance of communication/media technologies in the development of postmodern irony.

Notable features of postmodernity are: the centrality of the media industry and media technologies in contemporary social life; knowledge of the social and discursive construction of reality; the commodification of culture; recognition (if not acceptance) of diversity; and the breakdown of inherited traditions, institutions and knowledge(s). It is proper then that we now turn our discussion to how these material conditions of postmodernity have been expressed in postmodernism.

2.2 Postmodernism
Postmodernism attempts to describe and explain human existence from perspectives different from those of modernist and post-Enlightenment thinkers. Pat Brereton 37

Postmodernism is the cultural and artistic aesthetic of postmodernity. It is what Jameson describes as `the cultural logic of late capitalism'. Jameson

20

describes postmodernism as an explosion of culture into every sphere of society `to the point at which everything in our social life ­ from economic value and state power to practices and to the very structure of the psyche itself ­ can be said to have become "cultural".'38 This idea is also central to the theories of French sociologist Jean Baudrillard who claims that postmodernism represents a stage of socio-cultural and economic development: ...in which it is no longer possible to separate the economic or productive realm from the realms of ideology or culture, since cultural artefacts, images, representations, even feelings and psychic structures have become part of the economic.39

Both Baudrillard and Jameson consider postmodernism to be an expression of the capitalist economy which underpins postmodernity, and in their view postmodern culture is itself an economic activity.40 This complex socioeconomic self-awareness is also brilliantly expressed in the postmodern art of Andy Warhol. Warhol made the repetition of images associated with consumerism and popular culture, artistic, whilst simultaneously making art a popular and mass reproducible commodity. This element of

postmodernism can also be seen in the manner in which `postmodern' television shows such as The Simpsons, South Park and Family Guy selfreflexively refer to their production, circulation, and status as media and cultural commodities.

As the `post' suggests, postmodernism both contains and self-consciously seeks to surpass the cultural and artistic limitations of modernism. In his book The Postmodern Condition: a report on knowledge, Lyotard astutely

21

describes this situation using a genealogy of artists and shows how modernism's accelerating drive for newness eventually produced

postmodernism:

All that has been received, if only yesterday... must be suspected. What space does Cézanne challenge? The impressionists'. What object to Picasso and Braque attack? Cézannes. What presupposition does Duchamp break with in 1912? That which says one must make a painting, be it Cubist. And Buren questions that other presupposition which he believes had survived untouched in the work of Duchamp: the place of presentation of the work. In an amazing acceleration, the generations precipitate themselves... Postmodernism thus understood is not modernism at its end but in the nascent state, and this state is constant.'41 The process of questioning the questionin