Chapter One: Introduction. 1.1: Heritage Buildings and Tourism. One could argue that there has been a resurgence of interest in heritage over recent years. Palmer (1999) purported that heritage became the `buzz' word of the 1990s. Indeed, heritage tourism is now regarded as being a highly significant and rapidly growing sector of tourism (Alzua, O'Leary & Morrison, 1998), making up a significant component of tourism in many developed countries (Garrod & Fyall, 2000). Despite the suggestion that heritage tourism is essentially an experiential product (for example, Beeho & Prentice, 1997), there is reportedly little information analysing the underlying behavioural structures of demand for heritage tourism and the experiential elements of heritage tourism (Chhabra, Healy & Sills, 2003). Exceptions to this include research conducted by Beeho & Prentice (1997); Prentice, Witt & Hamer (1998); McIntosh and Prentice (1999); McIntosh (1999); Hannabuss (1999); Prideaux & Kininmont (1999), among others, who have examined the experiential aspects of constructed heritage attractions or theme parks. An experiential product "refers to the intangible experience which tourist attractions provide to their consumers. Tourism is therefore consumed as experience" (Beeho & Prentice, 1997, p.75). Intangible experiences include the thoughts and feelings of consumers, and their reported narrative (Collier, 1999). More than ever before, consumers expect their tourism experiences to be of high quality (Janiskee, 1996). The importance of understanding in greater depth the heritage `consumer' and their experiences constitutes an important gap in heritage tourism research, especially in light of the fact that the global tourism market is becoming more competitive (Buhalis, 1998). Whilst previous studies such as those listed above have examined the heritage tourism experience within a range of constructed heritage settings, an understanding of the experience gained in townscape settings, and the contribution of tangible aspects, such as buildings within the built townscape setting has not been widely examined within previous research efforts. Indeed, this area of neglect requires attention, as certain buildings within a built townscape can become important heritage resources to a tourism

1

destination. Yet, many are also neglected for preservation. There is a need, therefore, for a greater depth of understanding of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. For the purpose of this thesis, heritage buildings can be defined as being those buildings that are regarded as representing shared roots and the origins of our identities or belongings. They may be regarded as being meaningful to a national or regional history (Gordon, 2004). The term heritage building was used for this research, rather than New Zealand's leading heritage agency, The New Zealand Historic Places Trust's (NZHPT) broader definition of `historic places', which includes bridges, pas, shipwrecks and many other types of heritage (NZHPT, 2005). As this research focuses on buildings of significant heritage importance, a more concise definition was sought, and thus adopted. New Zealand has a large number of heritage buildings which are considered important tourism resources, because it is believed that these buildings are of high interest to what Tourism New Zealand describes as a highly desirable target market; the interactive traveller (Tourism New Zealand, nd). However, despite their perceived high value to New Zealand tourism, many of these buildings are said to be under threat from development pressures, neglect, or the wear of time, and one is not aware of the valuable role these buildings may play in telling the story of New Zealand to international visitors (NZHPT, 2005). It has been estimated in the Colmar Brunton Demand for Cultural Tourism Report 2003, that 61% of international visitors and 22% of domestic tourists experienced one or more heritage buildings during their holiday in New Zealand in 2003 (Tourism New Zealand, 2003). Despite this, very little research exists relating to the manner and extent to which heritage buildings contribute to the experiences of international tourists while they are visiting New Zealand. As mentioned above, from an experiential perspective, in order to satisfy visitors, tourist attractions need to understand their visitors in terms of the experiences they seek and gain (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). An important part of this analysis may be their expectations and ensuing narrative. This thesis aims to address the lack of experiential research conducted within built townscape settings by assessing the influence of heritage buildings in shaping the nature of experiences gained by international tourists in a case study region of New Zealand;

2

Hawke's Bay. The region selected as the case study for this research is Hawke's Bay due to its high concentration of heritage buildings as a tourism product offering. As it is likely that the experiences of New Zealand's heritage buildings will be different for domestic and international tourists, this thesis purposely focuses only on the experiences of international tourists. As noted above, international tourists are a key market for visiting heritage buildings in New Zealand. The specific tangible and intangible attributes of the heritage buildings that contribute to the experiences gained by international tourists will also be determined. Research methods to advance the understanding of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism are also considered, such as the use of photography to elicit tourists' narratives. This research will also apply contingent valuation methodology to provide an analysis of the willingness to pay of respondents to preserve Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings; thus indicating a level of relative importance to the worth of heritage buildings to regional tourism, as perceived amongst international tourists visiting the region. 1.2: Research Aims and Objectives. The main aim of this thesis is to gain a deeper understanding of the influences of heritage buildings in shaping the nature of experiences gained by international tourists visiting the Hawke's Bay region. The three specific objectives that guided this thesis were as follows: To explore the influence of heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay; To gain insight into the specific attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that influenced the experiences of international tourists visiting the region; To examine the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to Hawke's Bay, as perceived by international tourists visiting the region.

3

1.3: Contributions of Thesis Research. This research is much needed in terms of meeting key priorities identified by The Tourism Research and Development Strategy 2002, and The New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010 (NZTS). The latter document in particular is of significant importance for New Zealand tourism, as it contains a comprehensive list of principles, objectives and enablers to promote sustainable development of the country's tourism industry to 2010 (Ministry of Tourism, 2001). Specific priorities addressed by this research include: · Assess the importance of New Zealand's cultural and historical based products with the aim to "differentiate New Zealand in the global marketplace" (NZTS, 2010, p.32); · Encourage regional differentiation, and to assist in tourism growth by "increasing yield, addressing seasonality and regional spread issues" (NZTS, 2010, p.32.), and · Recognise the `customer' perspective in all tourism research. (NZTS, 2010).

The contribution of this thesis research to the above tourism sector priorities was made evident when this research was awarded a Ministry of Tourism Masters Scholarship to fund the research. In an academic context, there is a need to enhance our understanding of the motivations and thought patterns of tourists (Johnson & Thomas, 1992). As previously mentioned there is a paucity of experiential information relating to the consumption of heritage products, especially in townscape settings generally. Experiential information is important because in order to identify and prioritise important heritage assets for tourism, and to inform cultural development from a demand perspective, there is an essential need to understand the value of historical and cultural resources to tourists in their experience of a destination (Johnson and Thomas, 1990). As Poria, Butler & Airey (2001) explain, an increased understanding of the thought patterns of visitors can help heritage

4

management with a wide range of issues, such as determining pricing policy, accomplishing the mission of the business and creating products that better meet the wants of visitors. Essentially, an increased understanding of heritage visitor characteristics can help heritage management "to work with the visitor, rather than against the visitor" (Hall & McArthur, 1998, p.105). Examining the experiences of visitors in built townscapes, rather than just constructed heritage attraction settings, allows a more complete picture and wider story to be told. As such, the contribution of heritage assets to tourism is not merely attributed to the heritage enthusiast. It enables a wider and richer discourse of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism to emerge. On a regional level, within Hawke's Bay, the case study location for this thesis research, Napier City Council and Hastings District Council are concerned that heritage buildings and items within the Central Business District (CBD) remain at risk and there is a possibility of inappropriate development within the CBD. As such, a heritage inventory is currently being compiled by The New Zealand Historic Places Trust to list valued heritage buildings within the CBD (NZHPT, 2005). Additionally, The Art Deco Trust, which promotes the tourism potential, preservation, and restoration of Art Deco and related style buildings, collects up to date information on the types of tourists that visit Art Deco buildings, and their expectations and evaluations of these buildings within the Hawke's Bay region. In 2002, The Art Deco Trust conducted research looking at the profile of `the Art Deco tourist'. It was acknowledged then that further research is required to build on this profile (Art Deco Trust, 2002b). In particular, a threat discussed in the 2002 `SWOT' profile was that small inappropriate details about the Art Deco product could damage tourists' heritage experiences (ibid). By understanding the nature of experiences international tourists gain through the presence of heritage buildings within the townscapes they visit, this research can serve to affirm support for their identification, listing, retention, preservation and potential development for tourism use. An increase of interest in the buildings for tourism purposes is seen to result in increased numbers interested in their preservation (Robert McGregor, pers comm., 2005).

5

1.4: Thesis Outline. This thesis is divided into eight chapters. The introductory chapter sets the context for this thesis research; its contribution to scholarly and sector knowledge; its' aims and objectives. Chapter Two provides a background to the case study region. Specifically, it examines the historical context of heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay. Chapter Three discusses the importance of experiential research to tourism studies and reviews previous literature to examine the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. The literature review covers a wide spectrum of literature, from a variety of disciplines, including tourism, culture, heritage and architectural studies. Chapter Three defines heritage, and explains its meaning to this research context. Chapter Four presents the methodology adopted for the thesis research, in order to meet the specific research aims listed in 1.2. Further to this, it discusses the benefits of combining qualitative and quantitative research techniques, and why a mixed methodology approach was selected as the most appropriate method for this research. Recent applications in research methodology, such as the use of photographs, will also be discussed in the context of the thesis research conducted. Findings of the research conducted are presented and discussed in Chapters Five and Six. Chapter Five presents the results of the qualitative research methods, and examines the experiences of international tourists visiting Hawke's Bay from their narrative, and the place and influence of heritage buildings within these narratives. Chapter Six presents the results of the structured questionnaire and determines the attributes of heritage buildings that were found to be most interesting among the international tourists surveyed. Chapter Seven presents the results of the contingent valuation analysis, and discusses the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to the region. Chapter Eight provides a conclusion that summarises the main findings of the research, their significance for academic discourse and their possible implications for tourism in the region, and in wider contexts. Suggestions for future research will also be made in this chapter.

6

Chapter Two: Literature Review. A significant amount of heritage tourism literature to date has focused on the role of heritage in society, cultural and heritage markets, planning, interpretation, community involvement and issues of authenticity (Alzua et al, 1998). However, there is still little known about the consumer of heritage. In particular, there is a paucity of research analysing the nature of the relationship between factors such as visitor characteristics, visitor behaviour, motivations and the experiential nature of heritage tourism (Kerstetter, Confer & Graefe, 2001). Hall & McArthur (1998) add that in heritage literature, "only limited attention has been given to the human dimension"(p.8). This is a significant gap in scholarly knowledge, as increased demand for heritage products requires a more indepth understanding of visitor characteristics. It is important to recognise that "it is the human dimension that gives rise to heritage resources" (Hall & McArthur, 1998, p.8). This chapter provides a review of the published literature pertinent to the relationship between heritage buildings, consumers and tourism. It will start by discussing what constitutes heritage, and the increased focus on heritage tourism. The relationship between heritage buildings and tourism will then be examined, with a particular emphasis on how heritage buildings can form a prominent part of the tourist gaze. The experiential elements of tourism will then be examined; their importance; guiding theories; and previous studies into heritage tourism experiences. In particular, the review will reveal gaps in the literature, such as the lack of experiential research into heritage tourism and in particular the experiences gained from townscapes; the latter will be addressed by this thesis. 2.1: The Importance of Heritage Tourism. It has been argued that "heritage tourism is one of the trump cards for this industry of the future" (Frangialli, 2002). Indeed, Graham (2002) comments that both tangible and intangible aspects of heritage are "the single most important resources for international tourism" (p.1007). An increased interest in heritage tourism is said to be important,

7

because heritage resources can assist in achieving sustainable tourism development, as they are often shared public goods, which generally can be experienced by large numbers of visitors with little resulting environmental damage (Frangialli, 2002; McKercher & du Cros, 2002). However, despite the perceived importance of heritage tourism, it remains a difficult concept to define (Li, 2003). Indeed, Gordon (2004) believes heritage itself is a word far too ambiguous to allow for simple definition. Fyall and Garrod (1998) define heritage tourism as an economic activity that makes use of socio-cultural assets to attract visitors, while Poria et al (2001) add that heritage tourism is "a phenomenon based on visitors' motivations and perceptions rather than a specific site or attribute" (p.1047). Zeppel and Hall (1991) also note the importance of consumers' perceptions and define heritage tourism as being "based on nostalgia for the past and the desire to experience diverse cultural landscapes and forms" (p.49). Graham (2002) suggests that heritage is that part of the past, which is selected in the present for contemporary purposes. The term heritage tourism has also been used to describe the experiences pursued by, and motivators of, tourists (Alzua et al, 1998). In short, the definitions of heritage tourism have traditionally been based around consumer motivations. Indeed, with respect to the demand for heritage tourism, interest in visiting heritage sites has increased rapidly recently and is expected to continue (Kerstetter et al, 2001). Many researchers have sought reasons for heritage tourism's popularity and why people choose to visit heritage attractions. What they all tend to agree is that tourists are now eager for more cultural and heritage experiences (Hall, 1995; Alzua et al, 1998; Waitt, 2000; Kerstetter et al, 2001; Chandler & Costello, 2002). In particular, Hall (1995) argues that the boom in interest in heritage tourism has been fuelled by changes in consumer preferences for quality specialist-interest products, with a particular emphasis placed on attending heritage attractions where enjoyable experiences or activities can be participated in. Waitt (2000) adds that more tourists now visit heritage sites due to factors such as greater affluence and leisure time and the desire to experience the past in order to compensate for deficiencies in today's experiences. Thus, there is a need for case studies consisting of differing heritage resources and settings in order to determine and compare the experiences consumers gain from them. A focus on consumer experiences is

8

important, as it is argued that for a destination to develop, managers must understand the experiences tourists are likely to gain at their, as well as competing destinations (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). Within the published literature to date, there have been a number of key considerations regarding heritage. Predominantly, previous studies have focused on issues of preservation and curatorship (Garrod, Willis, Bjarnadottir & Cockbain, 1996; Navrud & Ready, 2002; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Li, 2003; Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2005; Majumbar, 2005; Salazar & Marquez, 2005), the question of whose heritage is being preserved and consumed (Meethan, 1996; Grant, 1998; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; Fisher, 2000; 2002; Waitt, 2000; Poria, Butler & Airey, 2004b), the commodification and presentation of history (Zeppel & Hall, 1991; Tannock, 1995; Goulding, 1999; Waitt, 2000; Hyounggon, 2005), the management of heritage and the role of stakeholder groups (Prentice et al, 1993; Swarbrooke, 1994; Hall & McArthur, 1998; Garrod & Fyall, 2000; Greffe, 2004), and the role of the community in preserving and promoting heritage (Balcar & Pearce, 1996; Nuryanti, 1996; Hall & McArthur, 1998; Caffyn & Lutz, 1999). There have also been numerous studies analysing heritage values and benefits gained by visitors (Prentice, 1993; Powe & Willis, 1996; Hall & McArthur, 1998; McIntosh, 1999; Jewell & Crofts, 2001). Whilst these considerations are prominent in the literature and important for heritage tourism management, they have not yet yielded experiential information to put consumer considerations to the fore. Different aspects of heritage have also been considered in the literature; for example, industrial (Prentice, 1993; Arwel Edwards & Llurds i Coit, 1996; Caffyn & Lutz, 1999), religious (Rinschede, 1992; Munsters, 1996; Surez, Sendra & Leon, 2005), and cultural heritage (Alzua et al, 1998; Graham, 2002; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Salazar & Marquez, 2005). However, there is a paucity of literature considering the role of the townscape within the tourism experience. 2.2: The Relationship Between Buildings and Tourism. It is well acknowledged that when tourists consider destination choice, they search for destinations that they perceive will provide them with unique and pleasurable experiences (Pine & Gilmore, 1995; Meethan, 1996; Howard, 2000). Indeed, what is important to a 9

tourism region now is a point of difference. Howard (2000) argues that rapid globalisation has led to many countries becoming very similar to each other and there is an increasingly apparent desire from many people "to strengthen their national, provincial or local distinctiveness" (p.7). This sentiment is shared by other scholars who make references to the commodification and homogenisation of tourism products (Richards & Wilson, Article in Press). Pine and Gilmore (1995) add that the provision of goods and services are no longer enough and destinations must differentiate their products through facilitating engaging experiences for consumers. Meethan (1996) similarly argues there has been a change in consumer consumption behaviour; that there has been a move away from demand for mass-marketed tourism to more individualised experiences, leading destinations to actively seek to position themselves as attractive places of experiential consumption. As such, it can be argued that the urban environment itself becomes a commodity to be bought and sold by consumers (ibid). It has been argued that the value-added and experiential element of heritage assets such as heritage buildings can significantly help a region to differentiate itself (Howard, 2000). Kierchoff (1996) comments that "architecturally, tourism facilities all over the world look almost alike... this now universal tourism design and ambiance contributes to a depressing atmosphere, which is exactly the opposite of what people are looking for when going on holidays" (p.249-250). A national poll conducted in Britain confirmed that the majority of British people "love heritage buildings and dislike modern architecture" (CMP Information Limited, 2004, p.4). Perhaps for this reason, coupled with the increased desire for distinctive experiences, architectural tourism is becoming an important niche form of worldwide tourism. `Architourism' is one of the latest global tourism trends (Lasanky, 2004). It is argued that a wide variety of groups associated with buildings such as architects and city planners cannot afford to be unaware of the `twists and turns' of the complexities of tourism (Greenwood, 2004). It is argued that architects need to understand the intricacies of tourist behaviour, and in particular, the nature of the experiences and images tourists take from a particular destination (ibid). Indeed, it is argued that through architecture, defined

10

as "a style of building or structure" (McCleod, 1988, p.47), a wide range of personal emotions can be evoked (Küller, 1980). Yet only recently have architectural historians begun to assess the role played by tourism in the history of the built environment (Lasanky, 2004). The built environment is also of considerable importance to the `experiencescape' of a tourist destination. O'Dell (2005) argues that spaces in which experiences are created and consumed, such as destinations can be termed `experiencescapes'. These can be viewed as landscaped spaces and elicit the notion that every surrounding that is encountered by tourists takes the form of "physical, as well as imagined landscapes for experience" (p.16). It is argued that, in reality, when tourists are selecting destinations to travel, or activities to partake in, what they are actually seeking are satisfying experiencescapes (O'Dell, 2005). As confirmed by previous experiential studies (for example, Moscardo, 1996; Otto & Ritchie, 1996; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; McIntosh & Siggs, 2005), experiences are very personal and individual tourists will have different experiences even if they participate in exactly the same activities. Thus, it is important to ensure that a tourist attraction, or indeed a destination generally, induces a variety of pleasurable experiences to individuals (Seng Ooi, 2005). Consequently, within architectural realms, the preferences of increasing numbers of tourists and how their demands may be changing must be understood (Greenwood, 2004). Allsopp (1974) purports that it is peoples' description of how architecture affects their senses that should be of paramount importance to all interested stakeholders in architecture, heritage, urban planning and tourism. If this is to be achieved, it is important to understand the specific attributes of buildings that are attractive to visitors. "Is it the sheer brilliance of the architect, the urban location, or something else?" (Greenwood, 2004, p.18). It may be argued therefore that a destination needs to understand the complexities of thought and emotion visitors have regarding the architecture of the region in order to develop and maximise tourism potential through sustained use of favoured buildings and future architectural developments (ibid). Indeed, it is true that, for some, the true experience of heritage buildings is simply the pleasure of viewing something pleasing to the eye (Scruton, 1979). However, it is not reasonable to suggest that aesthetic experiences are the only types of experiences visitors receive from buildings. For many,

11

architecture reportedly allows them to use their imagination and, as such, can create a wide variety of experiences (ibid); experiences that are complex, emotionally engaging, and potentially rich in narrative and personal meaning. For instance, Willis (1999) writes that modern human lives lack "fulfilment, significance, spirituality and a sense of belonging" (p.14). It is believed that some individuals may view historic architecture to account for these gaps (Willis, 1999). There is thus a necessity for more in-depth research at destinations looking into the built attributes that are of most interest to visitors, and how these attributes affect their experiences of the region and their experiencescapes. It is well argued in the scholarly literature that architecture's primary role is to give people personal meaning of the structures and locations around them (for example, Willis, 1999). To comprehensively interpret the relationship between specific architecture and human thought, it is necessary to analyse how visitors interpret their `experiencescape' (Scruton, 1979; O'Dell, 2005). In other words, it is of importance to determine a visitor's wider perception of a region and, indeed, where the architectural experiences fit into this. Indeed, Urry (2002) argues that the built environment can form a substantial part of tourists' perceptions of regions. He argues that when people travel to new destinations, they look upon it with interest and curiosity; in other words, they gaze at their surroundings. Li (2003) adds that the tourist gaze is a significant theme of modern consumer behaviour and tourists' experiences depend on particular objects upon which they gaze. It is said that the built environment can constitute a significant part of tourists' gazes (Urry, 2002; Li, 2003), and their interpretations of experiencescapes (O'Dell, 2005). While it is argued that many tourists do not plan to visit a region solely to gaze at the built environment (Griffiths, 2000), Urry (2002) agrees that there is an emphasis on the visual elements of tourists' experiences, and as such, buildings can become significant in terms of where the tourist gaze is directed. Heritage buildings can seem appropriate to place and cause viewers to mark that place off from others. An area that has common buildings is argued to generate `placelessness' and is therefore argued to be unlikely to attract large amount of tourists who wish to "gaze upon the distinct" (Urry, 2002, p.115). Furthemore, Li (2003) argues that central to tourists' consumption behaviour is the act of looking at aspects of landscapes or townscapes that are distinct,

12

and provide experiences that contrast with the everyday. Indeed, the gaze of townscapes can be so prominent that cities can become identified with certain buildings (Griffiths, 2000), and thus, a number of people gaze upon buildings simply to say that the visit was made, and the item was seen (Urry, 2002). However, buildings will be viewed from different perspectives and constructed according to differing cultural interpretations. Indeed, tourists and locals are likely to experience differences in the way they `see' a place. What may look quaint and pleasant for one person may look decayed and uninviting for another (Wright, 1985). For instance, although it is stated that more than 1.3 million people visit Australia's Parliament House buildings per annum, a number of parliamentary workers feel the buildings offer little as a tourist attraction (Griffiths, 2000). Fisher (2002) also concluded that different values were placed on heritage buildings between locals and tourists in Levuka, Fiji; as locals felt that heritage was not to be found in buildings, but in the land (vanua). Indeed, Hall & McArthur (1998) argue that "heritage values are human values" (p.17), and many of the problems with heritage management and preservation are caused through not understanding the views of stakeholders, such as tourists, towards heritage. Furthermore, it is argued that the tourist gaze will not be the same amongst different cultures, or indeed social groups (Urry, 2002). As such, research grounded in the realities tourists themselves describe (Prentice et al, 1998), analysing the differences in how tourists gaze upon heritage in different settings is of importance. 2.3: The Experiential Elements of Tourism. As previously touched upon, a number of researchers advocate the nature of experiences constructed as being paramount to a successful tourism industry. For instance, De Cauter (1995) purports that modern society characterises an `experience hunger,' whereby people are becoming increasingly willing to visit places or participate in activities simply for the experiential elements they provide. Similarly, Pine and Gilmour (1995) argue that there has been a growth in the `experience economy,' with consumers spending more to gain pleasurable experiences. Prentice et al (1993) further argue that heritage sites produce experiences rather than tangible products and it is these diverse experiences that

13

are in competition for tourists' demand; and Richards and Wilson (Article in press) similarly argue that successful tourism destinations must create "a distinctive place image or experience in an increasingly crowded global market place" (p.2). Wilson (2002) continues, adding the tourism potential of a region is not solely based on the physical assets, but on the quality of the experiences built around those assets, generally extending to the `living culture' and atmosphere of the place. Ultimately, therefore, regions must be aware that there is now a heavy demand for experiences and must seek to offer travellers an experience based on difference. Experience can be defined as "the subjective mental state felt by participants during a service encounter" (Otto & Ritchie, 1996, p.166) or "events that engage individuals in a personal way" (Bigne & Andreu, 2004, p.692). Thus, `experience' can be viewed as the subjective mental state felt by individuals (Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Palmer, 2004). For instance, one consumer may view a certain heritage attraction as having world significance, while others may gain different, more personally imbued experiences of the heritage. Tourists' assessments of a destination or attraction can be influenced by such factors as age, gender, and country of origin (Palmer, 2004). Hence, previous heritage tourism research has tended to distinguish between the experiences of different types of tourists; for example, international and domestic tourists, and between demographic types. Understanding the experiential elements of tourism, including feelings, sensations and consumer thoughts is now being recognised as an important topic for investigation, as tourism experiences in general have gone from being "simply a value adding aspect of more concrete goods and services, to valued commodities in and of themselves," (O'Dell, 2005, p.13). Indeed, it is argued that consumer researchers have now turned their attention to exploring the emotional and evaluative components of the consumption exper