1

Chapter 1 Literature Review
1.1 Introduction

To understand why an animal learns it is often necessary to look at how they learn. My research explores a relatively neglected area of animal learning: whether the social and/or genetic relationship as well as the sex of a "teacher" influences the learning success of a "student". By identifying how these factors influence learning, we may be able to gain insight into both the mechanisms of learning behaviour and the issues that are most important in animal learning.

This research involves the amalgamation of three main research topics: observational learning, kin recognition, and the influence of gender on learning. This introduction reviews literature on each area, examining possible mechanisms, hypotheses and studies relevant to each area in turn. The background material will familiarise the reader with observational learning theory, before explaining the significance of kin recognition in the learning context. Some of the important differences shown

between males and females in terms of learning and behaviour will then be explained, followed by background information on the study species. The chapter ends with the aims, hypotheses, and format of my thesis.

2 1.2 Observational Learning

Observational learning is a type of social learning where one animal learns from another (Clarke, Nicol, Jones, & McGreevy, 1996). This broad definition however has been modified many times over the last century as scientists have argued whether observational learning differs from other social learning processes such as social facilitation, imitation or stimulus enhancement (Galef, Manzig, & Field, 1986; Nicol, 1995; Zentall & Akins, 2001). Trying to tease apart the differences between these learning categories has been an ongoing process. I have taken Bennett Galef's stance on the subject and will "ignore... the elaborate taxonomies developed during the last decade" (Galef, 1996 pg 7), focusing instead on the possible functions of observational learning and studies investigating its mechanisms. Because my focus will be on laboratory-based studies and not wild or naturally occurring instances of observational learning, I have chosen the following definition to represent the view I am taking:

In an experimental situation, observational learning occurs when a naive animal (the observer) watches a trained conspecific (the demonstrator) carrying out a task, causing the observer to learn the appropriate response more quickly or more effectively than controls not exposed to a demonstrator (Lindberg, Kelland & Nicol, 1999, p188).

Literature on observational learning is plentiful, and studies on this phenomenon occur across a range of species in a number of animal groups including birds

3 (Biederman & Vanayan, 1988), mammals (Collins, 1988; Johns, Chesler, Bartlett, & Victor, 1968), and fish (Kieffer & Colgan, 1992).

In social species that live communally it is predicted that if one member of the group is unable to find food, another member of the group may assist (Galef, 1990). The reason for helping a conspecific has been much debated and depends on the genetic relationship and history of the two individuals in question. Helping may involve providing an unsuccessful individual with food through sharing one's own meal (Wilkinson, 1984), exchanging information on the location of a food source (Richter & Waddington, 1993) or allowing the unsuccessful individual to follow on subsequent foraging trips (Galef, 1990). Furthermore, one member of a group may learn of a new food source or way to access a food source and this information can be passed on to others within the group (Byrne & Russon, 1998). Observational

learning can also reduce the amount of time it takes to learn about a situation by gaining information from a conspecific that already has knowledge (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999). Capitalising on a conspecific's existing knowledge base can not only reduce the time taken in learning a task but also helps an animal cope with dangerous situations such as exposure to toxic foods or predators (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999; Galef, 1990; Galef & Iliffe, 1994).

Rodents have been shown to learn through observation when performing a variety of tasks (Galef, Mischinger, & Malenfant, 1987; Heyes & Dawson, 1990). A common paradigm involves the pressing of a lever or similar manipulandum in some way that gives the demonstrating animal access to food while allowing another animal to

4 watch the process (Heyes & Dawson, 1990). Using this technique, observers can often acquire the target behaviour faster in comparison to control animals (Simons & Lejeune, 1997). In addition to increased speeds, other aspects of the task are also learnt. For example, directionality of a joystick push (to the left or right) has been used to determine if rats are capable of learning through observation (Heyes & Dawson, 1990; Heyes, Dawson, & Nokes, 1992; Heyes, Jaldow, Nokes, & Dawson, 1994). It was found that observers not only learnt the task quicker, they learnt to press the joystick in the same direction as their demonstrator (Heyes & Dawson, 1990). To ensure this directionality was due to the presence of a trained conspecific and not just the movement of the joystick itself, a further experiment was conducted during which the joystick was automatically moved consistently in one direction in the absence of a demonstrator. Observers that watched a demonstrator displayed the same direction response, whereas those that observed the joystick moving alone showed no consistent bias in direction (Heyes et al., 1994).

The ability to learn which direction to perform a task using observational learning has also been assessed in mice (Collins, 1988). A trained demonstrator mouse opened a door to gain access to food while five mice observed from a "gallery". The gallery mice were either observers (could see the demonstrator) or non-observers (had their view blocked by opaque white Plexiglas). Observers took less time to open the door on their first trial than non-observers (2.1min for observers, 3.5min for nonobservers); furthermore observers were more likely to open the door in the direction demonstrated to them (Collins, 1988).

5 Maze learning has also been used to examine observational learning (Groesbeck & Duerfeldt, 1971; Leggio et al., 2003). In a Y maze, animals with access to a

demonstrator correctly identified which arm of a maze to enter with a higher accuracy than control animals (Groesbeck & Duerfeldt, 1971).

Leggio et al. (2003) made important contributions to understanding observational learning by studying hemicerebellectomized rats in a Morris water maze. Ten rats were placed in small individual chambers above a maze and allowed to observe 200 trials of trained conspecifics searching for hidden platforms in the water (approximately 6h of observation). Half of the rats were then hemicerebellectomized, a process that blocks further acquisition of new behaviour, thereby reducing the possibility that observer rats could learn through trial and error. Observers were then tested 40 times. During their initial tests, non-hemicerebellectomized rats showed similar patterns in searching as the demonstrator they had observed. With further tests, these intact rats did change their searching strategies to show the use of trial and error. Hemicerebellectomized animals displayed similar searching pattern to the demonstrators throughout the trials, indicating no new behaviours were acquired and that the platform location was from observational learning alone (Leggio et al., 2003).

1.3

Kin Recognition and Discrimination

The ability of an animal to recognize another conspecific as kin has been documented in a range of species (Gerlach & Lysiak, 2005; Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Nakagawa, Waas, & Miyazaki, 2001; Pfennig, Collins, & Ziemba, 1999; Porter, Matochik & Makin, 1986) even when the individual in question is unfamiliar (Galef, 1996;

6 Hepper, 1991). Recognition therefore allows an animal to distinguish kin from nonkin, potentially leading to the differential treatment of a conspecific, by modifying one's behaviour on the basis of relatedness (Busquet & Baudoin, 2005; Byers & Beckoff, 1986; Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Todrank, Heth, & Johnston, 1999). This ability provides reproductive advantages through improvements in individual reproductive success by incest avoidance or optimal in- or out-breeding, and genetic success through inclusive fitness (Hamilton, 1964; Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Pusey & Wolf, 1996). The mechanisms by which animals recognize kin are not always clear. I have chosen to follow Nakagawa and Waas (2004) in presenting two classes of recognition: recognition by indirect familiarisation and recognition by direct familiarisation. Direct familiarisation is the mechanism widely referred to as

phenotype matching, while indirect familiarisation is recognition by association (Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Nakagawa & Waas, 2004; Porter, 1988).

1.3.1

Benefits of Kin Recognition and Discrimination

It is widely known that mating with closely related individuals often results in reduced fitness (Bateson, 1983), with offspring from such pairings having a higher incidence of recessive alleles which can express themselves in the form of mutations and lower survival rates (Keller, Grant, Grant, & Petren, 2002; Pusey & Wolf, 1996). It is therefore beneficial for animals to avoid incestuous matings and thereby avoid inbreeding depression. It is also suggested that breeding with individuals that are too different genetically can reduce an animal's reproductive fitness, suggesting an optimum level of inbreeding may be maintained (Barnard & Aldhous, 1991; Bateson, 1983). In Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica) it was found that birds of either sex

7 preferred to mate with unfamiliar first cousins, choosing their relatives over unrelated individuals (Bateson, 1982).

Hamilton (1964) proposed the theory of inclusive fitness: helping non-descendent kin (such as siblings or cousins) is beneficial because it helps to propagate the common genes shared between them. The lekking behaviour in peacocks (Pavo cristatus) may be example of inclusive fitness (Petrie, Krupa, & Burke, 1999). Through multi-locus DNA finger-printing it was found that related male peacocks in a park displayed closer to each other than non-related birds (Petrie et al., 1999). Eggs were

experimentally removed from natal nests and reared in mixed broods of differing parentage before reintroducing the young animals back into the park. The released males joined leks with related birds. While displaying near a relative did not increase the individual's chance of mating, Petrie et al (1999) proposed that displaying near kin would increase the number of females being attracted to the area increasing the chance of a successful mating for at least some of the birds in the lek. This would therefore increase the inclusive fitness of all related individuals (Hamilton, 1964).

1.3.2

Indirect Familiarisation ­ Phenotype Matching

Indirect familiarisation is a type of recognition that involves an actor and a recipient (Hauber & Sherman, 2001). The actor uses a cue (such as plumage or odour) possessed by the recipient in order to decide if the recipient is a relative. The theory posits that an actor can ascertain the degree of relatedness from an unknown recipient based on some kind of physical cue that the actor identifies as a shared trait (Gerlach & Lysiak, 2005; Halpin, 1991; Hauber & Sherman, 2001; Sun & Müller-Schwarze,

8 1997; Tang-Martinez, 2001). An actor is able to learn about familial cues either from itself (self-referent matching) or from previous experience with other members of its family (Halpin, 1991; Hauber & Sherman, 2001; Tang-Martinez, 2001). It may be an individual trait that is specific to their family, or a grouping of characteristics that essentially allows the actor to recognise the recipient as belonging to the same family (Halpin, 1991). An actor is able to assess the degree of relatedness (parent, sibling, cousin etc.) by uses a number of traits and comparing the level of similarity (Halpin, 1991). Based on assessing the length of time spent investigating a conspecific or a conspecific's cage, rats have been shown to differentiate between siblings, half siblings, first cousins and unrelated individuals (Hepper, 1987). Rats that were

closely related spent less time investigating each other or their cages. A linear trend was found showing that as relatedness decreased, investigative behaviour increased (Hepper, 1987).

Indirect familiarisation is advantageous because it does not require an actor to have any prior interactions or encounters with the recipient. This gives an immediate benefit when it comes to mating or sharing resources as kin can be given differential treatment (Hauber & Sherman, 2001; Waldman, 1987). Indirect familiarisation

would be favoured when other identification methods are not possible or rearing conditions may lead to inaccurate decisions (see table 1.1) (Holmes & Sherman, 1983).

It is usually assumed that for reliable indirect familiarisation to occur, there must be some heritable component allowing for the expression of shared traits to be

9 identifiable within families (Holmes & Sherman, 1983). This expression can be

visual (e.g. plumage or body appearance), auditory (e.g. song recognition), in the form of odours or other sensory modalities (Halpin, 1991).

Table 1.1 Conditions favouring indirect familiarisation ____________________________________________________________________ Condition Description ____________________________________________________________________ Parental polygamy When there are multiple matings, paternal half siblings may not share the natal sites, or full and half siblings may be reared together Inter-brood aggregation Multiple offspring from different parents are reared together in a crèche situation Brood parasitism Animals subject to inter- or intra-species brood parasitism can result in nest-mates that are not siblings Dispersal Young that disperse at an early age may not have a chance to learn identities of parents or siblings ____________________________________________________________________ (Adapted from Holmes & Sherman, 1983)

Genetic components of odour recognition include the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and major urinary proteins (MUPs) (Busquet & Baudoin, 2005). MHC is a group of genes involved in immune function found in all vertebrates (Boyse, Beauchamp, Yamazaki, & Bard, 1991). There are different alleles for each gene in the complex creating multiple classes (and subclasses) of MHC for a given

10 species. The class of MHC an animal has can be detected by animals of the same and different species mainly through urine but also through other secretions (Beauchamp et al., 1985; Brown & Eklund, 1994). In mice the MHC has been studied extensively (Beauchamp et al., 1985; Yamazaki et al., 1976; Yamazaki, Yamaguchi, Andrews, Peake, & Boyse, 1978). Early research by Yamazaki et al (1976) showed that mice could recognise other mice that shared or differed in the class of complex, with males preferring to mate with females that had a different MHC to themselves. However, it was later found that if housed together the preference was not expressed suggesting that communal living amalgamated odours (Yamazaki et al., 1978).

Animals that are more closely related should smell similar reflecting their shared genotype, a phenomenon called odour-gene covariance (Busquet & Baudoin, 2005). This odour-gene covariance has been experimentally assessed in mice: male mice were able to determine subtle differences in relatedness, distinguishing for example cousins (related through a single parent) from double cousins (related through both parents) using odour alone (Busquet & Baudoin, 2005; Heth, Todrank, Busquet, & Baudoin, 2001).

It has been suggested that indirect familiarisation can occur in the absence of a heritable "relatedness cue" (Halpin, 1991; Holmes & Sherman, 1983). Tadpoles from the species Bufo americanus are able to recognise kin reared apart and it has been suggested there is a maternal factor that is found in the jelly of the developing eggs that conveys a post-embryonic referent (Waldman, 1982).

11 What an animal eats influences how they smell. This is well documented in species such as rats (Galef, 1977; Galef & Iliffe, 1994), Mongolian gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus) (Skeen & Thiessen, 1977), spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus) (Porter, 1988; Porter & Doane, 1979) as well as invertebrates such as wasps (Jaisson, 1991). Recognition based on dietary odour cues are obviously problematic as unrelated animal living in the same area may consume food from the same sources.

Another environmental process influencing odour that has been suggested is the "fermentation hypothesis" (Albone & Perry, 1975; Svendsen & Jollick, 1977). The bacterial flora present on an animal can influence an animal's scent. Animals living in close proximity to one another are more likely to share bacterial flora and therefore may have similar odours. Animals that are related to each other and interact with each other would therefore exchange bacterial flora in proportion to their number of interactions, because related animals interact more than unrelated or distantly related animals. Close relatives should smell more similar according to the fermentation hypothesis (Albone & Perry, 1975; Svendsen & Jollick, 1977).

Both dietary and fermentation processes in relation to kin recognition rely on previous association with relatives; neither process would help in the identification of unfamiliar relatives.

1.3.3

Direct Familiarisation - Association

In direct familiarisation the actor makes a decision about the recipient being kin based on previous associations (i.e. some interaction between the individuals has occurred

12 in the past that reliably indicates an animal as being related or not) (Halpin & Hoffman, 1987; Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Nakagawa & Waas, 2004; Paz y Miño & Tang-Martinez, 1999). It is thought that association may be the most common

method used for kin recognition throughout the animal kingdom, especially in altricial species where parent-offspring and sibling-sibling interactions will occur (Hepper, 1991; Holmes & Sherman, 1983). Animals reared in a natal nest can therefore assume that others in their direct vicinity are relatives (providing the breeding system does not involve communal rearing). Therefore in later life when encountering those individuals once more, they can be recognised as kin because of the prior association (Holmes & Sherman, 1983).

When prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) were separated from their siblings at 1-2 days of age and cross-fostered, the cross-fostered animals treated their genetic siblings as strangers when placed together again after around 40 days (Paz y Miño & Tang-Martinez, 1999). The animals that were reared together were treated as

siblings, providing evidence that recognition by association was the primary mechanism for sibling recognition in prairie voles. Prairie voles are monogamous and young are reared to form a communal group and display philopatry. This

lifestyle allows for association to be a reliable mechanism for kin recognition (Holmes & Sherman, 1983; Paz y Miño & Tang-Martinez, 1999). Similar results were found in white-footed mice (Peromyscus leucopus); a test mouse preferred familiar non-siblings over unfamiliar siblings (Halpin & Hoffman, 1987). These mice remain together until weaning and are generally not exposed to any other animals until weaning has occurred, again, a lifestyle that supports recognition by

13 association. Halpin and Hoffman (1987), when comparing their own findings with that of Grau (1982), suggested that there may be a critical period in which associative recognition learning takes place. Critical or sensitive periods are well recognised as periods of time during which certain stimuli must be encountered in order for the proper development of a behaviour to occur (Hensch, 2003). Association may be a type of learning that must occur during a sensitive period, occurring at time before young are exposed to non-relatives (Halpin & Hoffman, 1987).

1.3.4

Recognition by Spatial Distribution

Kin recognition by spatial distribution relies on the occurrence of animals that are close to or sharing a natal will be relatives, and will therefore be treated differentially to those encountered elsewhere (Elwood, 1991; Hepper, 1991; Holmes & Sherman, 1983). Recognition by spatial distribution may rely not only on the recognition of kin, but on the recognition of the site itself. Kittiwake gulls (Rissa tridactyla) nest on narrow cliff ledges, and the young kittiwakes remain in the nest until they fledge at around five weeks of age (Cullen, 1957). Adult kittiwakes will accept unrelated chicks placed into their nests until their own chicks reach five weeks of age; thereafter, they will reject unrelated chicks. The early acceptance of non-kin

indicates that they recognise their nest site and not their own offspring; however recognition of kin does occur once the young start to leave the nest suggesting that there is another mechanism of recognition occurring (Cullen, 1957; Holmes & Sherman, 1983).

14 1.4 Sex Differences in Spatial and Observational Learning

In spatial tasks such as navigating mazes, males often perform better than females across a range of mammalian species including humans, mice, rats and voles (Microtus pennsylvanicus) (Berger-Sweeney, Arnold, Gabeau, & Mills, 1995; Jonasson, 2005; Jones, Braithwaite, & Healy, 2003). Male mice can not only find objects faster than females but also remember and identify objects better than females (Frick & Gresack, 2003). In a meta-analysis of sex differences in rodents, it was shown that for both the Morris water and radial-arm mazes, male rats consistently out-performed females, indicating males have an advantage in both working and reference memories (Jonasson, 2005). However, this difference was not found in mice where females were found to do better in water mazes, suggesting an improved reference memory over males. Conversely males had a better working memory (i.e. they did better in radial-arm mazes) (Jonasson, 2005).

Pre-training occurs when an animal is given access to a maze prior to actual testing. The animal performs a number of test runs through the maze with each run occurring in a set time period. If the animal has not reached the required end-point (usually

locating a platform) before a set time period is over, the animal is then guided there and usually allowed a brief rest before being returned to the start of maze (PerrotSinal, Kostenuik, Ossenkopp, & Kavaliers, 1996). Pre-training may reduce the sex differences in the capacity to perform spatial tasks, suggesting components other than sex are playing a part in cases where males out-perform females (Perrot-Sinal et al., 1996). Female rats that received pre-training in a Morris water maze initially spent longer in the water than males, supporting the hypothesis that males learnt spatial

15 tasks quicker. However, after the pre-training phase, there was little difference between the sexes in the time taken to reach a platform and their spatial distribution in the water showed no significant sex differences (Perrot-Sinal et al., 1996).

Many studies on rodents fail to take into account possible sex differences in learning (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999). They either do not include an analysis of how sex may have affected the data obtained or they only use single sexes (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999). In observational learning single sexes are predominately used resulting in male-male or female-female pairs for the observer/demonstrator relationship. In an interesting study performed by Collins (1988), a female mouse demonstrator was used to teach both males and females a behavioural task. The demonstrator pushed a door open and gained access to food. Both sexes of observers acquired the task faster than "non-observer" controls, however, males learnt to press the door in the same direction as the demonstrator while females did not (Collins, 1988). This suggests that males are able to acquire a directionality component to a task better than females (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999). The cause of this sex difference may have a

physiological basis with differences in the mesostriatal dopamine activity and levels of gonadal steroid hormones being suggested (Choleris & Kavaliers, 1999).

1.5

Study Species - The Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus)

The Norwegian, or brown rat, is a medium-sized rodent (males weigh up to 800g and females 400g) that is thought to have originated in China and now resides on all continents of the world (Nowak, 1999; Pass & Freeth, 1993). Rats are predominately nocturnal and are most active between sunset and midnight (Calhoun, 1962; Nowak,

16 1999). They have a well developed sense of hearing and an excellent sense of smell although their vision is poor, especially in many of the laboratory-bred strains that are either albino or bred from albino rats (Calhoun, 1962; Pass & Freeth, 1993). Rats are social animals that live communally in burrows; female colony members may share parental care for offspring that are not their own (Galef, 1990; Nowak, 1999). They are omnivorous foragers that generally eat away from the burrow before returning (Galef, 1990; Nowak, 1999).

While considered a pest species by most, rats have been kept in captivity since the early 1800s and are thought to be the first animal that was domesticated for scientific purposes (Calhoun, 1962; Pass & Freeth, 1993). This domestication saw a range of strains being bred, most of which originated from the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia, United States (see figure 1.1).

Females generally live longer than males (3.6 and 2.7 years respectively) although strain has an influence on longevity, with inbred strains having shorter life spans (Pass & Freeth, 1993). Sexual maturity occurs around 6 weeks of age in females and 8 weeks in males, although some rats may not reach maturity until 16 weeks of age (Calhoun, 1962; Pass & Freeth, 1993). Females are polyoestrus with a 4-5 day cycle, the actual stage of oestrus (when the female is receptive to the male) lasts for 12 hours (Korol et al., 2004; Pass & Freeth, 1993; Warren & Juraska, 1997). Gestation lasts for 21-22 days and litter sizes average 6-14 pups (Pass & Freeth, 1993).

17

Figure 1.1. Genealogy of outbreed rat strains originating from the Wistar Institute since 1906. Note that Long-Evans, Wistar, Sprague-Dawley (SD) and Lewis (LEW) are all strains used in this study along with Brown Norway (which is considered to be the closest lab bred strain to the Wild Norway). (Figure from Pass & Freeth, 1993)

1.6

Aims and Hypotheses

In this thesis I examine how social and genetic relationships between observers and demonstrators impact on an animal's capability and/or aptitude to learn. I also

determine if the sex of an animal impacts the teaching and learning of an observational task. Observer rats fell into one of four treatment groups in regards to their relationship with their demonstrator: related and familiar, related and unfamiliar, unrelated and familiar, unrelated and unfamiliar (see Chapter 2 methods section for definitions). Demonstrators were given the chance to learn a task that

18 required them to press a joystick to the left or right. Based on the latency to first push, the total number of presses made and the number of sniffs directed at the joystick I determined if being related or unrelated, and familiar or unfamiliar, were important for observational learning and if either gender performed better.

1.6.1

Hypotheses

Rats both recognise kin and treat them differently from non-kin (Hepper, 1987). Kin recognition by spatial distribution suggests that rats that have lived together and are familiar will view each other as kin regardless of genetic relatedness (Holmes & Sherman, 1983). In addition, rats sharing the same home environment will have similar odours from eating the same food (Galef, 1977), and sharing bacterial flora (Albone & Perry, 1975). The theory of inclusive fitness suggests that it is beneficial for related animals to help each other in order to increase their combined reproductive success (Hamilton, 1964). This assistance may extend to teaching relatives the

location of food sources (Galef, 1990). I therefore hypothesised that learning would occur sooner and with greater accuracy when learning from a related and familiar rat than learning from an unrelated and unfamiliar rat. I expect that learning from

familiar and unrelated rat, or unfamiliar and related rat will result in mixed results, slower and less accurate than related and familiar, but faster and more accurate than unrelated and unfamiliar.

In observational learning, males and females have similar rates of task acquisition. However, when it comes to learning some aspects of a task there may be gender differences as suggested by Collins (1998) study with observational learning in mice

19 and supported by the apparent sexual differences in spatial learning (Berger-Sweeney, Arnold, Gabeau, & Mills, 1995; Jonasson, 2005; Jones, Braithwaite, & Healy, 2003). Based on these previous findings it is hypothesised that males with their apparent better spatial abilities will show a greater aptitude in learning the directional component of an observational task but both sexes will have equal acquisition rates.

1.6.2

Format

This thesis is presented in three chapters. The first chapter presents a literature review introducing the reader to background research supporting my thesis. The second chapter presents the research itself and is formatted as a paper for publication. The third chapter is a general discussion in which I summarise my finding and discuss future research potential. Because chapter two is designed as a stand alone piece, there will be some inevitable overlap in information presented.

20 1.7 References Albone, E. S., & Perry, G. C. (1975). Anal sac secretion of the red fox, Vulpes vulpes; volatile fatty acids and diamines: Implications for a fermentation hypothesis of chemical recognition. Journal of Chemical Ecology, 2, 101-111.

Barnard, C. J., & Aldhous, P. (1991). Kinship, kin discrimination and mate choice. In P. G. Hepper (Ed.), Kin Recognition. Great Britain: Cambridge University Press.

Bateson, P. P. G. (1982). Preferences for cousins in Japanese quail. Nature, 295, 236-237.

Bateson, P. P. G. (1983). Optimal out breeding. In P. P. G. Bateson (Ed.), Mate Choice. Great Britain: Cambridge University Press.

Beauchamp, G. K., Yamazaki, K., Wysocki, C. J., Slotnik, B. M., Thomas, L., & Boyse, E. A. (1985). Chemosensory recognition of mouse major histocompatibility types by another species. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 82, 4186-4188.

Berger-Sweeney, J., Arnold, A., Gabeau, D., & Mills, J. (1995). Sex differences in learning and memory in mice: effects of sequence of testing and cholinergic blockade. Behavioural Neuroscience, 5, 859-873.

21 Biederman, G. B., & Vanayan, M. (1988). Observational learning in pigeons: The function of quality of observed performances in simultaneous discrimination. Learning and Motivation, 19, 31-43.

Boyse, E. A., Beauchamp, G. K., Yamazaki, K., & Bard, J. (1991). Genetic components of kin recognition in mammals. In P. G. Hepper (Ed.), Kin Recognition. Great Britain: Cambridge University Press.

Brown, J. L., & Eklund, A. (1994). Kin recognition and the major histocompatibility complex: An integrative review. American Naturalist, 143, 436461.

Busquet, N., & Baudoin, C. (2005). Odour similarities as a basis of discriminating degrees of kinship in rodents: evidence from Mus spicilegus. Animal Behaviour, 70, 997-1002.

Byers, J. A., & Beckoff, M. (1986). What does "kin recognition" mean? Ethology, 72, 342-345.

Byrne, R. W., & Russon, A. E. (1998). Learning by imitation: A hierarchical approach. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 21, 667-721.

Calhoun, J. B. (1962). The Ecology and Sociology of the Norway Rat. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

22

Choleris, E., & Kavaliers, M. (1999). Social learning in animals: sex differences and neurobiological analysis. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 64, 767-776.

Clarke, J. V., Nicol, C. J., Jones, R., & McGreevy, P. D. (1996). Effects of observational learning on food selection in horses. Applied Animal Behavio