THE RELATION BETWEEN PREFERENCE AND DEMAND IN THE DOMESTIC HEN: DOES PREFERENCE VARY WITH PRICE?

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Masters of Applied Psychology at the University of Waikato by JULIE-ANNE MARIE BRUCE

_____________

University of Waikato 2007

ii ABSTRACT

Six hens responded under an increasing Fixed Ratio schedule of reinforcement to assess demand separately for two different food types: wheat and puffed wheat. Demand curves generated showed the least preferred food, puffed wheat, yielded a higher initial (ln L) demand than the more preferred food, wheat. While responding for the more preferred food, wheat, produced lower initial (ln L) demand functions, responding for wheat was maintained to higher increasing FR schedules of reinforcement than was that for puffed wheat. This phenomenon occurred across all six hens. To assess preference between the two food types the hens responded under a two-link concurrent-chain schedule of reinforcement. Under the concurrent-chain schedule of reinforcement there were three conditions, each consisted of a initial link with VI 90-s VI 90-s in effect, and terminal links of FR1, FR8 and FR32. The concurrent-chain schedule was used to examine if or how preference may relate to demand. Preference measures obtained showed wheat was generally preferred to puffed wheat across all prices throughout the preference assessment. As price increased in the terminal link during the preference assessment, preference for wheat became more extreme as did the hens responding. The results suggest that while there is a systematic relation between preference and demand, in that at higher FR values food with higher demand levels is preferred. This does not seem to hold, however, at FR1.

iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank my supervisors, Drs Bill Temple, Catherine Sumpter and Mary Foster for their guidance during the duration of writing my Masters Thesis. I would especially like to say thank you to Bill for all of his encouragement, help, ability to see potential when I saw none, and making me feel like I could do this. A very many thanks to my family and friends who have made the process a whole lot more bearable. A huge thank you to my Mum and Dad, Elaine and John Bruce for all of your unconditional love and support, and to Greg and Sarah for everything you have done for me. Thank you Brook for your support and encouragement, and the contingencies you put on my behaviour, they really had a big effect. A big thank you to Aimee for your friendship, support and just being there when I really needed you, it has really helped me through this. Thank you for the long (avoidance) chats on the phone and all your help. It's made the whole process much more fun with you. Thanks to Jenny for all her help with graphs and Matlab, and writing the mammoth concurrent chain program for my experiment. Thanks to Aimee, Amy and Renee for their fantastic proof reading skills, it was a huge help. Finally thank you to all the members of the Animal Behaviour and Welfare Research Centre for your support and friendship, and for running my experiment.

iv CONTENTS

PAGE Abstract Acknowledgements Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices Introduction Method Results Discussion References Appendix A Appendix B ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ii iii iv v vi vii 1 13 20 47 60 64 70

v LIST OF TABLES

TABLE

PAGE

1

Summary of experimental demand conditions and highest FR in each condition.

16

2

Number of days taken to reach statistical and visual stability during the preference assessment.

19

3

Parameters of lines fitted to consumption data for the wheat condition (Condition 1).

27

4

Parameters of lines fitted to consumption data for the puffed wheat condition (Condition 2).

28

5

Parameters of lines fitted to averaged consumption data for wheat and puffed wheat (Conditions 1 and 2).

31

6

The minimum and maximum ranges of left/right pecks and times during the preference assessment (Conditions 3, 4 and 5).

36

7

Parameters of the lines fitted to consumption data in the terminal link for the preference assessment (Conditions 3, 4 and 5).

42

8

The averaged terminal link pauses from the preference assessment (Conditions 3, 4 and 5).

45

vi LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE

PAGE

1

Overall response rates and averages for Series 2 and 3 for all subjects for the wheat and puffed wheat conditions (Conditions 1 and 2).

21

2

Running response rates and averages for Series 2 and 3 for all subjects for the wheat and puffed wheat conditions (Conditions 1 and 2).

22

3

Post reinforcement pauses and averages for Series 2 and 3 for all subjects for the wheat and puffed wheat conditions (Conditions 1 and 2).

23

4

Consumption and averaged consumption for all subjects in the wheat and puffed wheat conditions (Conditions 1 and 2).

26

5

Initial link data from the last 5 sessions of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.

33

6

The summed point estimates of log c for responses and time during the initial link of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.

34

7

Overall and running response rates during the terminal link of the last 5 sessions of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.

38

8

Averaged consumption during the terminal link of the last 5 sessions of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.

40

9

Terminal link pauses from the last 5 sessions of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.

43

vii LIST OF APPENDICIES

APPENDIX

PAGE

A

Raw data presented for all subjects for the wheat and puffed wheat conditions (Conditions 1 and 2).

64

B

Raw data presented for all subjects for the preference assessment (Conditions 3, 4 and 5).

70

1 Thorndike (1911) formulated a general theory called the Law of Effect in which he stated; a reinforcer is something that increases the probability of behaviour occurring again in the future. Reinforcers affect behaviour in greater or lesser degrees. However, Thorndike (1911) did not discuss reinforcer value directly. If a reinforcer has an effect on behaviour then is it reasonable to assume that different reinforcers would have differing effects on that behaviour, and the reinforcers would also have different values. There have been many approaches to assigning reinforcer value or strength and the two discussed here come through the consideration of the preference between, and the demand for, reinforcers. The terms preference and demand are often used to describe separately occurring phenomena within experimental and applied psychology. Preference refers to the choice made by an organism in a given situation, or when given the choice of two alternatives, and is suggested to be means of measuring reinforcer value (Tustin, 1994). Preference assessments have been carried out with both humans and non-humans (Baum, 1974; Hughes, 1976; Pace, Ivancic, Edwards, Iwata, & Page, 1985; Matthews & Temple, 1979). Demand refers to the amount of work an organism will do for a particular commodity and has also been used as a measure of reinforcer value (Tustin, 1994). Researchers have investigated the demand for a number of different commodities; for example, food (Hursh, Raslear, Shurtleff, Bauman & Simmons, 1988), environments (Matthews & Ladewig, 1994) and drugs (Hursh & Winger, 1995) again using both humans and non-humans. The assessment of an animal's demand requires the organism to respond on a manipulandum to gain access to a reinforcer or an event (commodity) at differing prices (Hursh, 1980). A demand function plots the amount of a

2 commodity purchased against the price of that commodity (Lea, 1978), typically in logarithmic terms. In animal experiments, price is usually analogous to the number of responses required from the animal (Lea, 1978). Fixed Ratio (FR used typically) schedules require the animal to respond a predetermined number of times before a reinforcer is made available. For example, a FR 20 schedule would deliver a reinforcer after every 20th response is made (Ferster & Skinner, 1957). This is also considered to be a price of `20'. The initial slope, intensity (steep or flat) and shape of the demand function shows the elasticity of the commodity, which can be used to determine how valuable that commodity is (Lea, 1979). Hursh (1980) describes three types of elasticity of the demand function which he says are necessary to characterise the allocation of behaviour in demand assessment: inelasticity, unit elasticity, and elasticity. When consumption is plotted against price (both in logarithmic terms), this gives a function with a slope more negative than -1.0. This shows elastic demand, which is thought to indicate the commodity, is a non-essential item because the animal does not maintain its response rate across price increases, and so consumption decreases across price. . Alternatively, a demand curve with a slope less negative than -1.0, is said to be inelastic (Hursh, 1980). When demand is inelastic the animals' response rate increases as the price increases so consumption remains relatively stable across price increases. However the consumption rate may still decrease. Inelastic demand curves show that the item being worked for is of some `value' to the animal (Hursh & Winger, 1995) and is thought to indicate that the commodity being worked for is a `need' rather than a `luxury'.

3 Unit elasticity, the third type of elasticity described by Hursh (1980), occurs in situations where the animal maintains a constant response rate across price increases. There is a "precise balance" (Hursh, 1980, p.227) between consumption and price, with the decreases in consumption matching the price increases (i.e. a doubling in `price' leads exactly to a halving of consumption). For example, someone may spend $100 a week on petrol and if the price of petrol doubled but he or she still spent only $100 a week on petrol, then their consumption of petrol would be halved. Unit elasticity would then be seen by the shape and slope of the demand curve, which is equal to -1. It is also possible to have a demand curve that indicates mixed elasticity. Mixed elasticity is shown by demand curves that concave downwards and contain portions of inelasticity, unit elasticity and elasticity. A demand curve that shows mixed elasticity is inelastic at low FR prices, has at least one point of unit elasticity (maximal response output), and as the price increases to high FR values the response rate decreases quickly, showing elasticity. Demand curves of mixed elasticity have been described by the equation: Log Q = log L + b (log P) ­ a P (1),

which describes consumption and price in logarithmic terms (Hursh et al., 1988). In this equation, Q refers to total consumption (e.g. reinforcers or amount consumed per session), and P is the price (e.g. FR size). The parameter log L is the estimate of the initial level of consumption obtained at the lowest price. The initial slope of the demand function is described by parameter b, and parameter a reflects the change in the slope of the function as the price increases. From this equation Hursh et al. (1988) established that it was possible to identify the FR or price at which maximal response output occurs, or the price at which demand

4 changes from inelastic to elastic. This point is termed Pmax, and is described by the equation: Pmax = (1 + b) / a where the parameters a and b are as previously described. Assessing demand for a commodity gives an indication of just how hard an animal will work for the commodity being offered, or how `valuable' that commodity is to the animal. Hursh et al. (1988) stated that reinforcer `value' is an important factor when measuring demand. Demand functions are a way of investigating the sensitivity of consumption of a commodity as the price changes (Hursh & Winger, 1995). The changes in consumption according to price could be another indication of how `valued' the commodity is by the animal. As different commodities produce different demand curves, it is possible to quantitatively assess these differences by fitting Hursh et al.'s (1988) equation to the demand functions. Demand functions can be compared in a number of ways. Firstly, two curves may differ in initial intensity of demand (log L in Equation 1). They may also differ in the degree of initial elasticity (b value in Equation 1), and also in the rate at which this elasticity changes (a value in Equation 1). Finally, Pmax (the point of maximal output and unit elasticity) may also vary and allow comparison of the commodities. Unfortunately, comparisons of the parameters of the fitted lines are not entirely straightforward. Consider two commodities both showing mixed elasticity. One demand curve reflects a higher initial consumption rate (higher log L value) but falls quickly, producing a demand curve that has a steeper (more negative) initial slope or a lower b value, and a bigger change in the slope (higher a value) of the demand curve. The other demand curve starts lower (lower log L (2),

5 value) but remains inelastic for longer, and consumption declines more slowly (higher b and lower a values). Comparison of initial demand would suggest the first commodity was most valued, but consideration of inelasticity and Pmax would `favour' the second commodity. Clearly under some circumstances consideration of demand curves could be ambiguous. Alternatively it has also been suggested that preference measures can be used to assess reinforcer value (Tustin, 1994). According to Tustin (1994), demand curves can predict preference, with a flatter demand curve reflecting a "more highly valued or preferred reinforcer" (p. 598). This occurs because the more `valued' reinforcer maintains the rate of responding as the `price' increases. It is not clear however, whether preference derived from consideration of demand levels will necessarily be the same as that assessed by more usual methods (i.e. concurrent schedules of reinforcement). Concurrent schedules have been used to assess various aspects of reinforcer preference, including, between rates (Fantino & Davison, 1983), amounts (Grant, 2005) and types (Flevill, 2002) of food. Commonly, preference is assessed using concurrent schedules of reinforcement. Under concurrent schedules of reinforcement an animal is required to respond on one of two (or more) simultaneously available but incompatible manipulanda, such as levers that can be pressed or keys that can be pecked (Catania, 1966). Each manipulandum has a corresponding consequence or reinforcer, such as a different food type. Preference measures are usually derived as response ratios or ratios of times spent responding on each of the manipulanda (Baum & Rachlin, 1969). When investigating an animal's preference for given commodities it is important to understand that the animal's preference is only ever relative to the

6 commodities or events available. For example, a child may prefer oranges over apples when asked to choose between these two alternatives, but may prefer apples over pears when given a choice between these two alternatives. This would suggest the child had a preference for oranges compared to the other two alternatives. It is quite possible that the child dislikes all three fruits, but will show a preference relative to the situation. A schedule of reinforcement determines the number of responses needed, or elapsed time required on the manipulanda, before a reinforcer is permitted. Variable Interval (VI) schedules are commonly used for measuring an animal's preference as it encourages sampling of both alternatives. Under a VI schedule, a reinforcer becomes available after the first response is made following a predetermined interval since the last reinforcer. The intervals vary and have an averaged value which is specified in the schedule (e.g. a VI 60-s schedule will make a reinforcer available on average every 60 seconds after first response on the alternative since the previous reinforcer delivery). Schedules of reinforcement may be rich or lean, with a rich schedule delivering reinforcers more frequently and at a faster rate compared to the lean schedule (Sumpter, Foster & Temple, 2002). Concurrent schedules can also be programmed to be dependent or independent. If the schedules are programmed to be dependent, each schedule counts down simultaneously, and when one schedule reaches zero (in terms of VI schedules) and a reinforcer becomes available, the opposing schedule stops timing until that reinforcer has been delivered (Catania, 1966). Both schedules then continue timing down once the reinforcer is no longer available. Independently programmed schedules continue to time down regardless of whether the opposing schedule has a reinforcer available (Catania,

7 1966). Independent schedules face the problem of exclusivity of choice, while dependent schedules guard against exclusivity by ensuring that the animal will experience both alternatives available. Matthews and Temple (1979) suggest, however, that exclusive responding may be maintained by dependent contingencies (i.e. responses required), and preferences observed may actually be smaller than the `true' levels of preference. Herrnstein (1961) proposed an equation, which allows preferences obtained through concurrent schedules to be quantitatively described or predicted. This equation, the Strict Matching Law (SML), reads as: B1 / (B1 + B2) = R1 / (R1 + R2) where parameter B refers to the behaviour which includes the number of responses made or the time spent responding to manipulanda. Reinforcers obtained on each alternative are represented by the parameter R, while the numbers 1 and 2 represent the two alternatives available. The Strict Matching Law states that the distribution of responding will match the distribution of reinforcers that are available on concurrent schedules of reinforcement (Herrnstein, 1961). For example, if one schedule delivers twice as many reinforcers as the other, the Strict Matching Law would predict, that 2/3rd's of the subjects responding and 2/3rd's of the subject's time would be allocated to the richer schedule. Deviation from the matching law has been known to occur during choice assessment experiments and Baum (1974) concluded that behaviour did not always conform to the Strict Matching Law. From the Strict Matching Law equation, Baum (1974) derived the Generalised Matching Law equation: Log (B1 / B2) = a log (R1 / R2) + log c (4), (3),

8 where parameters B and R are as previously defined. The sensitivity of the animal's behaviour to changes in the reinforcement rate are described by parameter a, and log c is the measure of bias the animal has towards one alternative over the other, irrespective of the reinforcer rate differences. Two types of deviation from strict matching are undermatching and overmatching (Baum, 1974). Undermatching is said to occur when more responding than predicted by the Strict Matching Law occurs on the leaner schedule of reinforcement. In Equation 4 undermatching is associated with a values less than 1.0. Overmatching is when more responding than predicted occurs on the richer schedule of reinforcement, and a values in Equation 4 are greater than 1.0. Another form of deviation from strict matching that must be considered has been described by Baum (1974) as inherent or response bias. This can be seen as an unaccounted for preference by the animal toward on of the alternatives when the schedules of reinforcement for each alternative are, in fact equal. Possible reasons for inherent bias may be; one response key in an operant chamber may require more effort to peck than the other, or it may be physically more difficult for the animal to respond to one key over another. However, Baum (1974) states the reason for such a bias may remain unknown to the researcher. Matthews and Temple (1979) investigated food preference in cows responding under concurrent schedules of reinforcement. To account for the inherent bias outcomes in their study, elaborated on Baum's (1974) generalised matching equation. Matthews and Temple's (1979) equation reads as: Log (B1/B2) = a log (R1/R2) + log b + log q (5),

9 where the parameters B, R, and a are as previously defined. Log b allows for a measure of inherent bias and log q is the imposed biases (in their case differences in the two foods offered). Log b and log a added equal log c from Equation 4. Equation 5 allowed Matthews and Temple (1979) to obtain a measure of preference for differing food types excluding any inherent biases. Tustin (1994) suggests that both preference and demand measure reinforcer `value' and that they are expected to give equivalent measures of reinforcer `value'. Preference and demand are often investigated as separate components of the same experimental research, and it is not understood how, or if, they relate to each other. There are very few studies, which have compared preference and demand measures. One study, which investigated both demand and preference was conducted by Flevill (2002). An assessment of preference for three foods (wheat, puffed wheat, and honey puffed wheat) was obtained in Flevill's (2002) study by requiring the hens' to respond under concurrent Random Interval (RI) schedules of reinforcement, where reinforcement is programmed to occur at random intervals. It was found that wheat was most highly preferred followed by honey puffed wheat, and puffed wheat was least preferred. Flevill (2002) then investigated hens' demand for the same three different food types by increasing FR requirements. Given the preference rankings, it is reasonable to expect that the hens would show a higher demand for the more preferred commodity over the least preferred commodity across all prices. However, this was not the case. Specifically, Flevill (2002) found higher initial (ln L) demand for the least preferred food (puffed wheat) and lower initial (ln L) demand for the most preferred food (wheat).

10 Demand measures found by Flevill (2002) showed that hens will respond at a faster rate for the least preferred commodity at lower prices when only one of the commodities is available. However she found that when two commodities are available concurrently, hens will respond quicker for the most preferred food (Flevill, 2002). These preference results when compared with the findings from the demand measures were not intuitive. The preferences obtained by Flevill (2002) were assessed on a simple concurrent schedule. From Flevill's (2002) research it can be concluded that when a hen is required to respond under equal concurrent schedules of reinforcement at a `price' of one wheat is the preferred food. When using ordinary concurrent schedules to assess preference, the data indicate that clear preferences were found at a low `price' (Flevill, 2002). Demand curves are generated by plotting responses made over increasing prices, while preference is assessed by time spent and responses made to the manipulanda associated with the preferred alternative. A chained schedule involves an animal responding on a manipulandum while in the presence of one stimulus, which in turn produces a second stimulus, then a third, fourth and so on (Ferster & Skinner, 1957; Kelleher, 1966). Concurrent-chain schedules offer a way to assess preference for reinforcers at higher prices, requiring more than one response. A two-component concurrent-chain schedule consists of an initial link or `choice phase' and a terminal link or `outcome phase' only (Kelleher, 1966). During the initial choice phase there are two lit response keys concurrently available, but there is only one lit response key available during the terminal link. The animal responds to a programmed schedule of reinforcement during the initial link, which leads to the terminal link, giving direct access to the reinforcement (Houston,

11 Sumida & McNamara, 1987). During the terminal link, the animal is required to respond on the manipulandum according to a different schedule of reinforcement than that in the initial link. Typically a single food is used as a reinforcer (Davison, 1983), and is termed the primary reinforcer (Kelleher, 1966). The terminal link has been referred to as a conditioned reinforcer, and responding in the initial link is used to estimate the effectiveness of the conditioned reinforcing properties of the terminal link (Kelleher, 1966). Based on Flevill's (2002) research when the commodities were presented alone (i.e. demand assessment), hens responded faster at low FR's for the less preferred commodity. This less preferred commodity, however, produced lower rates of responding when the two commodities were presented concurrently. In the case of Flevill's research this was done with concurrent RI RI schedules, requiring only one response for access to the reinforcer. It is of interest to investigate whether preference will change accordingly with different methodology, (i.e. if preference will change when assessed at various prices). That is, will the hens' preference change as the price increases? To investigate if preference does change along with increases in price, a concurrent chain schedule will be used here. This will allow assessments of preference at different terminal link schedules and therefore differing `prices'. If a concurrent-chain schedule with FR1 in the terminal link, and simple concurrent schedules are equivalent, then, from Flevill (2002) it is reasonable to expect initial link preferences to be in favour of the more preferred of the two foods. However as the terminal link schedule value is increased this seems unlikely to remain consistent. At higher `prices' the reinforcer value may change. It is reasonable to assume that at the higher FR values, terminal link preference will be towards the

12 most preferred food available. In addition the more preferred food is expected to sustain demand to higher levels. In light of previous findings (Flevill, 2002) the current experiment has two main objectives. The first is to replicate and extend Flevill's (2002) preference assessment, by employing a concurrent-chain schedule. This will enable the examination of preference for two different reinforcers (wheat and puffed wheat), at prices other than FR1. Secondly, with the use of a concurrent-chain schedule three different `prices' (i.e. FR1, FR8 and FR32) will be programmed to operate in the terminal link, which will produce three different points at which preference can be assessed, and also allow for comparison to, or prediction from, the demand assessment.

13 METHOD Subjects Six Brown Shaver hens, numbered 11 to 16, were used as subjects. Each hen was individually housed in a wire cage measuring 430-mm high, 310-mm wide and 470-mm long. Water was freely available to every hen, ad libitum, in her home cage. Vitamins and grit were provided on a weekly basis. The hens were maintained at 80% (+/- 5%) of their free feeding body weights, which was calculated through daily weighing through supplementary feeding of NRM Peck'n'Lay, or Commercial Laying Pellets. All hens were approximately 26 months old at the commencement of the experiment. All hens' had previous experience responding on concurrent variable-interval (VI) schedules of reinforcement.

Apparatus The particleboard experimental chamber was 640-mm long, 540-mm high, 430-mm wide and painted white internally and externally. A covered fan, 80 mm in diameter, was situated on the back wall, 425 mm from the bottom of the chamber and 170 mm from the left side of the chamber. The fan provided ventilation and some masking noise. The floor of the chamber was wooden and lined with a grey artificial grass mat (550 mm by 410 mm). Within the chamber there were two circular response keys made of semitranslucent Perspex and backlit green by a 1-W bulb. Each key was 30 mm in diameter, situated on the front wall of the chamber. The keys were surrounded by an aluminium plate 130-mm long, 50-mm wide and positioned 215 mm apart, with the left key 55 mm from the left side of the chamber wall and the right key

14 35 mm from the opposite side. In order for a response to either key to be effective, a force of 0.1 N (10 g) was required. Each effective response was followed by a brief audible feedback beep provided by an electronic beeper, situated centrally behind the keys. Responses made to unlit keys were ineffective. Situated on the front wall, 150 mm beneath each response key, was an open square 120-mm high and 90-mm wide, which provided 3-s access the reinforcer when the food hopper was raised. The hopper was part of an external magazine, which contained the experimental food: wheat in the left magazine, puffed wheat in the right magazine. Each magazine was manually filled with the appropriate food when required. During the 3-s reinforcer access period, both key lights were extinguished and the response keys became inoperable. A 1-W white bulb, situated 30 mm above the hopper, illuminated the reinforcer during periods of reinforcementaccess. The light from the response keys and the food hopper were the only sources of illumination in the experimental chamber. Each magazine was placed on a pair of Atrax Compact Precision Balance TM, BH Series Scales, which allowed the magazines to be weighed during the duration of each session. The magazines sat on the scales with an attached aluminium bracket. The brackets provided stability for the magazines to sit on top of the scales, allowing the weights to be read every second, and gave space for a tray to catch any spilt feed. The magazines, scales, and power supply box were all attached to a Pentium Processor 133 Mhz, GenuineIntel Computer, with 16 Mb ram, running windows 98 and Med PC R for windows (Med III, 1987-99), version 1.16.

15 Procedure Demand assessment. During the demand assessment the hens responded on FR schedules of reinforcement for wheat (Condition 1) and puffed wheat (Condition 2). Before starting the wheat condition preliminary training required the hens to respond on a FR 20 schedule for one week. Experimental sessions for the wheat condition started with the hen being placed in the chamber and the left key lit green. The right key was inoperable throughout all series of the wheat condition. During the puffed wheat condition the right key was lit green and the left key was inoperable. Within each condition, three series of increasing FR schedules were conducted. There was a maximum of eight days of responding on FR 20 between each series of the wheat condition, and five days of responding on FR 20 between each series of the puffed wheat condition. This allowed for all hens to reach individual break points, and for all hens to start responding to the new series on the same day. Table 1 presents the highest FR schedules reached where each hen received reinforcers, in Series 2 and 3 of the wheat and puffed wheat conditions of the demand assessment. If the hen failed to receive any reinforcers during a session, that particular FR schedule was presented again during the next session until the hen had completed two consecutive sessions without receiving any reinforcers at which time the schedule of reinforcement would automatically be reset to FR20. For both the wheat and puffed wheat conditions each experimental session lasted for 40-mins keytime, which comprises the total session time excluding the cumulative reinforcer time. On the first experimental day of each series each hen

16 Table 1. The order of experimental conditions, along with the highest FR schedule completed for each series, in both conditions, for each hen.

Subjects

Condition

Series

11

12

13

14

15

16

Condition 1: Demand Assessment Wheat (Highest FR) 2 3 Condition 2: Demand Assessment Puffed Wheat (Highest FR) 2 3

256 256

256 256

128 256

256 256

256 128

512 512

128 128

64 128

128 128

256 128

128 256

256 256

17 was required to respond on a FR 1 schedule and this schedule was increased each session by way of doubling (i.e. FR 2, FR 4, FR 8, FR 16, FR 32, FR 64 etc). Preference assessment. Throughout the preference assessment the left magazine contained wheat and the right magazine contained puffed wheat, corresponding with the keys/magazines in effect in the wheat/puffed wheat condi