Diversity or Perversity? Investigating Queer Narratives, Resistance, and Representation in Aotearoa / New Zealand, 1948-2000

A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts in History at the University of Waikato, New Zealand by CHRISTOPHER J. F. BURKE

2007

ii

Abstract
This thesis contributes to the burgeoning field of the history of sexuality in New Zealand and seeks to distill the more theorised and reflexive understanding of the subjectively understood queer male identity since 1948.

Emerging from the disciplines of History and English, this project draws from a range of narratological materials: parliamentary debates contained in Hansard, and novels and short stories written by men with publicly avowed queer identities.

This thesis explores how both `normative' identity and the category of `the homosexual' were constructed and mobilised in the public domain, in this case, the House of Representatives. It shows that members of the House have engaged with an extensive tradition of defining and excluding; a process by which state and public discourses have constructed largely unified, negative and othering narratives of `the homosexual'. This constitutes an overarching narrative of queer experience which, until the mid-1990s, excluded queer subjects from its construction.

At the same time, fictional narratives offer an adjacent body of knowledge and thought for queer men and women. This thesis posits literature's position as an important and productive space for queer resistance and critique. Such texts typically engage with and subvert `dominant' or `normative' understandings of sexuality and disturb efforts to apprehend precise or linear histories of `gay liberation' and `gay consciousness'.

Drawing from the works of Frank Sargeson, James Courage, Bill Pearson, Noel Virtue, Stevan Eldred-Grigg, and Peter Wells, this thesis argues for a revaluing of fictional narratives as active texts from which historians can construct a matrix of cultural experience, while allowing for, and explaining, the determining role such narratives play in the discursively constructed understandings of gender and sexuality in New Zealand.

iii

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the many people who have assisted me at varying stages throughout this project.

Initial thanks go to my supervisors, Dr Catharine Coleborne in the Department of History and Dr Kirstine Moffat in the Department of English, for their support and encouragement. Your guidance has been invaluable, and our meetings and discussions always a source of intellectual stimulation and growth.

Others have also been integral. In particular, I would like to make special mention of Dr Sarah Shieff, Dr Mark Houlahan, Dr Lynda Johnston, and Nepia Mahuika at the University of Waikato, Dr Chris Brickell at University of Otago, and Nic Dempster at Victoria University of Wellington, all of whom set aside time or provided input at formative stages.

I would like to express my personal gratitude to Peter Wells who was Writer in Residence at Waikato during much of this period. Your generous sharing of materials and insights greatly enriched the development of my work. Thank you for your friendship and your kindness.

Thank you also to my fellow graduate students and friends, both inside and outside of university. As always, I have appreciated your support. Your encouragement and enthusiasm has made the past year all the more enjoyable.

Finally, thank you to mum and dad for their material and emotional sustenance during my education and for encouraging my interest in both literature and history in the first place. I am indebted.

iv

Table of Contents

Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents

ii iii iv

Introduction

1

Chapter One:

Queering the Past: Revising New Zealand's Social and Cultural Histories

18

Chapter Two:

Reading Hansard: Constructing `The Homosexual' from the Records of New Zealand's House of Representatives

44

Chapter Three:

`Men of my kind': Moments of Queer Resistance and Critique in New Zealand Literature

79

Conclusion List of Sources

120 127

1

Introduction
Norman Jones, a New Zealand parliamentarian, claimed to represent the views of the `average' New Zealander when he characterised (male) `homosexuality' as `anathema to most human beings' during the debate surrounding the Homosexual Law Reform (HLR) Bill in 1985. 1 Jones identified two indices for normative behaviour. These revolved around the biological and cultural imperatives of procreation for married, opposite-sex spouses, and the continued maintenance of the nuclear family unit. He believed that the Bill was repellent since it sought to decriminalise `sodomy', and therefore, `abnormal sex between males'. 2 `The homosexual' was without history or place in society. Homosexual communities represented a `new vogue and subculture', and, through their reclamation of the term `gay', had engaged in `the worst travesty of a decent word that was ever bastardised'. 3 In spite of `spurious talk about human rights', homosexuals remained part of a `[w]ay-out sexual orientation' that favoured indiscriminate acts of violation and carnal lust. 4

However, in 1957, almost three decades earlier, an alternative view of `homosexuality' was raised by author James Courage. Courage's novel, A Way of Love, represents New Zealand's earliest story of explicitly romantic love between men. Written by a man who was himself `homosexual', A Way of Love couches notions of same-sex desire as beneficial and positive. It therefore displaces many of the conventional readings of `homosexual' persons asserted through `official' discourses like those embodied by Jones's diatribe some twenty-eight years later. Courage's story calls into question the marginal status of homosexuality. The novel's protagonist, Bruce, insists on the presence of a diverse and dynamic queer community: `what I might call without exaggeration our immense league'. 5 Bruce's
1

Norman Jones, 8 March 1985, New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 461, p. 3523. I use the abbreviation NZPD hereafter. 2 Jones, 8 March 1985, NZPD, Vol. 461, p. 3522. 3 Jones, 8 March 1985, NZPD, Vol. 461, pp. 3522-3. 4 Jones, 8 March 1985, NZPD, Vol. 461, p. 3523. 5 James Courage, A Way of Love (London: Jonathan Cape, 1959), p. 145.

2 method of sexual expression rejects contemporary imputations of `deviance' that represent `homosexual' bodies and sexual practices as transgressive and `abnormal'. He instead suggests that same-sex desire constitutes `neither a crime nor an unjustified indulgence'. 6 Bruce's story is a `little history' used to preserve a complex and subjective set of emotional and sexual parameters that factored in the lives of queer men: a narrative that rejects ideas of `repentance' and celebrates `gratification' in the widest possible sense. 7

These clearly contrasting views underscore divergences evident between bodies of knowledge used to define the parameters of queer identity in New Zealand. This thesis contends that, within a New Zealand context, parliamentary debates in the twentieth century constructed largely unified, negative and othering narratives of `the homosexual'. These constructed and partial narratives present an overarching and `official' narrative of queer experience which, until recently, quite literally excluded the queer subject from its construction. Along with historians like Steven Maynard, I suggest that political regulation, governance and, on occasion statistics, transformed, through language, `the diverse sexual experiences of men' into a `limited number of legal [and cultural] categories'. 8

In contrast, a reading of New Zealand fiction provides a central means by which historians might assert the multiplicity of experience available at a given time. Borrowing a model used by cultural historian Judith R. Walkowitz, this thesis asks how and in what ways queer personages were empowered through text to disturb `official' meanings of `homosexuality' and, in addition, seeks to understand how such `moments' of critical agency were determined, or at least influenced, by their material and discursive environments. 9 This thesis therefore acknowledges the
6 7

Courage, A Way of Love, p. 36. Courage, A Way of Love, pp. 251, 254. 8 Steven Maynard, `Through a Hole in the Lavatory Wall: Homosexual Subcultures, Police Surveillance and the Dialectics of Discovery, Toronto, 1890-1930', Journal of the History of Sexuality, 5 (1994), p. 229. 9 In City of Dreadful Delight Walkowitz re-reads a series of narratives surrounding the Whitechapel murders in Victorian England and their reductive depictions of women. Walkowitz exposes a multiplicity of possible social experiences using a series of `adjacent' or `parallel' texts. These

3 conceivably complex ways in which society and text intersect in mutually constitutive and multiple ways.

New Zealand historians have only recently engaged with notions of a queer `national' past. In comparison to Australian contexts, for example, where a productive vein of historiography began to emerge from the mid-1980s, New Zealand contributions remained sparse until the mid-to-late 1990s, and have peaked only in the last few years. 10 Such texts have at times either been mediated by focuses other than the reconstitution of same-sex histories or offer historical accounts in modes of analysis outside the `ordinary' purview of the academy. 11 The body of work that constitutes the categories of academic and explicitly queer history is therefore small and remains a major aspect of New Zealand historiography yet to be fully explored. 12 Other general histories, such as Michael King's and James Belich's, survey `homosexual' personages and their respective
alternate stories demonstrate how women contested their dominant representations in `official discourses'. She finds that women `reshape[d] cultural meanings within certain parameters'. See Judith R. Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight: Narratives of Sexual Danger in Late-Victorian London (London: Virago, 1992), p. 9. 10 For analyses of Australian contexts see Robert Reynolds, `Gay History, in The Oxford Companion To Australian History, eds., Graeme Davison, John Hirst, Stuart Macintyre (Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 278-9. A detailed list of historiography is also available online. See Australian Lesbian and Gay Archives, `Australian Lesbian and Gay History: A Bibliography', Australian Lesbian and Gay Archives [online], 09 October 2006, available URL: http://home.vicnet.net.au/~alga/docs/bibliography.htm. 11 For examples see Stevan Eldred-Grigg, Pleasures of the Flesh: Sex and Drugs in Colonial New Zealand, 1840-1915 (Wellington: Reed, 1984); Nigel Gearing, Emerging Tribe: Gay Culture in New Zealand in the 1990s (Auckland: Penguin, 1997); Heather Worth, Gay Men, Sex and HIV (Palmerston North: Dunmore, 2003). 12 I draw on many of these in my reading of queer history in Chapter One. For key examples see Phil Parkinson, `Sexual Law Reform', Sites: A Journal for Radical Perspectives on Culture, 19 (Spring 1989), pp. 7-19; Phil Parkinson, `Lesbian and Gay Archives in New Zealand: A Minority Gathers Its Own History', Archifacts: Journal of the Archives and Records Association of New Zealand, 4 (1984), pp. 7-13; Justin William McNab, `A Social Historical Overview: Male Homosexuality in New Zealand', (MA thesis, University of Auckland, 1993); Laurie Guy, Worlds in Collision: The Gay Debate in New Zealand, 1960-1986 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 2002); Chris Brickell, `Same-Sex Desire and the Asylum: A Colonial Experience', New Zealand Journal of History, 39, 2 (2005), pp. 158-178; Chris Brickell, `The Emergence of a Gay Identity', in Sexuality Down Under: Social and Historical Perspectives, eds., Allison Kirkman and Pat Moloney (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2005), Alison J. Laurie, `"Filthiness" Became a Theory: An Overview of Homosexual and Lesbian Organising from Nineteenth Europe to Seventies New Zealand', in Outlines: Lesbian and Gay Histories of Aotearoa, eds., Alison J. Laurie and Linda Evans (Wellington, NZ: Lesbian and Gay Archives of New Zealand, 2003), pp. 10-19; Alison J. Laurie, `Lady Husbands and Kamp Ladies: Pre-1970 Lesbian Life in Aotearoa/ New Zealand' (PhD thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, 2003).

4 contributions to the schema of New Zealand history. 13 Such texts, however, have not been informed by robost theoretical or conceptual frameworks, and have instead promoted a monochromatic view of sexual difference that is largely unaffected by considerations of class, ethnicity, or time period.

A similar dearth of critical scholarship exists in regard to queer literary enterprise in New Zealand. Peter Wells' `Introduction' to Best Mates, New Zealand's first and only anthology of queer literature and criticism, represents an exception in this case, although in more consciously `literary' than historical contexts. 14 Remaining scholarship has been confined to theses on the expatriate writer James Courage and a few references to Courage, Frank Sargeson, and Bill Pearson, in Belich's and King's national surveys. 15 Some limited scholarship has also considered Sargeson's role as a `homosexual' writer, though seldom in socio-historical contexts or at any length. 16 Such scholarship has typically resisted the reading of an explicitly `homosexual' presence in Sargeson's work and has instead promoted suggestions of `latent' traces of homosexuality. Such brevity contrasts with the richness and

Michael King, The Penguin History of New Zealand (Auckland: Penguin, 2003), pp. 376-80; James Belich, Paradise Reforged: A History of New Zealanders, From the 1880s to the Year 2000 (Auckland: Penguin, 2001), pp. 511-4. 14 For his critical overview of gay male literature in New Zealand see Peter Wells, `Introduction: Modest Achievements', in Best Mates: Gay Writing in Aotearoa New Zealand, eds., Peter Wells and Rex Pilgrim (Auckland: Reed, 1997), pp. 7-31. 15 For theses on Courage see Grant Richard Harris, `A Reading of the Novels of James Courage' (MA thesis, Massey University, 1993); John Lee, `"A Private History": Towards a Biography of James Courage, Expatriate New Zealand Writer' (MA thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, 2001). A Master of Library and Information Studies thesis by Sabine Berendse is also of interest. Berendse surveys New Zealand novels that contain gay characters or thematic concerns. It should be noted, however, that such preoccupations do not necessarily signal a queer orientation on the part of the authors. See Berendse, `Gay and Lesbian Characters and Themes in New Zealand Novels' (MLIS thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, 1999). For references to queer authors in general histories see Belich, pp. 332, 335, 337, 513; King, pp. 379-80. King also explores Sargeson's queer sexual orientation in Frank Sargeson: A Life (Auckland: Viking, 1995). 16 See Kai Jensen, `Not Diminished in my Stature as a Man', in Whole Men: The Masculine Tradition in New Zealand Literature (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1996), pp. 107-126; Kai Jensen `Holes, Wholeness and Holiness in Frank Sargeson's Writing, Landfall, 173 (March 1990), pp. 33-44; Mark Houlahan, `Outings With Frank: New Aspects of Frank Sargeson's Life and Texts', Span, 44 (April 1997), pp. 69-78; John Newton, `Homophobia and the Social Pattern: Sargeson's Queer Nation', Landfall, 199 (2000), pp. 91-107.

13

5 diversity of literary materials in New Zealand and the presence of traditions that celebrate analogous British, European, and North American contexts. 17

Analyses explaining parliament's lengthy involvement in policing sexual deviance in New Zealand have also been mostly absent. 18 Academic conceptions of queer pasts have mainly engaged with a mode of historical analysis broadly described as gay social history; studies that prioritise experience, testimony and collective identity as the central considerations for the recuperation of a `gay' history. 19 Such views favour `[i]ndividual experience recounted by ordinary people' as the most `authoritative, authentic and irreducible form of evidence' and the means by which `lesbians' and `gay men' are `given their voice back and ... their worldview better understood'. 20 Thus, while, a `queer-focused' history remains a relatively unexplored field, the New Zealand experience offers even less in regard to cultural history approaches to the past and its concerns for the part language and representation plays in mediating and constructing subjective lives.

For examples, see Byrne R. S. Fone, A Road to Stonewall: Male Homosexuality and Homophobia in England and America Literature, 1750-1969 (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1995); Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire (New York: Colombia University Press, 1985); Paul Hammond, Love Between Men in English Literature (London: Macmillan, 1996); Paul Hammond, Figuring Sex Between Men From Shakespeare To Rochester (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Mark Lily, Gay Men's Literature in the Twentieth Century (London: Macmillan, 1996); Joseph Bristow, ed., Sexual Sameness: Textual Differences in Lesbian and Gay Writing (London: Routledge, 1992); Joseph Bristow, Effeminate England: Homoerotic Writing After 1885 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995); David Bergman, Gaiety Transfigured: Gay Self-representation in American Literature (Madison, Wis: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991); Patricia Juliana Smith, The Queer Sixties (New York: Routledge, 1999); Christopher Robinson, Scandal in the Ink: Male and Female Homosexuality in Twentieth-century French Literature (London: Cassell, 1995); Lawrence R. Schehr, French Gay Modernism (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2004). 18 For exceptions see Cameron Pritchard, `The Discourses of the Homosexual Law Reform', in Sexuality Down Under: Social and Historical Perspectives, eds., Allison Kirkman and Pat Moloney (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2005), pp. 79-96; Timothy McCreanor, `"Why Strengthen The Wall When The Enemy Has Poisoned The Well?": An Assay of Anti-Homosexual Discourse in New Zealand', Journal of Homosexuality, 31, 4 (1996), pp. 75-105; Chris Atmore, `Drawing The Line: Issues of Boundary and the Homosexual Law Reform Bill Campaign in New Zealand (Aotearoa), 1985-86', Journal of Homosexuality, 30, 1 (1995), pp. 23-39. 19 H. G. Cocks and Matt Houlbrook, eds., `Introduction', in The Modern History of Sexuality (London: Palgrave, 2006), p. 5. 20 Cocks and Houlbrook, p. 5.

17

6 Therefore, while some academics, like Chris Brickell, have explored social constructivist accounts of the past in describing culturally contingent categories like `homosexual' and `heterosexual', 21 few, if any, have taken up the challenge presented by queer theory: a mode of cultural analysis viewed by some as antagonistic to the recuperative endeavours of gay social history. 22 The body of literature on queer theory, however, is vast and has enjoyed success in the fields of literature and feminist studies. 23 Queer theorists assert that specific and sexual identity constructions, such as `homosexual' and `gay', are not merely culturally contingent, but inherently `arbitrary, unstable and exclusive'. 24 Proponents promote a view of identity that is emphatically denaturalised and unfixed. Thus, British historian Sean Brady suggests that `identity' is `permanently open and mutable', so that individual and subjective experience challenges the meaning of collective constructs. 25 Seidman suggests that since `identities are always multiple' there remains `literally an infinite number of ways in which `identity-components', like sexual orientation, race, and class, can `intersect and combine'. 26

Brickell, `Same-Sex Desire and the Asylum', pp. 158-9; Brickell, `The Emergence of a Gay Identity', p. 80. 22 This reticence may in fact reflect a `global' shift. H. G. Cocks in 2004, followed by Sean Brady in 2006, have both suggested that many new `gay' histories have been less theoretically-charged. They have instead favoured more descriptive and neo-empiricist bases for investigation. See Cocks, `The Growing Pains of History of Sexuality', Journal of Contemporary History, 39, 4 (2004), pp. 657-66; Brady, `All About Eve? Queer Theory and History', Journal of Contemporary History, 41, 1 (2006), pp. 185-195. For a critical overview of social constructivism in this area see Steven Seidman, The Social Construction of Sexuality (New York: Norton, 2003). 23 Steven Seidman, ed., `Introduction', in Queer Theory/Sociology (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1996), p. 11. For further examples see Annamarie Jagose, Queer Theory (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1996); Michael Warner, ed., `Introduction', in Fear of a Queer Planet: Queer Politics and Social Theory (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. vii-xxxi; Thomas Foster, Carol Sigel and Ellen E. Berry, eds., The Gay `90s: Disciplinary and Interdisciplinary Formations in Queer Studies (New York and London: New York University Press, 1997); Donald E. Hall, Queer Theories (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003); Iain Morland and Annabelle Willox, eds., Queer Theory (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005); Joseph A. Boone, ed., Queer Frontiers: Millennial Geographies, Genders, and Generations (Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 2000); Robert J. Corber and Stephen Valocchi, eds., Queer Studies: An Interdisciplinary Reader (Melbourne: Blackwell, 2003). For an instructive New Zealand-specific account in human geography see Lynda Johnston, Queering Tourism: Paradoxical Performances at Gay Pride Parades (London and New York: Routledge, 2005). 24 Brady, p. 186. 25 Brady, p. 186. 26 Seidman, p. 11.

21

7 This depth of scope has led some to suggest that, given queer theory's `commitment to denaturalization', `queer' can have `neither a foundational logic nor a consistent set of characteristics' and is thus itself resistant to overly reductive definitions.27 Michael Warner, however, suggests that `[q]ueer' addresses more fully the disaffecting and potentially marginalising tropes of `gay' and `homosexual'. 28 The conscious use of `queer' as an inclusive term undercuts `traditional' categories mobilised around sex partner choice. It conceives of a relatively wide ambit of sexual difference that includes otherwise `marginalised' personages and allows for individual and subjective difference between social actors. Warner holds that such capacities reject `minoritizing logic' in favour of a `more thorough resistance to regimes of the normal' and a `way of basing politics in the personal without acceding to ... pressure to clean up personal identity'. 29

Several academics have raised possibilities for integrating queer theory as an effective mode of historical scholarship. Judith Butler, for example, has called for the conscious use of `queer' as `a site of collective contestation, the point of departure for a set of historical reflections and futural imaginings' which in `the present' is `never fully owned'. 30 This, she suggests is `always and only redeployed, twisted, queered' from a `prior usage' and in the direction of `urgent and expanding political purposes'. 31 Heather K. Love, a literary commentator, explains that the naming of `queer studies' indicates a `commitment' among scholars to the `difficulties of the queer past'. 32 It represents a pursuit that extends beyond the `affirmative mode of historiography', which, during gay liberation, had
27

Jagose, Queer Theory, p. 96, citing David M. Halperin's Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography. 28 Warner, pp. xxvi-iii. 29 Warner, pp. xxvi-xxvii (author's emphasis). See also Suzanna Danuta Walters, `From Queer to Here: Radical Feminism, Postmodernism, and Lesbian Menace', in Queer Theory, eds., Iain Morland and Annabelle Willox (New York: Palgrave, 2005), p. 11; Robert J. Corber and Stephen Valocchi, eds., `Introduction', in Queer Studies: An Interdisciplinary Reader (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003), p. 9. 30 Judith Butler, Bodies That Matter: On The Discursive Limits of `Sex' (New York: Routledge, 1993), p. 223. 31 Butler, Bodies That Matter, pp. 223, 228. 32 Heather K. Love, `Spoiled Identity': Stephen Gordon's Loneliness and the Difficulties of Queer History, GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies (2001), p. 492.

8 sought to distill examples of `same-sex love' as models for `gay and lesbian life in the present'. 33 Love instead notes queer scholarship's determination to engage in analyses of `antihomophobic inquiry' that acknowledge the discursive construction of `gender melancholia, heterosexual identification, shame, stigma, and disidentification' in their understandings of subjective complexities. 34 Such conceptualisations acknowledge the potentially fraught composition of queer identities and consider some of the marginalising pressures experienced by queer bodies when traversing worlds conventionally prefigured as heteronormative. 35

Steven Maynard proposes perhaps the most sophisticated historical model for creating queer histories. In his article `Respect Your Elders, Know Your Past', Maynard urges practitioners to develop a productive middle-ground that would synthesise gay social history and queer theory approaches. He posits a revised mode of historical inquiry that combines the level of theorisation and reflexivity evident in queer studies with the `accessible stories' and mode of analysis favoured by social history. 36 Such analyses would unite the `discursive' and the `material' conceptions of the past. He suggests that investigations of the text or text(s) should be placed alongside their broader `material and historical context(s)' so as to better distill their possible `origins, implications, and effects'. 37 Maynard recommends the adoption of the term `queered history' which could refer to a critical stance, rather than the historian's `object of study'.38 A queer history, he suggests, must `recognize if not resolve the messy historical issues of the subject's selfconsciousness and self-identities'. 39

Love, p. 492. Love, pp. 491-2. 35 This has been acknowledged by cultural geographer, Lynda Johnston, who writes that `[q]ueer theory provides a framework from which to draw on critical social theories which challenge heteronormative discourses'. See Johnston, p. 26. 36 Maynard, `"Respect Your Elders, Know Your Past": History and the Queer Theorists', Radical History Review, 75 (1999), p. 59. 37 Maynard, `History and the Queer Theorists', p. 72. 38 Maynard, `History and the Queer Theorists', p. 72. 39 Maynard, `History and the Queer Theorists', p. 73.
34

33

9 This thesis sits within this nexus of emerging historiographical development. It borrows social history motifs, that include an interest in `experience' and the material past, and places this within the cultural history framework offered by queer studies. This study is thus also preoccupied by notions of `narrative', representation, and the conceptualisation of identities, both `normative' and `non-normative'.

The source materials used for this thesis, parliamentary debates taken from the Records to the House of Representatives, and fiction written by queer male authors, both demonstrate lengthy contributions to the discursive construction of sexuality and gender in the New Zealand. The period between 1948 to 2000 is a rich site in which to locate this investigation. The discursive movement evident in public discourse regarding same-sex desire marks a transition from its status as deviant and, in the case of sexual intercourse between men, criminal, to decades of increased (if troubled) integration and assimilation in an environment where the state's coercive power is no longer used to stifle visible signs of queerness. However, fictional texts do not sit as passive bodies of knowledge. By placing these texts alongside the construction of `homosexual' identities evident in parliamentary debates, my research apprehends an uneasy dialectical opposition between contemporary understandings of same-sex desire. Their composition takes into account the broader backdrop of material and historical contexts as well as the potentially complicating notions of `identity' construction that research of this kind necessitates.

In considering the context of the HLR campaign of the 1980s Chris Atmore has suggested that images of `the homosexual' structure the rhetoric and dialogue between members of parliament. Their use has been described by Atmore as intrinsic to the policing of cultural boundaries. This, she suggests, was a territorial war which involved the `manipulation of symbols and competing discourses'. 40 Such materials point to ways in which discourses surrounding `homosexuality', social deviance and standards of morality were conflated and framed by
40

Atmore, p. 24.

10 associations of deviance and social decay more broadly. New Zealand's parliamentary debates are preoccupied both by the status of `homosexuality' and the status of `normative identity'. Thus, not only does Hansard present many of the definitional and reductive properties placed upon the queer subject within `official' discourses, it also offers a means for capturing the historically contingent boundaries of what might constitute society's prescriptive moral standards. Such a process is arguably intrinsic to the enterprise of queer history and the application of queer theory more generally. 41

Hansard forms a productive area for reading cultures of representation since propriety often prevented contemporary media from reporting on `homosexual' subcultures in the past. 42 In contrast, the House is called to bear on issues of sexual identity and `the normative' with surprising regularity. Following Michel Foucault, historians have argued that ideas about sexuality were not stable, and shifts over time resulted partly from the mechanisations of parliament. 43 The `homosexual' was `not simply regulated by the legal system but was also produced by it'. 44 However, historians have at times used Hansard as a cultural barometer, a tool to `gauge' public opinion or attitudes towards deviant behaviour. This kind of history has been characterised by essentialist tendencies, with rhetoric taken as

Seidman explains, for example, that `[q]ueer theory' is not `the study of homosexuality' as a `minority' but the `knowledges and social practices that organise "society"' as a whole by sexualising `heterosexual' or `homosexual' `bodies, desires ... identities ... and social institutions'. See Seidman, pp. 12-13. 42 Certain mainstream newspapers in 1963, for example, refused to even print the word `homosexual'. See Hugh Young, `A Chronicle of Homosexuality in New Zealand: Part 1', Queer Resources Aotearoa New Zealand: Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Resources [online], 08 October 2006, available URL: http://gaynz.net.nz/history/Part1.html. 43 See Foucault, The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, trans., Robert Hurley (New York: Random House, 1978), pp. 36-40, 43. See Chapter One of this thesis for further analyses of Foucault's views of the law and its production of homosexuality, pp. 29-30. 44 Matt Cook, `Law', in The Modern History of Sexuality, eds., H. G. Cocks and Matt Houlbrook (London: Palgrave, 2006), p. 65. A notable example of this view has been put forward by H. G. Cocks in his recent study of England between 1780 and 1850. He notes that the largest expansion of prosecutions for `homosexual offences produced a corresponding shift in the status and representation of homosexual desire'. Cocks suggests that the later Laboucherie Amendment of 1884 constituted a continuing process of definition and regulation of ideas surrounding normative and non-normative sexuality. Such ideas were circulating, he suggests, since the 1780s, and as early as the mid-sixteenth century. See Cocks, Nameless Offences: Homosexual Desire in the Nineteenth Century (London and New York: Tauris, 2003), pp. 8, 17-8.

41

11 representative of a cohesive and stable collective consciousness. 45 Taken at face value, parliamentary debates present an accurate reference point both for individual attitudes, and thus members' `true' feelings, but also reveal a more broadly espoused societal reaction to ideas surrounding `homosexuality'.

Yet, parliamentary debates must be treated more reflexively and considered in increasingly theoretical contexts. Analyses should take into account the complex and discursive relationships between text, discourse and performance which characterise the record. Since Hansard records parliamentary debates, historians access perfo