Introduction
1. Preface
I recall my father talking many years ago about the two men he regarded as the greatest of all Italians: Giuseppe Garibaldi, for single-handedly uniting Italy and, my favourite, Antonio Gramsci the Sardinian communist who gave his life fighting for the Italian workers. The stories about the workers' takeover of the Turin works, the fights in the streets with the Fascisti, and Gramsci's furtive trips back and forth between Italy and Moscow, constantly trying to evade Mussolini's bullies enthralled me. Years later I came to understand the life and intellectualism of the little Sardinian gobo,1 the hardship and trials of his young life, his frustrations and disappointments and, finally, his tragic last ten years in Mussolini's damp and cold prisons, suffering extraordinarily difficult conditions of severe neglect and deteriorating health, scribbling his political thoughts into dozens of notebooks until in 1937 he lost his battle with tuberculosis and died. Researching a Master's dissertation on Indonesia's role in ASEAN's formation and evolution led to a growing fascination with the Suharto New Order power structure and in particular the pervasive role of the state ideology Pancasila in Indonesian life.2 The research also led me unexpectedly back to Gramsci. Reading a recently published work by R. William Liddle on Indonesian political leadership and culture I came upon reference to what Liddle called the "currently popular Gramsciinfluenced approach" to cultural and class inequality that argued against class attitude and behaviour as strictly determined by socio-economic position.3 Following this line of thought led to Roger Simon's introduction to Gramsci's political thought and Gramsci's notions on the relationship between hegemony and ideology.4 The implication of a Gramsci-influenced approach became clear but equally so was its irrelevance to my work at that stage on Indonesia's role in ASEAN. Gramsci and Indonesia was going to have to be a project for the future.

Gobo: hunchback. Ross O. Casci, Master's Dissertation, Is there a long-term role for ASEAN in the aftermath of the Asian economic crisis?, 28 March 2001. 3 R. William Liddle, Leadership and Culture in Indonesian Politics, (Allen and Unwin, Sydney, 1996), p. 225. 4 Roger Simon, Gramsci's Political Thought: An Introduction, (Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1991).
2

1

1

As a powerful enabling discourse of unity and development, particularly appropriate to New Order Indonesia's complex pluralist society and its potential for division and instability, Pancasila appeared to perform the vital Gramscian legitimising function of providing the means by which the New Order could effectively craft mass socio-political consciousness and support for its developmental agendas. With their emphasis on economic breakdown and political collapse, contemporary writings understate the role of ideology in explaining the cataclysmic events of 1997/8 leading to President Suharto's resignation and the end of his New Order. The central purpose of this study is to test the hypothesis that Gramsci's ideologically-based theories of social politics provide the means to explain fully the end of Suharto's New Order; that Gramsci's hegemonic historic bloc model, with its clearly delineated overlapping and mutually inclusive economic, political, and ideological components, each powerfully informed by class-articulated ideology, offers a powerful and timely analytical framework to explain the rise and fall of Suharto's New Order. This thesis also provides an appropriate typology to explain the techniques of hegemonic refurbishment by which a dominant class crafted mass consciousness to sustain its ideological legitimacy. In 2003 after two years researching Gramsci's understanding of hegemony as a means of explaining the rise and fall of the Suharto New Order, and Gramsci's particular emphasis on the utility of ideology as hegemonic discourse, I read John Hilley's 2001 publication Malaysia, Mahathirism, Hegemony and the New Opposition.5 In terms of this thesis testing the value of a Gramscian perspective to explain the rise and fall of the Suharto New Order, Hilley's Mahathirist project offers some key insights.6 Hilley's analysis of Dr. Mahathir Mohamad's Malaysian hegemonic bloc not only provided a timely insight into the socio-political and cultural influences that inform an emergent counter-hegemony in the contemporary Southeast Asian context of Islamic resurgence and growing demands for neo-liberal reforms, but also tested Gramsci's political theories in a parallel socio-political environment to this Indonesian research. As well as testing the Gramscian perspective in a contemporary setting, Hilley's Mahathirist project also provided significant insights into a critical

5

John Hilley, Malaysia, Mahathirism, Hegemony and the New Opposition, (Zed Books, New York, 2001). 6 Detailed Chapter 1, section 2, p. 47 to section 2.2, p. 55. 2

aspect of this research: hegemonic refurbishment in response to potential counterhegemonic challenge. It is hardly surprising, given his state of health and the harsh conditions under which he laboured, that Gramsci's prison writings have been described as disjointed and not only difficult to interpret but tending to lend themselves to different interpretations and thus contradiction.7 His approach to social politics, that prioritised the needs of leaders by emphasising processes of cultural unification against a background of order, discipline, and unity, hinted strongly at authoritarianism. Yet while Gramsci's management of consent implies authoritarianism and seemingly contradicts his emphasis on the need to satisfy the general will his techniques of consent management find strong resonance with the empirical realities of sociopolitics under Suharto's New Order Indonesia. There are, prima facie, strong reasons for examining Gramsci in the Suharto New Order context. For example, although it is important to remember that Gramsci's concepts of hegemonic order were developed in a particular historic period, like his Italy of the 1920s and 1930s, the nation over which General Suharto imposed his New Order was in deep crisis, struggling to rationalise the roles of state and society, and came to be increasingly dominated by intrusive monopoly and investment capital.8 Moreover, the powerful role the New Order was to allocate to ideology, through the regime's representation of the state doctrine Pancasila to sustain their domination of Indonesian life for some three decades, mirrors Gramsci's ideological approach that addressed the issue of power and domination through the `lens of culture and ideology'.9 Transferring Gramsci's ideas to the contemporary world also faces the problem that his writings concerned crises of his particular time but there are nonetheless parallels between Gramsci's Italy of the 1920s and Suharto's New Order Indonesia. The Risorgimento had unified Italy's former disparate assemblage of independent states only fifty years earlier and Italy was still struggling with issues of socio-political and economic cohesion and they were occurring in Gramsci's time against a background of regime-imposed fascism. Suharto's Indonesia struggled with similar issues and the New Order solution was to impose upon its people an exclusive representation of the state ideology Pancasila. Notwithstanding the broad range of
James Martin, Gramsci's Political Analysis: A Critical Introduction, (Macmillan Press, London, 1998), p. 4. 8 Anne Showstack Sassoon, Approaches to Gramsci, (Writers and Readers, London, 1982), p. 97. 9 Martin, (1998), p. 2. 3
7

issues that informed his social and political thoughts (and the irrelevance of much of it to contemporary realities)10 at the very heart of Gramsci's social politics, therefore, are theories attuned to post-independence Indonesian politics: the use of power and its close association with ideology and culture. Gramsci's concept of hegemony intellectual and moral leadership through political alliances underpinned by a struggle for ideological domination - stands out from much of his writings and carries relevance to a socio-political analysis concerning Indonesia where the social politics of power, cultural identity and unity have dominated the mass politics of post-colonial development. Gramsci's preoccupation with state-building and cultural unification, although originally set in the specific environment of post-World War One Italy, nonetheless, powerfully compliments contemporary analysis of similar issues in the context of post-independence Southeast Asia as Hilley has shown in his study of Mahatharist Malaysia. Aspects of Gramsci's theories on power and its relationship to ideology similarly underpin the nation-building/ideological/cultural rationalisation perspective this thesis employs to explain Suharto's New Order Indonesia. When the realities under enquiry are firmly premised, as they were under the Suharto New Order, on a hegemonic duality of political power and the crafting of the people's socio-political consciousness through ideological discourse, it is no less appropriate to reconstruct and reassert Gramsci to analyse the processes involved: representing the politics of the past in modern terms by reasserting Gramsci's socio-political model can only but expand the contemporary explanatory framework. By contrasting the Gramscian model with the Indonesian context, this thesis offers an explicitly ideological approach to explain the basis for the Suharto New Order's formation in 1967, the regime's domination of Indonesian life for some
The factory movement (Roger Simon, Gramsci's Political Thought: An Introduction, (Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1991), pp. 78-86, Quinton Hoare, (Ed.), Antonio Gramsci: Selections From Political Writings, (Intervention, New York, 1977), pp. 310-321), the philosophy of praxis (Adolfo Sanchez, The Philosophy of Praxis, (Merlin, London, 1977), the role of `super-structures' in capitalist society, the political party as the modern `Prince' (Martin, (1998), pp. 89-114, Benedetto Fontana, Hegemony and Power: on the Relationship Between Gramsci and Machiavelli, (University of Minnesota Press, London, 1993), Antonio Gramsci, Prison Notebooks, translated by J. Buttigieg, (Ed.), (Columbia University Press, London, 1966), No. 5, para. 127, Simon, (1991), pp. 100-107), the Southern Italian question, Quinton Hoare and Nowell Smith, (Eds.), Antonio Gramsci: Selections From the Prison Notebooks, (Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1971), pp. 70-4, 92-9), Marxist revolutionary transition to socialism (Joseph Femia, Gramsci's Political Thought: Hegemony, Consciousness and the Revolutionary Process, (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981), Chantal Mouffe, (Ed.), Gramsci and Marxist Theory, (Routledge and Keegan Paul, London, 1979), Simon, (1991), pp. 47-51, A. Showstack Sassoon, (Ed.), Approaches to Gramsci, (Writers and Readers, London, 1982), the study of philosophy Hoare, (1971), pp. 323-77), and on Americansim and Fordism (Hoare, (1971), pp. 277-316). 4
10

three decades, and eventual collapse in 1997/8. The thesis is premised on the notion that Antonio Gramsci's socio-political theories based upon the crafting of mass consciousness through ideology provide a more comprehensive model for explaining the rise and fall of the Suharto New Order than the prevailing twin economic and political transition crises approach; the twin-crises approach neglects the profound influence of consensual societal subordination through the representation of ideology, specifically the New Order's rendering of the state ideology Pancasila, and the doctrine's deep institutionalization of the processes that dominated all aspects of Indonesian life.11 Through his social politics of hegemony and hegemonic order, his theoretical construct the historic bloc, and his ideas on the use of ideology as an enabling discourse to organize hegemonic moral and intellectual legitimacy, Antonio Gramsci provides a powerful analytical perspective for such research. Gramsci's observations on hegemonic order offer highly useful and appropriate insights into explaining the behaviour of the Suharto New Order. Gramsci's theories focus on the processes by which power is shared between those at the centre and those on the periphery of socio-political and economic influence but what is specific about his model and heightens its relevance in the Indonesian context is the essential role he attributes to ideology. Ideology in the Gramscian schema plays a vital validating role in establishing and sustaining processes that rationalize power allocation between the centre and the periphery that, on the face of it, is not dissimilar to the techniques employed by Suharto's New Order in representing the state ideology Pancasila to legitimize his regime's authority. As Fontana puts it, Gramsci provides insights into the techniques and machinations of ruling elites as they employ the "causatory agents of consensual persuasion legitimized by ideology" and directive
11 Pancasila consists of five principles originally included in the Indonesian constitution of 1945: belief in God, a just and civilized humanitarianism, national unity, Indonesian democracy through consultation and consensus, and social justice. The first principle of Pancasila, belief in God, was a proclamation of Indonesia as a `religious' state, though not based on any particular faith. Indonesia would be a religious state but not `secular' or `Islamic.' Secularism had been thoroughly discredited by its association with communism and in recent years negatively associated with liberal democracy. The second principle called for a just and civilized humanitarianism. The third principle, national unity, demanded that regional and ethnic loyalties be foregone and that allegiance is to the unitary Indonesian state. The fourth principle committed the state to an Indonesian style democracy featuring musyawarah (consultation) and mufacat (consensus) representing patterns of behaviour derived from traditional Javanese village life. Being both Islamic terms they assured those wanting an Islamicorientated state that their concerns and beliefs would be accommodated within a Pancasila state. As interpreted by both Sukarno and Suharto, the principle argues that Western forms of parliamentary or party democracy are incompatible with traditional forms of Indonesian decision-making. The fifth principle, social justice, assumes a goal of economic and social egalitarianism and prosperity for Indonesia. According to the principle, the state exists for the well-being of the collective rather than the individual and ideologically justifies a direct role for the state in the national economy.

5

moral and intellectual leadership to establish and sustain their hegemony.12 A ruling elite's use of such processes and techniques are highly relevant to this research because they appear to closely match the behaviour of the Suharto New Order in its quest for social stability and conformity to underpin its developmental agendas. Moreover, the Suharto New Order's use of Pancasila as the discourse of ideological legitimacy by evoking the powerful symbolism of tradition and culture provides an important contemporary context in which to test the Gramscian model. Weighing the Gramscian model in the Suharto New Order context also offers valuable insights into what would appear to be a legitimate means of arriving at mass cohesion and sociopolitical development in the face of potentially problematic ethno-cultural diversity. Gramsci's social politics focus on the domestic realm of culture and ideology as the site upon which political contestation takes place and when it becomes necessary to reconfigure and rationalise cultural and political demands he looks to the nature of effective ideological leadership in that arena for solutions.13 Prima facie Gramsci's ideologically-based model also offers a relevant methodology for explaining the Suharto regime's rise and fall: it was the New Order's representation of the state ideology as discourse across the sum of Indonesia's socio-political, economic and cultural life that enabled their authority to be established and unite Indonesia's potentially problematic diverse society behind modernization and developmental agendas. While global issues contributed dramatically to domestic economic and political crises during the mid-1990s they were, nonetheless, in Gramscian terms, secondary and his insights suggest that they should have been countered through techniques and processes of hegemonic refurbishment. Gramsci's emphasis on the cultural/ideological, formulated in the context of early Twentieth Century Italy, may appear dated in the contemporary context but the perspective is prima facie highly appropriate to the Suharto New Order where elements of the cultural/ideological, carefully crafted by the ruling order, legitimized a unified secular-nationalist-development-state approach in the socio-political environment of a significant majority Muslim society split by profound theological divisions. Moreover, Gramsci's insights into a schema by which capitalism could survive if not flourish in the modern bourgeoisie democracies he saw blossoming in
Benedetto Fontana, Hegemony and Power: on the Relation between Gramsci and Machiavelli, (University of Minnesota Press, London, 1990), p. 140. 13 James Martin, Gramsci's Political Analysis: A Critical Introduction, (St. Martin's Press, London, 1998), p. 166. 6
12

the industrializing West of his time readily transfer to the post-WW 2 era of Southeast Asian capitalist development.14 The political neutrality of his model of hegemonic order also continues to be borne out today by its acceptance in right-wing circles as a legitimate method by which strong leaderships of modernizing states might gain political legitimacy to acquire and hold on to political power.15 As a contemporary Gramsci-ist elegantly puts it, the right has seemingly grown comfortable with the array of methods used by modern institutions of the state to sustain hegemonic order through civil society by "shaping the cognitive and effective structures" through which contemporary societies are obliged to perceive and evaluate "problematic social reality".16 The crafting of culture and ideology into an exclusive rendering of Pancasila as the official state ideology provided the Suharto New Order with the means to influence all aspects of mass socio-political behaviour: Gramsci's politics of the "newly emergent yet marginalized rather than the powerful and prestigious" where everything, including economics and ideology, becomes political, offers highly useful insights into understanding the nature of the processes such influence required.17 In the Gramscian schema, the search for hegemonic legitimacy took place across the totality of economic, political, and cultural/ideological life. This research therefore needs to establish the extent to which Suharto New Order structures processes and behaviour contrasted the Gramscian model of hegemonic order in demonstrating legitimacy across each of the regime's economic, political and ideological forms. The strong ideological orientation of a Gramscian perspective also provides a series of useful explanatory processes relevant to the impact of the contemporary resurgence of socio-political Islam and the global spread of liberal democratic ideals. Both issues had a profound impact upon Indonesia during the late 1980s, ultimately challenging the regime's legitimacy and leading to hegemonic obsolescence and the Suharto New Order collapsing in 1998.

David McLellan, Marxism after Marx, (McMillan, London, 1998), p. 204. Rob van Kranenburg, `Whose Gramsci? Right-wing Gramscism', International Gramsci Society Newsletter, March 1999, Number 9, pp. 14-8. 16 van Kranenburg, (1999), p. 16. 17 Dante Germino, Antonio Gramsci: Architect of a New Politics, (Louisiana State University Press, London, 1990), p. 253.
15

14

7

2. Thesis
It is standard among writers and scholars on the Suharto New Order that collapse in 1998 came about through twin crises of economic breakdown, initiated by a currency `contagion'18 spreading from Thailand in 1996 through Southeast Asia into Indonesia from 1997,19 and political collapse following overwhelming mass societal demands for economic, political, and human rights reform and regime change.20 New Order economic and socio-political cohesion had come under increasing strain during
18 The term `contagion' was employed by various economic analysts to describe the currency and banking crisis that swept out of Thailand. The term usefully described the transmission of the corrupting influence of neighbouring currencies contacting each other in the manner of a disease. 19 Meitzner describes the economic crisis that led to Suharto resigning on 21 May, 1998 as having deepened from mid-August 1997 in four phases; first the massive devaluation of the Rupiah in August, second, further financial shocks in December 1997 with rumors about Suharto's failing health, a third phase in late February 1998 brought about by massive student reaction to the failing economy, and a fourth phase in the first week of May 1998 when the IMF-directed abolition of fuel subsidies triggered popular riots in Medan. Marcus Meitzner, `From Suharto to Habibie: the Indonesian Armed Forces and political Islam during transition', in Geoff Forrester, (Ed.), Post-Suharto Indonesia: Renewal or Chaos? (Crawford House Publishing, Bathhurst, 1999), pp. 66-76; Michael Vatikiotis, Indonesian Politics under Suharto: The Rise and Fall of the New Order, (Routledge, London, 1998), pp.xvii-xix; Far Eastern Economic Review, 22, May, 4. 11, 18, September, 23, October, 13, 20, November, 18 December, 1997, (p.70), 22, 29, January, 19, February, 16, April, 1998 (p.59); H. W. Arndt and Hal Hill, Southeast Asia's Economic Crisis: Origins, lessons, and the Way Forward, (Allan and Unwin, Singapore, 1999), pp. 16-28; M. T. Daly and M. I. Logan, Reconstructing Asia: The Economic Miracle That Never Was, The Future That Is, (RMIT University Press, Melbourne, 1998), pp. 13-22; Clark D. Neher, Southeast Asia in the New International Era, (Westview, Oxford, 1999), pp. 113-4; Philippe F. Delhaise, Asia in Crisis: The Implosion of the Banking and Finance Systems, (Wiley and Sons, Singapore, 1998), pp. 131-141; Francois Godement, The Downsizing of Asia, (Routledge, London, 1999), pp. 82-91 and pp. 161-2; Andrew MacIntyre, `Political Institutions and the Economic Crisis in Thailand and Indonesia', in T. Pemple, The Politics of the Asian Economic Crisis, (Cornell, London, 1999), pp. 158-60; David Bourchier and Vedi R. Hadiz (Eds), Indonesian Politics and Society: A Reader, (Routledge Curzon, London, 2003), pp. 18-21; Ahmad D. Habir, `Conglomerates: All in the Family?' in Donald K. Emmerson (Ed), Indonesia Beyond Suharto; Polity, Economy, Society, Transition, (M. E. Sharpe, London, 1999), pp. 197-201; Peter Searle, `Ethno-religious Conflicts; Rise or Decline? Recent Developments in Southeast Asia', Contemporary Southeast Asia, Vol. 24, No. 1, April 2002, pp. 6-12; Jamie Mackie, `Tackling the Chinese Problem', in Geoff Forrester, (Ed.), PostSoeharto Indonesia: Renewal or Chaos? (Crawford House, Bathurst, 1999), pp. 10-15. 20 Fear of mass unrest panicked the elites and contributed to both sides of the political establishment (power-holders and opposition) withdrawing their support for Suharto. Young, (1999), p. 76; MacLane, `Mass Politics and Political Change in Indonesia', in Arief Budiman, Barbara Hartley, and Damien Kingsbury (Eds), Reformasi: Crisis and Change in Indonesia, (Monash Asia Institute, Clayton, 1999), pp. 239-50. On the inadequate `establishment' and elite response to the crisis; Max Lane, `Mass Politics and Political Change in Indonesia', Budiman, Hartley and Kingsbury, (1999), pp.240-250; Watson, (2002), pp. 120-1; Vincent Boudreau, `Diffusing Democracy? People Power in Indonesia and the Philippines', Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, Vol. 31, No. 4, 1999, pp. 3-18; Young, (1999), pp. 70-73; Walters, (1999), p.60; Metzner, (1999), pp. 85-7; Hara, (2001), p. 320. For the politics of the crisis see MacIntyre, (1999), pp. 143-162; FEER, 12 February, 1998, pp. 16-7, 14 May, 1998, pp. 22-4; Daly and Logan, (1998), p. 21; Delhaise, (1998), p. 136-7; Godement, (1999), p. 162-4; Vatikiotis, (1998), pp. 218-232; Bourchier and Hadiz, (2003), pp. 278-283; R. William Liddle, `Regime: The New Order', in Donald K. Emmerson (Ed), Indonesia Beyond Suharto: Polity, Economy, Society and Transition, (M. E. Sharpe, London, 1999), pp. 68-70; editorial, Jakarta Post, 8 January, 1998; Edward Aspinall, `The broadening base of political opposition in Indonesia', in Gary Rodan (Ed), Political Oppositions in Industrialising Asia, (Routledge, London, 1996), pp. 228-231; J. Kristiadi, `The Future Role of ABRI in Politics', in Geoff Forrester (Ed), Post-Soeharto Indonesia: Renewal or Chaos? (Crawford House, Bathurst, 1999), pp. 55-06.

8

the previous decade21 from demands for regime change and economic and sociopolitical reform and these issues contributed to the regime's eventual collapse in 1998. The catalyst for economic failure was the Thai currency `contagion' stimulating a growing economic crisis in Indonesia from early 1996, reinforcing the socio-political unpopularity of the Suharto regime and ultimately leading to the end of the Suharto New Order with his resignation in 1998. On their own these events neither adequately nor fully explain the failure of the Suharto regime after three decades of domination, relative social stability, and economic progress. This thesis argues that the failure of the `twin-crises' theme to adequately explain what occurred is that prevailing views do not take into account vital factors of ideology and culture and their use in crafting consensual mass subordination, specifically the significance and influence of the New Order regime's representation of the state ideology Pancasila as an instrument of hegemonic discourse to legitimize its nation-building agendas. The prevailing twincrises explanation therefore neglects the profound role ideology played over some thirty years in morally and intellectually legitimizing New Order hegemony and enabling socio-political stability and a high level of socio-political and economic development. This thesis examines the argument that the twin-crises approach does not adequately address the shortcomings in the New Order's representation of ideology and its contribution to the circumstances that led to Suharto resigning and proposes that it is to Gramsci and his model of hegemonic order that we should turn for a more comprehensive explanation. Antonio Gramsci's social politics dynamically link ideology and culture to creating and sustaining regime hegemonic legitimacy and this thesis tests his approach in the context of the socio-political events that reached their cataclysmic conclusion in Indonesia during 1997/8. Explaining the rise and fall of the Suharto
For the origins of the economic crisis in the late 1980s and subsequent calls for market reform and deregulation see: Soestrato, (1998), p. 853; A. MacIntyre (Ed), Business and Government in Industrialising Asia, (Allen and Unwin, St., Leonards, 1994), pp. 11-2; Richard Robison, `Politics and Markets in Indonesia's Post-oil Era', in Gray Rodan, Kevin Hewison and Richard Robison (Eds), The Political Economy of Southeast Asia: An Introduction, (Oxford University Press, Melbourne, 1997), pp. 34-63; Anthony Rowley, `Who's who in Jakarta?' FEER, 1 September, 1987, pp. 72-3; Soestrato, (1989), pp. 858-9; Richard Borsuk, `Markets: The Limits of Reform', in Donald K. Emmerson, Indonesia Beyond Suharto; Polity, Economy, Society, Transition, (M. E. Sharpe, London, 1999), pp. 140-2; H. W. Arndt and Hal Hill, Southeast Asia's Economic Crisis: Origins, Lessons and the Way Forward, (Allen and Unwin, Singapore, 1999), p. 16; Neher, (1999), pp. 110-112; Delhaise, (1998), pp. 129-131; David Martin Jones, Political Development in Pacific Asia, (Polity Press, Cambridge, 1997), pp. 122-128; Vatikiotis, (1998), pp. 138-189; Habir, (1999), pp. 183-197; Richard Borsuk, `Markets; the Limits of Reform' in Donald K. Emmerson (Ed), Indonesia Beyond Suharto; Polity, Economy, Society and Transition, (M. E. Sharpe, London, 1999), pp. 136-67; editorial Republika, 30 March, 1998. 9
21

New Order using Gramsci's acute sensitivity to the relationship between culture, ideology, hegemony, counter-hegemony and the phenomenon of mass consciousness over a distinct historic period offers a means of prioritizing domestic and cultural factors that tend to be neglected in the simplistic twin-crises approach that over emphasizes external global factors.22 Gramsci's socio-politics of hegemonic construction, containment, and challenge and, in particular the vital role of ideology as a `binding glue'23 of socio-political unity to institutionalize and legitimize class domination and societal cohesion (Gramsci's `historic bloc'),24 offers the ideal model against which to contrast the rise and fall of the Suharto New Order in the face of socio-political and economic challenge. The research centres on Gramsci's notion that hegemonic continuance requires ongoing reaffirmation of moral and intellectual leadership constantly readdressed on the basis of new and changing patterns of sociopolitical and economic alliances that responded to change. In Gramsci's analysis, a hegemonic order must remain prepared and able to reconstruct itself when challenged by new socio-political circumstances and new realities. As well as renegotiating and re-balancing societal forces and alliances, a crisis of regime hegemony (in the face of a latent counter-hegemony) suggests hegemonic obsolescence or decay and requires what Gramsci describes as ideological refurbishment through re-articulating a regime's ideological legitimacy.25 To Gramsci, a class cannot achieve or maintain its hegemonic position if it confines itself merely to its own class interests; it must go outside immediate self interest and attract to its cause "popular and democratic aspirations" through ideological persuasion which might in itself demand the re-adjustment and re-negotiation of both intra-regime

22 Carl Boggs, `What Gramsci Means Today', in Douglas Dowd, (Ed.), Understanding Capitalism: Critical Analysis From Karl Marx to Amartya Sen, (Pluto Press, London, 2002), pp. .57-8. 23 Esteve Morera, Gramsci's Historicism; A Realist Perspective, (Harvester Wheatshaft, London, 1990), p. 190. 24 A Gramscian `historic bloc' represents the hegemonic activity of a historic period during which the economic affairs of Marx's `structure' and the politics and ideology of his `superstructure' overlap into an organic system of social alliances held together by a common ideology and a common culture. As such, the `historic bloc', an analytical construct comprising three overlapping forms (its economic, political, and ideological), represents hegemonic order in which a ruling class `leads' its allies and supporters while `dominating' its opponents. Without the element of consent implied in leadership, society is left with no `ethico-political' direction but is merely under a form of `precarious domination' that is continually , and disharmoniously, questioned by those dominated. The Gramscian historic bloc is explained in further detail in Chapter 1, section 1.7, pp. 37-39. Luciano Pellicani, Gramsci: An Alternative Communism? (Hoover Institute Press, Stanford, 1981), pp. 31-2; Anne Showstack Sassoon, Gramsci's Politics, (Croom Helm, London, 1980), pp. 121-2. 25 Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, translated by Quinton Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith, (Eds.), (Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1977), pp. 180-3.

10

and top down key societal alliances.26 Power relations in the context of regime hegemony generally necessitate some kind of societal trade-offs but an emergent counter-hegemony would not necessarily require, as Chantel Mouffe puts it, replacing the hegemonic order's world-view with a "completely new" one.27 In the context of the Suharto New Order, faced as it was with a crisis of moral and intellectual legitimacy, a transformation of existing ideological elements would have sufficed had those processes been adequate to address and ameliorate the economic and sociopolitical challenges of the 1990s by offering a more inclusive re-articulation of the state ideology Pancasila. The necessary socio-political and economic concessions on the face of it appear to have be