1

Historicising the Feminist: A Study of Mary Wollstonecraft's Political and Discursive Contexts
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in History at University of Waikato by Charlotte McDougall

The University of Waikato 2006

I ABSTRACT

This thesis has investigated the life and publications of Mary Wollstonecraft. The thesis is divided in to three chapters the first chapter explores the political and social context of late Eighteenth century England in which Wollstonecraft lived the majority of her life. It then moves on to discuss the `Revolution Controversy' and Wollstonecraft's contribution to that debate. Giving specific attention to A Vindication of the Rights of Man as it is Wollstonecraft's first political publication, and was the first published response to Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France. Without first publishing A Vindication of the Rights of Man, Wollstonecraft could not have published her most famous work. Next the second chapter investigates Eighteenth century education, and how Wollstonecraft ideas on changing the nature of education would help reform society in her eyes. Education was recognized as having special significance by many Enlightenment philosophers, this thesis looks at the contribution of John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau to educational theory, and they ways in which Wollstonecraft responded to their ideas. In the final chapter the inclusive nature of Wollstonecraft's gender theory is considered. Wollstonecraft is widely recognised as publishing what became for many the founding document of modern western feminism. What is given less recognition is that Wollstonecraft was in fact interested in broad social reform, similar to many other Enlightenment philosophers, Wollstonecraft's social theory included changing education and socialisation for both women and men. Society could not be reformed without changing social and educational practices with regard to both

II men and women. Wollstonecraft furthered the contemporary debate on the rights of man to include the rights of woman. Wollstonecraft criticised the unnatural distinctions of gender and class, setting out in both Vindications the negative consequences for the character of both men and women. Another less recognised aspect of Wollstonecraft's philosophy which this thesis has highlighted is the vital role that religion played, and its implications for her ideas. This aspect of Wollstonecraft's thought has tended to be over looked by many Wollstonecraft scholars, who try to place Wollstonecraft in some kind of political and social continuum which I think misses the revolutionary and far sighted nature of Wollstonecraft's philosophy. In taking a historicist approach or understanding to Wollstonecraft, by reading Wollstonecraft in the terms of the political and social environment of the late eighteenth century, it becomes easier to understand the radical nature of Wollstonecraft's ideas, and the personal hardships she faced as both a woman and a member of the lower middle class.

1 INTRODUCTION

The intention in this thesis is to examine the political and social thought of Mary Wollstonecraft in light of the `Revolutionary Moment', and the opportunity it offered her to envisage a society where all people were equal under God. I emphasise two aspects of the nature of Wollstonecraft's thought which have been given less notice by Wollstonecraft scholars, firstly: the central place that her religious belief held in Wollstonecraft's social and political philosophy. Secondly: the gender - inclusive nature of Wollstonecraft's ideas for social reform. Wollstonecraft could not have written A Vindication of the Rights of Woman without first writing A Vindication of the Rights of Man. Wollstonecraft's ideal society included equal employment opportunities and political and legal representation for all members of society, both rich and poor, and men and women. Quentin Skinner raises two issues that have been relevant in an enquiry in to a historical figure and their published works, Skinner discusses the idea that historians sometimes consider the significance of a work or individual in light of modern ideas and influences, leaving no place for the analysis of what the author intended at the time. Wollstonecraft has often been interpreted in this manner. Skinner suggests that intellectual biography is subject to the difficulty of the changing literal meaning of key terms. An extension of this is that such changed terms are then deployed anachronistically in an analysis of an historical individual.1 This is relevant for Wollstonecraft who is commonly considered or described as a feminist. This is not a term

1

Quentin Skinner, "Meaning and Understanding in the History of Ideas," History and Theory: Studies in the Philosophy of History 8, no. 1 (1969).

2 Wollstonecraft or her contemporaries would have been familiar with. The term `feminism' first appeared in an English Dictionary in 1851 and feminist, in 1894.2 While Wollstonecraft may in fact have been the `mother' of western feminism, this is not something she would have been aware of herself. Literature can not be removed from cultural practice. In reading and understanding Wollstonecraft, first as a lower middle class woman, with no legal or political representation outside of a male relative, then giving consideration to her position within Joseph Johnson's `literary family' and the ideas and individuals to which she was exposed. It may be possible to understand the way in which Wollstonecraft communicated her ideas. Wollstonecraft has been the subject of a number of good biographies, most recently Janet Todd and Lyndall Gordon I draw heavily on their work here.3 Mary Wollstonecraft was born in April 1759 in Spitalfields outside of London. Her mother Elizabeth Dixon was from Ballyshannon in Ireland, and her father Edward Wollstonecraft was the son of a prosperous Spitalfields manufacturer. Mary was the couples' second child and first girl. In 1765 the family, which now included two more daughters Eliza and Everina, shifted to Barking, where another son James was born. Then in 1768 the family shifted again to Beverely in Yorkshire, where they stayed for six years. Here the last child, Charles was born. As the oldest daughter, it Mary's duty to help her mother with household and family duties. These efforts were to go unrewarded, as the oldest child Edward (Ned) was Elizabeth's favourite. In Beverely Mary got the opportunity to attend the local parish school, but gained most of her knowledge through avid reading of any books she could obtain. Here Mary made friends with Jane Arden. Arden's family was
2 3

Oxford English Dictionary Online Janet Todd, Mary Wollstonecraft: A Revolutionary Life (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2000). And Lyndall Gordon, Mary Wollstonecraft: A New Genus (London: Little, Brown, 2005).

3 wealthier than the Wollstonecrafts and this was to create problems for the friendship, and provide a first lesson for Wollstonecraft in the unequal class structure of English society. As Mary matured she observed her mother's dependent and unhappy situation as a married woman. Her life involved both domestic drudgery and physical and verbal violence. As Edward Wollstonecraft Sr's farm failed and the family became more financially insecure, his drinking became chronic. When drunk he took these problems out first on his wife and then his daughter Mary when she came to the aid of her mother. When Mary was 15 the family returned to London, where life really began to offer her opportunities. There she was introduced to Mr and Mrs Clare. Mr Clare was a retired clergyman and the couple were childless. They offered Mary the emotional and intellectual support which was absent in her family life. One day Mary accompanied Mrs Clare to visit a Mr and Mrs Blood. Like Mary's mother, Mrs Blood had a large family, and an alcoholic husband. Mary developed a close friendship with Fanny Blood. Like Wollstonecraft, Fanny was the oldest daughter and relegated to helping her mother take care of the family. Wollstonecraft's family moved again in 1776, this time to Laugharne in Wales. Wales did not offer Mary the same intellectual stimulation as London, and soon she considered leaving home. Aged 19 Wollstonecraft felt trapped in an unhappy and quarrelsome family. Her father had stopped working, and was home all the time, drinking and tyrannising over his wife and family. The family returned to London in 1778, the same year that Mary left home to become a lady's companion, to a Mrs Dawson in Bath. Being a lady's companion was one of the few respectable career options open to an unmarried lower middle class woman. This was not a happy experience for Mary; however, she was to witness the fashionable life of the aristocracy, from which she was

4 to formulate the beginning of her critique of social inequality. Mary was called from her employment with Mrs Dawson to nurse her dying mother. Elizabeth's dying words haunted the rest of her oldest daughter's short life: "A little patience and all will be over."4 This sentiment came to represent the life of the majority of women for Wollstonecraft. Following the death of Mrs Wollstonecraft the family went in their own directions, and Mr Wollstonecraft remarried. Mary joined the Blood family at Walham Green in London, taking charge of a new family, and continuing her programme of selfeducation through reading. Mary's independence and peace were shortlived. Her sister Eliza was unhappily married to Meredith Bishop, and following the birth of their first child, suffered a very bad bout of post natal depression. Bishop called on Wollstonecraft to come and nurse Eliza. In the absence of assistance from their brother Ned, Wollstonecraft removed Eliza from the house late at night, leaving behind the baby, which died soon after. Mary now had to support not only herself but also Eliza. With assistance from Mrs Clare and Mrs Burgh the widow of writer and clergyman James Burgh, Wollstonecraft, Fanny Blood and, Eliza founded a school for girls in Newington Green. The school prospered almost immediately. It was also during this time that Wollstonecraft was to meet the first of two men who made a great difference in her life. Dr Richard Price was a Dissenting Minister of a small chapel at Newington Green. Price was friendly with many of the leading political and philosophical figures of the day, a fellow of the Royal Society, and an authority on

4

Gordon, p.28

5 financial and scientific matters.5 During this time Wollstonecraft also befriended the Reverend Joshua Waterhouse. Fanny's suitor Hugh Skeys finally proposed in 1784 and Fanny accompanied him to Portugal. In Autumn 1785, leaving the school in the care of her sisters and Mrs Burgh, Wollstonecraft sailed to Portugal to nurse a pregnant and ailing Fanny. Fanny died soon after her arrival, again illustrating for Wollstonecraft the dependent and uncertain position suffered by the majority of women. Following the death of her closest friend Wollstonecraft returned to England to find that in her absence the school had been mismanaged and had to close. She then accepted a position as a governess, the last respectable position open to her as a middle class female. Wollstonecraft became the governess to the three youngest daughters of Lord and Lady Kingsborough, the largest estate holders in Ireland. Lord and Lady Kingsborough's marriage was arranged predominantly to combine the two estates: Lord Kingsborough had numerous liaisons with other women, and Lady Kingsborough was a harsh and distant mother to her daughters. Wollstonecraft was unhappy in her position but benefited from access to the large and well endowed library in the house. She also formed a close friendship with the oldest of the three girls, Margaret, with whom she would continue to correspond following her dismissal. Wollstonecraft attempted to reform her charges and further the partial education they had received before her arrival. During her time in Ireland, Wollstonecraft also witnessed the grinding poverty and injustice experienced by the peasants as a consequence of the hierarchical nature of the society. The Kingsboroughs and Wollstonecraft went to Dublin for the season, while here Wollstonecraft had a chance for social contact which had been absent at Michaelstown.

5

For a well developed analysis of Richard Price see D O Thomas, The Honest Mind: The Thought and Work of Richard Price (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977).

6 In 1787 following her dismissal, Wollstonecraft returned to Joseph Johnson and his social circle. In contrast to the Kingsboroughs and their privileged social circle, the Dissenting circles in which Wollstonecraft mainly socialised experienced and interpreted English politics and society differently. Excluded by the Test and Corporation Acts from an active political life, the Dissenters were critical of many aspects of English political and social practice. Wollstonecraft would come to share their ideals. Johnson published Wollstonecraft's Thoughts on the Education of Daughters in 1787, and then soon after published Mary: A Fiction, Wollstonecraft's attempt to imagine a different kind of heroine than those common in novels aimed at girls and women. Soon after, Wollstonecraft wrote Original Stories From Real Life, inspired by Thomas Day's Sandford and Merton. In 1788 Joseph Johnson and Thomas Christie founded the Analytical Review to which Wollstonecraft became a regular contributor, and this offered here some financial security: she became an independent woman. Through Johnson's frequent dinner gatherings Wollstonecraft came in to contact with many of the leading artists, writers, and free thinkers from England, Europe, and America. On the 14th July 1789 the world as England knew it changed for ever ­ ordinary French men and women stormed the Bastille, beginning the French Revolution. For Mary, this heralded the potential for a new era in social and political relations. In November during the commemoration of the Glorious Revolution, Dr Richard Price preached a sermon on the Love of the Country. Thus commenced in England what is now known as the Revolution Controversy. Edmund Burke responded to Price's sermon with Reflections on the Revolution in France. The first of many responses to Burke was Wollstonecraft's. In defence of her mentor Price, Wollstonecraft wrote A Vindication of

7 the Rights of Man, composed in about 6 weeks, and initially published anonymously. Her work received many positive reviews, which led to Johnson publishing a second edition attributing the work to Wollstonecraft.6 This positive response to her first political work, gave Wollstonecraft the confidence to venture further in to the world of political publication from which women were generally excluded. In 1792 Wollstonecraft's most famous work, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, was published. Wollstonecraft dedicated the book to Tallyrand, who was involved in shaping French Revolutionary government policy. Wollstonecraft hoped to influence French ideas on female education and citizenship, as well as comment generally on gender relations and their importance for social progress. The second Vindication confuted the ideas concerning female character and education of many male writers of the eighteenth century, the most famous of whom was Jean Jacques Rousseau. Although Wollstonecraft approved of some of Rousseau's political and social theories, she was disappointed by Sophie, Rousseau's ideal woman as delineated in Emile (1762). Wollstonecraft felt that Rousseau perpetuated the false values and virtues which impeded social progress. Wollstonecraft travelled to revolutionary France, and arrived as the course of the Revolution was changing and taking on a more violent nature. What Wollstonecraft witnessed in Paris was to alter her ideas on politics and progress, but never entirely dampened her belief in a future state of social equality. During her residence in Paris Wollstonecraft had contact with many leading Girondian members of the Convention and attended meetings herself. Of special note was Madame Roland with whom
6

Sylvana Tomaselli, ed., Mary Wollstonecraft: A Vindication of the Rights of Man and a Vindication of the Rights of Woman, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). p.xxii

8 Wollstonecraft shared ideas of gender equality. As the Revolution descended into the `Terror' and many of Wollstonecraft's Girondian friends fell victim to the `National Razor', Wollstonecraft began to lose hope for the creation of a new politically and socially representative society in France. At this time she was introduced to Gilbert Imlay with whom she had her first real relationship, and a daughter Fanny, named after her lost friend. Imlay protected Wollstonecraft by listing her as his wife and giving her American citizenship. This gave her security when France went to war with England. Imlay's business ventures were unsuccessful however, and he soon left Mary, and travelled to England to further his contacts. During this time baby Fanny contracted smallpox but survived due to Wollstonecraft's careful and practical care. In April 1795 Wollstonecraft followed Imlay to England. Imlay had begun an affair with another woman. He offered Wollstonecraft financial support for Fanny but ended their personal relationship. Wollstonecraft attempted suicide in May 1795 but was rescued. Imlay, in part to help Wollstonecraft recover, and to resolve a business matter of his own, dispatched her to Scandinavia. This journey would result in the publication of Wollstonecraft's final and most popular work during her lifetime. Scandinavia offered Wollstonecraft opportunities to observe and comment on features both positive and negative in eighteenth century society, and to envisage a future time of social equality. On her return to England in October, Imlay failed to meet her at Dover. Soon after her return she again attempted suicide, this time she jumped from Putney Bridge, again she was rescued. Her relationship with Imlay ended in acrimony, and she returned to the support and protection of Joseph Johnson, and again became editorial assistant to the Analytical Review. At the

9 same time she was reacquainted with William Godwin. This time they were more amicable than at the previous meeting in 1791. This was to briefly offer Wollstonecraft what Gordon describes as the most fruitful experiment, the most successful personal relationship.7 Fanny who was now 3 years old took an instant liking to Godwin and played a part in cementing his relationship with her mother. Wollstonecraft and Godwin were to influence each other ­ being in some ways opposites they complemented each other. They married when Wollstonecraft was six months pregnant on the 29th of March 1797. On Wednesday the 30th of August, Wollstonecraft gave birth to another girl, who was named Mary, known to later generations as Mary Shelley and author of Frankenstein. Her mother died of septicaemia on the 10th of September, leaving behind a grieving husband, two young daughters, and an unfinished novel. Godwin published the novel with the alternate endings Wollstonecraft had written and not decided upon. He then wrote Memoirs of the Author of `The Rights of Woman' in which he gave an honest and sentimental exploration of the life of his late wife. Godwin seriously misjudged the times and the increasing conservatism of society. The Memoirs ensured that Wollstonecraft was remembered initially not for the positive contributions she made to society, and the support she gave to her friends and family, but for the socially and morally unorthodox events of her personal life. Following Godwin's Memoirs, Wollstonecraft's work was ignored or ridiculed. Early First Wave Feminists did not want to be associated with the ideas of Wollstonecraft, because of this, although they shared some of her ideals. Wollstonecraft was discovered by some individual women through their own research most notably Emma Goldman and Virginia Woolf who both discuss Wollstonecraft in their published works. In the 1960's and 70's during second wave
7

Gordon, Mary Wollstonecraft: A New Genus. p.330

10 feminism Wollstonecraft was finally recognised, evidenced by a spate of biographies and studies. Most of these have focussed on Wollstonecraft's place within the feminist canon. While not wishing to diminish the significance of this scholarship, it is also important to view Wollstonecraft in the political and discursive contexts of her time. This thesis attempts to supply some of this significant context in the hope that doing so emphasises still further the achievements of this remarkable thinker. In the first chapter of this thesis I give a brief history of seventeenth and eighteenth century England, as it relates to an understanding of the published works of Mary Wollstonecraft. Then I move on in the second part of the chapter to explore the Revolution Controversy and the implications for England of the French Revolution. Firstly I discuss Price's Sermon, then the famous response of Edmund Burke. Next I discuss A Vindication of the Rights of Man, and the rare opportunity that the Revolution offered a woman to publish a work of a political nature. I give attention to the way in which Wollstonecraft counters Burke's use of sentimental language, and his defence of a political and social system that perpetuated poverty, inequality, and the false distinctions of property, rank, and birth. Finally I give a brief discussion of Burke's most well known respondent Thomas Paine's Rights of Man. Chapter 2 looks at education - both the education that existed in eighteenth century England and the ways in which education was envisaged by Wollstonecraft as a tool for social change. Education was a favourite topic of philosophers attempting to change the nature of society. I discuss the important educational experiments undertaken during the 1650's. Following examining the revolutionary visions of John Locke and Jean Jacques Rosseau, this chapter explores how Wollstonecraft extended the ideas of

11 Locke and Rousseau to include girls as well as boys. Both boys and girls shared a rational nature from God, and should both have an education, in order to reach their full potential. This then is the starting point for chapter three which is concerned with Wollstonecraft's gender vision and its divergence from the social reality which she experienced. In her published works, Wollstonecraft was concerned with the ways in which her society maintained women in positions of dependence. Wollstonecraft's gender project was wider than this, however. This chapter illustrates Wollstonecraft's ultimate concern not with female equality but with the reformation of human society.

12 CHAPTER ONE: ENGLISH POLITICS I This chapter has two purposes. Firstly it will to introduce and outline the political and social context in which it is necessary to read and understand Mary Wollstonecraft and her social milieu. Following this historical discussion will be an exploration of the early Revolution Controversy. Within this discussion I will explore the contribution of Wollstonecraft's mentor Richard Price and Price's prominent opponent Edmund Burke. I will then examine Wollstonecraft's A Vindication of the Rights of Man in the context of the issues raised by Price and Burke. Wollstonecraft's social and religious theory differed markedly from Burke's and I will illustrate how Wollstonecraft refuted Burke's interpretation of politics, society, religion, and virtue. Lastly this chapter looks at Thomas Paine. In many respects the English were some of the freest citizens in eighteenth century Europe. England experienced civil war and turbulent social change during the civil war and Interregnum of the seventeenth century. Then in 1688 without violence or bloodshed England replaced the unpopular Catholic monarch James II with William III, the Dutch Stadtholder in what was known as the Glorious Revolution. Despite this seemingly peaceful transition English society was divided by a number of factors that were to prove a recurring problem throughout the eighteenth century, and receive particular notice in light of first the American Revolution, and then the French Revolution. Following the execution of King Charles I in January 1649, a republic was established, during which time England experimented with different social and political

13 ideals. In this period a number of different Protestant sects arose. England's republic proved shortlived; at the Restoration of Charles II in 1660 there was a promise of peace and a return to social stability. Many problems faced the Cavalier Parliament: how to unite a factionalized nation, continue to build on the overseas expansion under the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, and ensure that England never again faced the political and social disruption of a revolution. Measures passed by the Cavalier Parliament to try to end religious and social division were to further enflame them in the course of the eighteenth century. The Clarendon Code as it was known comprised the Corporation Act (1661), the Act of Uniformity (1662), the Conventicle Act (1662), the Five Mile Act (1665), and the Test Acts (1661, 1673). Instead of returning England to a nation united under the Anglican religion of the Church of England, the Clarendon Code alienated the different Protestant religious sects, ensuring that religious dissent would continue to divide the English nation. The Corporation Act legislated that only people who had taken the sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the rites of the Church of England within the last year were eligible for civic or municipal office. Under the Test Act all office holders were required to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, repudiate the doctrine of transubstantiation and receive the sacrament according to the rites of the Church of England. This applied to both civic and military office holders. This resulted in Dissenters being excluded from positions in the military, government, and civic organizations such as the Bank of England, the South Sea Company, and as office holders in hospitals, alms- houses, and work- houses. 8

8

Goodwin, Albert. The Friends of Liberty: The English democratic movement in the age of the French revolution. Hutchinson & Co Ltd (London, 1979) p.77 B. W. Hill, ed., Edmund Burke on Government, Politics, and Society (Sussex: Harvester Press Ltd, 1975). Hill also explores the effects of the Test and Corporations Acts on English politics and economics pp.167-216

14 Charles II did not have a legitimate heir, his brother James was therefore in line for the throne. James was a Catholic. There were many attempts to politically exclude James from becoming King leading to division within both parliament and society over the legality of exclusion on religious grounds. 9 At the same time there was concern over the growing power of King Louis XIV of France, and the potential threat of a return to Catholicism. 10 King Charles died in 1685 and was succeeded by his brother James. In the same year King Louis revoked the Edict of Nantes which had protected the rights of French Protestants. Many Protestant refugees arrived in England.11 Fear of popery united different political and social factions in England, as King James attempted to rule with Royal Prerogative, ignoring the legal power of parliament. Mary of Modena, James' consort gave birth to an heir. This triggered what became known as the Glorious Revolution. Leading politicians in England invited William of Orange the Dutch stadtholder to invade and eject King James. 12 In November 1688, James abdicated and William became King of England. Despite the peaceful nature of the transition the political events following the Glorious Revolution did not in any way prove a permanent solution and continued previous political and social divisions, which would again prove divisive during the American and French Revolutions. The Bill of Rights negotiated in the revolutionary settlement of 1688-9 secured triennial parliaments, security of property, and broad toleration of religious dissent. William III accepted this and was responsible for initiating change in the financial structure of the English government and economy with the establishment of the Bank of England in 1694. According to Maurice Ashley,

9

Coward, p.285 Coward, p.274 11 Coward, p.274 12 Coward, p.300
10

15 William's main concern was the war in Europe, and preventing the French mastery of Europe. William proved an able general, but he was not a congenial King. He did not have good relations with members of government.13 Coward also highlights King William's determination to involve England in the European warfare against King Louis XIV and the threat of Catholic hegemony in Europe created political rivalry and division in parliament.14 Despite the political and social inequalities created by the Clarendon Code, religion and Enlightenment were in less conflict in England than in the Catholic nations. In many respects religion was a matter of private judgment and did not prevent the spread of ideas or concepts that questioned either religious or government authority. According to Porter "Enlightenment in Britain took place within, rather than against, Protestantism."15 Over the course of the eighteenth century England experienced what has become known as the Industrial Revolution which resulted in growing class identity in society. Urbanization caused by the rise of industry and increasing enclosure of common land in the countryside led to the growth of cities, in particular London. Mark Kishlansky describes London as "a world of its own"16 it was the political, legal, economic, and social capital of Great Britain. Asa Briggs argues that although there was no universal transformation, and England in the 1780s was still predominantly an agricultural and trading nation, she does point to the fact that industry was gradually developing however

13

Maurice Ashley, `The Stuarts', in The Lives of the Kings & Queens of England. Edited by Antonia Fraser (London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1993) pp.245-251 14 Coward, p.307 15 Porter, p.99 16 Kishlanksy, Mark. A Monarchy Transformed: Britain 1603-1714. Penguin Books, (London, 1996)

16 small and localised at first.17 In 1695 the Licensing Act lapsed and was not renewed, this resulted in an increasingly free press, the spread of ideas, and questioning of political and social inequalities with less fear of prosecution. 18 As the population of larger cities grew coffee houses, taverns, debating clubs, societies, and assembly rooms arose; leading to the increasing political awareness of urban dwellers through the spread of questions and theories on the nature of politics, religion, and society. These different social spaces, catering to varied class and political allegiances, provided a forum for discussion and the spread of theories and concepts related to political and social reform. Another factor resulting from increasing commercialization and industrialization was the rise of a middle class with financial capital not the traditional landed wealth of the aristocracy. Excluded from political representation and the social and familial networks of the aristocracy, both the working class and the middle class began to develop a sense of identity and class consciousness. Money was a way to increase one's standing in English society as class boundaries were less rigid in England than in Europe: "Men could not be parted from their property, capital was allowed to ferret where it would, and new riches could be manicured into respectability."19 Relationships of dependence in familial, social, and political relations, especially primogeniture, resulted in unnatural distinctions in society which would come under increasing scrutiny in light of specific events in the mid and late eighteenth century. Briggs develops a clear and precise summary of the slow transformation of English society at all levels. Kinship and family
Asa Briggs, The Age of Improvement 1783 ­ 1867. A History of England in Eleven Volumes, General Editor W.N. Medlicott. Longman London, first published 1959. This edition 1979. pp.17-18 18 Linda Colley identifies the lapse of the Licensing Act as the time when printing houses were established with more frequency in England and the unifying effect the rise of newspapers had on Great Britain, pp.4041. 19 Roy Porter, Enlightenment: Britain and the Creati