SATURATED: A STUDY IN FAT OBSESSION

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Social Sciences at The University of Waikato by NATALIE ANNE COWLEY

The University of Waikato 2006

ABSTRACT This thesis examines both contemporary and historical meanings surrounding human body FAT in order to illuminate, chiefly, the forces that have rendered it both an omnipresent and negative entity in Western societies. It explores the apparent contradiction that we must exist amidst hyper-consumptive capitalism yet display no bodily evidence of such consumption. Along with an investigation into alternative bodily conceptions to that of the hegemonic West, a discourse analysis is employed to challenge the key assumptions that underpin the current `obesity epidemic' and its ensuing `war on obesity' so that body FAT may be configured differently. It is shown that, because bodily conceptions and ideals are complex cultural constructions, body FAT, as a substance, is not the scourge it is presently portrayed, but rather a substance that signifies most of what consumer society despises and fears. It is argued that the `war on obesity' has not been successful, and will continue to be ineffective, because the focus should not be on losing body FAT but rather on the conditions of poverty that generate overall ill-health. It is concluded that such a `war', if sustained in its current fashion, will only serve to further malign the situations of those deemed `overweight and obese'.

i

GRACE Thank you to Paul Blair, Gita Rao, Paul Harris, Maxine Campbell, Carolyn Michelle, Bev Campbell and Ted Ninnes for a variety of support. Also to Jordan and Ione Herewini, for being good guinea pigs.

ii

CONTENTS Abstract Grace CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION Theoretical Framework/Themes Literature Review Chapter Overview CHAPTER 2: MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS Beauty, Health and the Body in Ancient Greece and Rome Christianity and Beyond: Hunger, Appetite and Morality The Enlightenment Our Heritage CHAPTER 3: THE FAT'S IN THE FIRE Modernisation Regulation Fashion Medicine Morality Class Consumerism Reductio ad Absurdum CHAPTER 4: ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTIONS Fat as Life Obesity and Poverty Challenging the Hegemony iii i ii 1 7 8 10 12 16 19 24 27 30 31 33 35 36 38 38 40 43 51 55 57 61

CHAPTER 5: THE MODERN SCOURGE The Medium is the Message A ­ B = C? Discrimination CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION AFTERWORD REFERENCES

65 67 73 92 99 107 108

iv

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION

The dominant logic of consumer capitalism: The increase of `obesity' in societies obsessed with both thinness and hyper-consumption while the rest of the world's population is either severely malnourished or starving to death.
The World Health Organisation has coined the term `globesity' to denote the increasing spread of FAT around the globe. Their latest research also states that obesity has surpassed both malnourishment and HIV/AIDS to become the `dominant unmet health issue' with an estimated 300 million obese adults worldwide (Kulick & Meneley, 2005). As Watson and Caldwell (2004) concur in The Cultural Politics of Food and Eating, obesity is fast becoming the hot-button issue of global health. The public discourse surrounding issues of body weight and health has reached a feverish pitch, with the news media quick to report every new scientifically derived study that highlights the dangers of excess body FAT and over-indulgence. In a critical appraisal of current obesity research, Gard and Wright (2005) suggest that the use of an `epidemic' paradigm for the condition of obesity is one further example of the narrative of decline ­ which seems particularly prevalent in the current age. Life in a `risk' society consists of one perpetual crisis after another: crises that are not confined to structures or institutions but extend to encompass human bodies. The authors quote Lockett (2003), who puts it this way:
There seems to be a new one each week. In the last three months alone, we have had a swathe of them reported: shoplifting, methamphetamine addiction, diabetes, meningitis, schizophrenia. Yes, we are in the midst of an epidemic of ...epidemics.

Further:
The most serious, costly and deadly of these, say health experts, is obesity.

1

We are told that our ballooning weight leads to disease and early death and is costing millions in health spending. Competing headlines make a catastrophe of the situation, as we `declare war' on this `ticking time bomb'. We are force -fed a monotonous mantra: we are fat and getting fatter, and we must lose weight. (Cited in Gard & Wright, 2005, p.2)

Thus, the current `globesity epidemic' engenders a siege mentality amongst health professionals, policy makers, and the public at large, whereby incremental aggressive `battles' must be fought on all fronts to combat the growing scourge of society; FAT. One could be forgiven for accepting that this alarm is warranted. With a constant media barrage of medically generated evidence that being `overweight or obese' causes illnesses such as diabetes, heart disease and cancer, and a plethora of negative images of FAT bodies ­ children especially ­ eating fast food or ice-cream, there leaves little doubt in the public consciousness that FAT constitutes a health and moral hazard to the community, and a financial drain on health systems. The proposed solution to this rampant adiposity is the aforementioned `war', which has as its primary weapon the media. Here we are admonished to eat less and exercise more, to choose `lite' versions of our overwhelming array of foods, and to be staunchly vigilant to any signs of excess FAT in our children. Television shows `educate' us in healthy lifestyle habits; reality TV shows have weight loss competitions; food and packaging must display nutritional information and FAT content; diet books and products abound, as do exercise equipment, gym subscriptions, weight loss surgeries, and `diet' drugs. There is however a minor but increasingly vocal counter-discourse to what may be termed a scientifically induced moral panic (for discussions on moral panics see Beck, 1992; Glassner, 1999). Beginning in the 1970s with feminist protestations against the tyranny of slenderness (e.g. Orbach, 1978; Millman, 1980; Chernin, 1981), opposition to the contemporary West's obsession with thinness and hatred of FAT has culminated amidst the current debate in a small cabal of scientists, nutritionists, educators, social commentators, activists and academics who provide an antidote to the ubiquitous alarmist discourse concerning obesity.

2

Gard and Wright (2005) question the orthodoxy of the implicitly moralistic medical model that configures obesity as a phenomenon with a clear cause (modern Western sloth and gluttony), clear consequences (diabetes, heart disease, and other illnesses), and a clear solution (diet and exercise). Obesity theorists such as Richard Klein (1999) and Paul Campos (2004) concur, arguing that there are numerous aspects of the causes and consequences of being `overweight or obese' which are not explained by this simplistic model. The politics of obesity create a site where biology, culture, ideology and economics collide, and any attempt to address the real problem ­ and this may be the crux of the matter: FAT may not be a problem in itself ­ needs to consider all of these components. Those opposed to the dominant hegemonic discourse surrounding body FAT advance arguments that not only call into question the framework of the debate, but also suggest that the framework itself is self-defeating in that it actually causes more obesity. We live in a society infatuated with thinness, one that abhors and discriminates against the `overweight or obese' individual, and manages to link this deplorable corporeal state with life threatening illnesses. It then proposes a solution, `dieting and exercise', that has been proven (yes, even scientifically) to be ineffective. Could it be possible that the combination of obsession, discrimination, and a practice that destroys the body's natural metabolism (dieting) is exacerbating the `problem' when in fact it was not such a problem in the first place? Recent research has turned the tables on the mainstream scientific `facts' about obesity with claims that being overweight is actually beneficial to one's health, and that the term `obesity' is invariably overused and stretched to include those who are merely `overweight'. Research in this vein posits the `obesity epidemic' as yet another moral panic in the age of anxiety, and highlights the historical-cultural trajectories that have constructed the FAT body as undesirable and unhealthy. This thesis aims to draw on such research, in order to explore the contradictions inherent in the dominant logic of consumer capitalism referred to at the beginning of this chapter. It shall be argued that, not only is FAT a feminist issue, but it is also, increasingly, with the advent of the `obesity epidemic', an economic and cultural one. Due to the encouragement, nay, requirement of capitalism that we consume voraciously

3

to fulfil the logic of never-ending market expansion, we are now in the ridiculous and anxiety producing position of being exhorted to over-consume, yet we are savagely punished if we display any bodily evidence of it. This thesis will demonstrate how such logic is deeply implicated in both the rise of `obesity' and the `war' against it. Because we do appear to be growing fatter (whether or not this is cause for alarm will be explored in later chapters), yet simultaneously, the societal pre-occupation with thinness is also growing, which presents an intriguing anomaly. It will be shown however, that this may not be such skewed logic after all: the medically and morally mediated hatred of FAT encourages people (whether they are FAT or not) to in effect consume more ­ more of the products generated by the multi-billion dollar diet and fitness industry, itself getting FAT from the over-consumption and yo-yoing weight of millions. In fact, dieting may be the perfect consort for our current stage of capitalism, and the dieter the perfect consumer, due to the fact that ­ as Hillel Schwartz (1986) points out, they are never satisfied. The constant warnings about the dangers of FAT have found remarkable resonance with contemporary capitalism and its need to expand markets by creating new desires. Not only is the body commodified in that we can purchase a new body ­ a fantasy body ­ through the use of, among other things, diet and exercise products, but the now recognised inevitable failure of such methods (see for example Wann, 1998; Gaesser, 1999; Klein, 1999; Campos, 2004) keeps the consumer perpetually frustrated, ensuring that `false needs in spectacular abundance' (Debord, 1995) are never fully sated, thus paving the way for reconfigured products and new desires. Further, the destabilisation of needs generates confusion with regards to the consumption of food, inasmuch as hunger is conflated with appetite. A further characteristic of consumer capitalism bearing on the food/body/FAT nexus is individualism. Body theorists such as Susan Bordo (1998) have argued that it is the individualising of the `problem', and indeed, our individualistic society, that is to blame for the anxiety felt over food choices and our bodies. Much like the myriad of choices we all supposedly have in order to shape our `unique' identities and lifestyles (such as with cars, clothes, homes, and food), we also have the choice to (re)shape and transform our bodies to fit our identity. If we fail, then we have personally failed, and the

4

conspicuousness of that failure is carried with us daily. If we have not `tried' at all, then we have chosen to have a FAT, unfit body ­ one that becomes our identity: lazy, slovenly, loose, and inefficient. Embodying efficiency is crucial to the capitalist work ethic ­ itself a serendipitous beneficiary of the Protestant work ethic as Max Weber has surmised. This ethic creates a climate wherein "...all pleasures are soured, all judgments are curdled" (Schwartz, 1986, p.68). capitalism. Along with almost all other aspects of late capitalist consumer society then, FAT, or more accurately the absence of FAT, has become a commodity, both materially and symbolically. FAT bodies are also individualised, with the individual shouldering sole blame if they cannot gain `control' of their body. How do these notions fit with the current `obesity epidemic', and the tidal wave of advice and admonishments that `slothful and gluttonous' Western society is subject to? The focal point of this thesis is a material substance: FAT. However, as will be The individual must embody this inherent asceticism, which is consistent with, and often represents, the machinery of industrial

demonstrated, the intricacies surrounding this subject point to its largely symbolic nature, hence, a significant measure of this work will explore bodily ideals and conceptions ­ ones juxtaposed with material reality. The central question to be asked is: why do we currently face a constant barrage of negative messages about FAT? To address this question, this thesis will provide an overview of the historical, biological, cultural and environmental determinants of body FAT, with a view to illuminating why it is that firstly, FAT is so demonised in the West, and secondly, if the antidote to this demon is simply a matter of individual diet and exercise, why then is society getting fatter? The assumption that we are indeed in the midst of an `obesity epidemic' also requires some attention: one crucial aspect of this epidemic discourse is the insistence that being `overweight or obese' is unhealthy in itself, not to mention the numerous diseases attributed to it. This assertion will be challenged, along with the `solution' to this epidemic ­ the `war on obesity'.

5

What of the solution? What does this war entail? What weapons will be used? Who will be the casualties or `collateral damage'? Will there be `friendly' fire? It shall be argued that the casualty will not be FAT the substance, as intended, but rather the already despised and discriminated against FAT population. Whether considered `overweight, obese, or morbidly obese', these people will bear the brunt of the `war', which, it will be maintained, will only intensify the `crisis' that is the fattening population. Inextricably linked to the issue of `globesity' is the fact that, along with numerous other negative conditions or attributes, FAT foods and FAT bodies have become the provenance, and are symbolic of, the poor. Moreover, FAT remains a feminist issue, and is increasingly an ethnic one, with a large percentage of the world's FAT population consisting of the poor, women, and ethnic minorities (de Garine & Pollock, 1995). Therefore, the triad of gender, race and class will be of vital concern to this thesis' discussion. It is recognised too that in taking a wider scope of the dynamics surrounding body FAT some areas will not be granted the in-depth coverage that is warranted. An advantage of a more expansive multi-factoral approach however, is that the identification of virtually all of the facets that contribute to conceptions of FAT provides more fertile ground for further research on the topic. The word FAT is used throughout this work due to its essential centrality to the topic. It is the topic. In addition though, it is used in preference to the more common terms `overweight and obese' as these are the words at the heart of the `obesity epidemic' discourse. As will be revealed, these terms are derogatory, arbitrary, and culturally encumbered ­ yet it is FAT that is considered a four letter word. This thesis intends to employ this four letter word in an exercise of recuperation, in order to render conspicuous what postmodern society wishes would disappear.

6

Theoretical Framework/Themes
The central theme will be one which examines differing aspects of the apparent contradiction inherent in the dominant logic of consumer capitalism as it relates to the food/body/FAT nexus, the `obesity epidemic', the `war on obesity', and the positioning of the FAT body in such an environment. In venturing to ascertain the grounds for the West's contemporary obsession with FAT, a genealogy of sorts will be undertaken into how the body has been historically configured. Thus, a further dominant theme will be one of changing bodily conceptions and ideals, and how various cultural phenomena have influenced these. While applying these themes will go some way to providing answers as to why FAT is currently such a negative entity, a deconstruction of the hegemonic discourse regarding `obesity' will allow further insights into the extent of FAT aversion and the assorted vested interests that accompany it. Finally, anecdotal evidence will be employed to determine the degree to which the societal antipathy toward FAT affects the everyday lives of people classified as `overweight or obese'. As such then, this work will comprise part Neo-Marxist critique of political economy, part historical and anthropological analysis, part discourse analysis wherein the FAT body will be situated as a social construction, and a dash of ethnomethodology. Owing to the multi-faceted nature of research into the food/body/FAT convergence, it is not the intention of this thesis to finesse fine theoretical points. Rather, theory will be used pragmatically in a `tool box' fashion. This may be termed `postmodern eclecticism', which, much like `deconstructionism' seeks to demolish or subvert certain dominant assumptions and discourses ­ a definite and significant objective of this work. Most often however, these approaches, as is congruent with their `relativity of truth' premise, are content to leave their work demolished; afraid that any attempt at reconstruction or proffering concrete alternatives will be considered totalising. While this thesis largely adheres to the requirements of utilising such an approach, in the spirit of eclecticism it would like to make incremental steps toward reconstructing FAT discourse, thus leaving the reader with a possible alternative `truth' or `reality'.

7

The theories employed include those of `body' theorists such as Susan Bordo and Michel Foucault ­ the former due to her insightful and comprehensive feminist critique of the forces that shape both our material and symbolic bodies, and the latter because his works are crucial to any analysis of the individualised and scrutinised (post)modern body. Karl Marx and Neo-Marxian theorists such as Pierre Bourdieu will be utilised for a critique of consumer capitalism's complicity in the construction of the negative FAT body, as well as an examination of the relationship between food/body/FAT and class. This thesis will engage with further theorists as appropriate, such as Marshall McLuhan, Friedrich Nietzsche, Norbert Elias, George Orwell, bell hooks, Deborah King, Chris Shilling, Max Weber, and Thorstein Veblen. Largely though, points will be made with reference to various anthropological, obesity theory, and activist writings ­ which formed a significant section of the literature review, and to which we shall now turn.

Literature Review
The very first type of literature to be reviewed, and one which, in essence, sparked the rationale for this thesis, was the avalanche of news media articles on the `obesity epidemic' and the dangers of FAT, most with the implication that if we did not eat less and exercise more then Western society would be doomed. This was followed up by a brief analysis of all types of media, including television programmes and news bulletins, magazines, books, `advertorials' and websites, which demonstrated the extent to which alarmist `obesity' discourse ­ and FAT abhorrence - had permeated the public consciousness. The fact that these articles were generated within a climate of hyperconsumption and an increasingly `thin ideal' triggered an interest in the cultural antecedents to this seemingly absurd situation. A review of the literature on historical practices and ideals concerning consumption and the body, from Ancient Greece to the current day West, proved very fruitful in this regard. The most rewarding of these, for the purposes of this thesis, were Roberta Seid's (1989) Never Too Thin: Why Women Are At War With Their Bodies; Never Satisfied: A Cultural History Of Diets, Fantasies And Fat by Hillel Schwartz (1986); and Peter Stearns' (1997) Fat History: Bodies And Beauty In The Modern West. Because a chief intention of this thesis was to subvert the contemporary notion

8

that sees FAT as objectionable and harmful, it was considered that a review of anthropological literature on bodily practices and ideals would illuminate alternative conceptions of the body. While there is considerable anthropological literature on this topic, the review was confined to that which specifically mentioned FAT, and this is where the volume Fat: The Anthropology Of An Obsession by Don Kulick and Anne Meneley (2005) was particularly pertinent. The identification of alternative cultural configurations of FAT and the body then generated a search for literature that presented cogent arguments against the current `obesity epidemic' discourse and anti-FAT sentiment. While literature of this sort was not abundant (there were however numerous books and journal articles on the `problem' of FAT and why the West has become so) several key works were found; most notably Eat Fat by Richard Klein (1996); Fat! So? Because You Don't Have To Apologize For Your Size by Marilyn Wann (1998); Big Fat Lies: The Truth About Your Weight And Your Health by Glen Gaesser (2002); The Obesity Myth: Why Our Obsession With Weight Is Hazardous To Our Health by Paul Campos (2004); Revolting Bodies? The Struggle To Redefine Fat Identity by Kathleen LeBesco (2004); and most recently, The Obesity Epidemic: Science, Morality And Ideology by Michael Gard and Jan Wright (2005). The final leg of the literature review involved drawing out the discriminatory practices experienced by the FAT in Western society, mostly documented by feminist writers or human rights activists. Sandra Solovay's (2000) Tipping The Scales Of Justice: Fighting Weight-Based Discrimination was most relevant in this regard, as was Shadow On A Tightrope: Writings By Women On Fat Oppression by Lisa Schoenfielder and Barb Wieser (1983), and Marcia Millman's (1980) Such A Pretty Face: Being Fat In America. It was deduced that there was indeed a gap in the literature with regards to critical writings or research specifically concerned with body FAT, its socio-symbolic history, and its contemporary significance. While ­ mainly feminist ­ research on the body and its cultural determinants constitutes a sizeable sphere, the focus to date has been on the thin body in the West. Overall, this literature review revealed that there has been

9

remarkably little general cultural explanation for the revulsion felt toward FAT that is increasingly infiltrating our consciousness.

Chapter Overview
The following chapter will take an historical look at FAT and the body, both materially and symbolically, in order to highlight not only how we may have reached this `saturation' point in the West, but also how the FAT body has been constructed. FAT was not always considered distasteful or undesirable, nor was it an indicator of low status; rather the converse. In various historical periods FAT denoted prosperity and health. Indeed, there are still several cultures in the world today in which FAT bodies are desirable ­ where FAT signifies health, fertility (in women) and power (in men). Chapter three picks up on these historical threads to ascertain the departure point for positive connotations of FAT and the forces that instigated and reinforced FAT aversion. It will identify the main cultural determinants that saw the fear and loathing of body FAT rise to the crescendo it has reached today, as well as the groups or institutions that benefited from what was to become an obsession, namely the upper classes and the weight loss industry. Chapter four explores conceptions of the body in non-Western cultures ­ with particular reference to `ethnic minorities' within dominant Western society such as African Americans and native Hawaiians. This cross-cultural look at the body/food/FAT confluence will highlight the cultural relativity of bodily ideals and practices, as well as identifying some of the reasons for the current association of FAT and ill-health with certain ethnicities, and, correspondingly, poverty. The final chapter builds on the foundations of societal attitudes toward FAT that have been discussed in previous chapters in order to appraise the dominant discourse that has produced the notion of an `obesity epidemic', and the frenzy it has generated throughout the Western world. It will focus on, and deconstruct the key assumptions that underpin

10

such a discourse, in the process drawing attention to the general essence of the consumerist, medicalised, individualised, anxiety producing age in which we live ­ one that has proven an ideal setting for an obsession with body FAT. It will be argued, finally, that the `obesity epidemic' discourse is largely based on fear and fallacy, and that its ensuing `war on obesity' is not only injudicious, but will serve to exacerbate the already onerous living conditions that the FAT person must endure in a society that ascribes to the FAT a mass of negative significations.

11

CHAPTER 2: MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS

Let me have men about me who are fat Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o'nights Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look; He thinks too much; such men are dangerous Julius Caesar, Act 1, Scene 2.

FAT is a three-letter word with variable meanings. As Richard Klein (1996) points out in Eat Fat, it can refer to a substance, a food, or someone's body. It can be used as an adjective, both positive and negative, and as a noun. Allusions to the positive, such as `fat of the land', `fat purse', and `phat sound' (African American vernacular) connote images of abundance, health, and plenty. The dominant semiotic use of FAT in the West however, is invariably negative in nature, often expressed in an ashamed, alarmist, or disparaging tone - whether referring to material greed, as in `fat cat', bodily nonconformity as in `fat cow', or the disgust directed at food which is `full of fat'. This modern condemnatory discourse surrounding FAT is anything but simple or absolute. Definitions of FAT, and opinions about its value have varied a great deal both historically and geographically, with the Western version of FAT still up for contestation in many parts of the world, and indeed, in pockets of the West. FAT, in any society, is never purely about food, bodily weight, health, or beauty, but rather it is a symbol; "a mirror we gaze into to glimpse the things society tells us are the fairest ­ and the grossest - of them all" (Kulick and Machado-Borges, 2005, p.121). Generally speaking, FAT, as a food and a bodily condition, is appreciated where food is scarce and/or the supply erratic, and low-fat foods and thin bodies are popular where food is abundant (de Garine and Pollock, 1995; Gardner and Halweil, 2000; Smith, 2002; Popenoe, 2005). Because humans evolved in environments of scarcity, they developed a preference for (traditionally scarce) fats (and sweets), as they were crucial for storing

12

energy in lean times (Gardner and Halweil, 2000). This mechanism for storing FAT easily ­ often termed the `thrifty gene' (Beller, 1977; de Garine and Pollock, 1995) - has undoubtedly contributed to the increase of body FAT in societies of `abundance'. However, because food abundance has been relatively rare historically, it is not surprising to learn that roughly eighty percent of human societies on record have had a preference for a plumper (typically female) body (Popenoe, 2005). The first figures found that portray the human body are thought to be more than fifteen thousand years old; they are all female, all very round, and they all have erotic zones that protrude abundantly ­ the most famous example being what archaeologists call the `Venus of Willendorf' (Klein, 1996). What these preferences illustrate is that while our material corporeal form is seen to be largely determined by the interaction of human and environmental biology, body ideals are grounded in environmental realities and economic orders, which in turn influence cultural values. Then, it could be argued, these cultural values help determine our concrete corporeality: much like the dialectical process described by Marx and Engels (1964), whereby the relationship between the dominant ideas of a society and its economic base is not a simple one-way causal movement, but rather a back and forth interchange. Or, to put it another way, cultural change engenders physical change and vice versa in a feedback loop (Wright, 2005). FAT, therefore, is intricately bound up with issues of both resource distribution and personal recognition. As a substance and a signifier, it is an aspect of personal embodiment that elucidates wider issues of society, economics, politics, culture, and morality: as Forth and Carden-Coyne (2005, p.7) state, "(t)he way in which we cultivate our bellies reveals a great deal about our culture generally". Another way in which this close relationship between diet, material development, and ideology can be exemplified is in Gardner and Halweil's (2000) description of the Guale people living thousands of years ago near what later became Savannah, Georgia, in the United States. The Guale people lived a typical hunter-gatherer existence, meeting their daily energy requirements through nuts, fruits, plants, deer and seafood, and naturally keeping a balance between calorie input and energy output. This balance ensured that

13

FAT corporeality was of no concern, as the population generally did not experience times of extreme food scarcity or famine - there were `light bouts of seasonal scarcity' thus the FAT body was not exalted as a sign of abundance or an essential storage system. With the growth of agriculture amongst the Guale (probably to increase food supply for a growing population, according to the authors) both diet and activity changed. Corn was now plentiful, and able to be stored, freeing the people to spend less time gathering, hunting, and cultivating food, and more time on creative endeavours. This, say Gardner and Halweil, had a negative effect on the Guale people's diet and health, as diets tied to the cultivation of a few major crops lacked diversity, and therefore were deficient in the full range of vitamins and minerals that had benefited hunter-gatherers. In addition, episodes of hunger may have been less frequent, but they were more severe, and regularly reached famine levels. The FAT body would have become a state to strive for in times of (crop, largely carbohydrate) plenty, in order to lay down reserves for imminent famines. The material necessity of FAT (if it could indeed be achieved) would quite rapidly develop into a signifier of wealth, health, and hence, beauty. The purpose of this example is to provide a background to, and foundation for, the continually contested and multiple denotations surrounding FAT over both time and space. As intimated by the example of the Guale people, FAT foods and bodies have historically been unequivocally associated with the rich ­ those most able to access the nutritive resources (although in collective societies such as that of the Guale, those who were better able to access the resources would share the spoils; a point that will be explored further in a later chapter) ­ while the thin body indicated poverty, and as such, for the most part, has been considered undesirable. In the modern (and post-modern) West however, this quite discernable historical pattern has experienced an inversion: in contemporary North America, Europe, and other Western nations the FAT body and FAT foods have become a determinant, and an effect, of poverty (see for example Powdermaker, 1997; Kipnis, 1998; Sobal & Maurer, 1999; Crotty & Germov, 2004; Harrison, 2005; Kulick & Meneley, 2005). This chapter

14

aims to apply a selective overview of FAT and its material and symbolic impedimenta through a brief survey of the successive changes and contested meanings of FAT, the body, health, fashion, and beauty as experienced from Ancient Greece and Rome to the present day West. It is anticipated that this historical examination will,