`IT WAS HARD TO DIE FRAE HAME':
DEATH, GRIEF AND MOURNING AMONG SCOTTISH MIGRANTS TO NEW ZEALAND, 1840 -1890.
By

Debra Powell
A Thesis Submitted to the University of Waikato in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in History

2007

Abstract
James McGeoch's headstone, which can be seen at the Presbyterian Cemetery in Symonds Street, Auckland, carries a simple sentiment in the Scottish dialect that resonates with first generation migrants everywhere: `It was hard to die frae hame'. 1

This thesis is an investigation into the experiences of death and mourning among nineteenth century Scottish migrants to New Zealand. It considers the ways in which death, and the framework of social conventions through which it is interpreted and dealt with, might provide evidence for the persistence or renegotiation of cultural behaviours among migrant communities. The focus of this study is on the working classes and in particular those who resided in, and emigrated from, Scotland's larger cities and towns. A complex of ideas and customs informed cultural practices regarding death among the working classes. This thesis highlights the multiple challenges that the process of migration posed to these cultural practices. The ongoing renegotiation of such ideas and customs were important components in the formulation of cultural and religious identities in New Zealand.

This thesis is simultaneously an investigation of deathways, a migration study, a consideration of the working class experience, and a tentative venture into the history of emotion. Using a diverse range of sources, including New Zealand coroners' reports, gravestone inscriptions, and personal autobiographical accounts as written in journals, diaries and letters, this study highlights the complexity and variety of migrants' experiences of death and attempts to uncover the multiple meanings of these experiences.

1

Translation: `It was hard to die from home'.

ii

Acknowledgements
This project could not have been undertaken without funding support received from the New Zealand Federation of Graduate Women, the University of Waikato Scholarships board, and the Marsden funded team headed by Dr. Brad Patterson of the Irish and Scottish Studies program at the Stout Centre, Victoria University. I am indebted to these groups for their generous assistance.

My supervisors, Dr. Rosalind McClean and Dr. Rowland Weston, have been a pleasure to work with. I would like to express my deep appreciation for their expertise and encouragement, and consistently excellent advice.

I am grateful to Kathryn Parsons from the New Zealand Room in the University of Waikato Library for her generous assistance in accessing archival resources. I would also like to thank fellow Marsden scholar Rebecca Lenihan from Victoria University who has shown interest in my study and been keen to share her research findings. Special thanks go also to Emma Spooner for her proof-reading expertise and her friendship during my years of graduate study; and to Big Jim Fulton for being my best friend and support, and for sending the hundreds of emails that provided such a welcome distraction from the real business of thesis writing.

The staff and graduates of the History Department have been a joy to work alongside. Thanks for the madness and the general hilarity. Who would have thought that a year researching and writing about death could prove to be such great fun? And lastly, thanks, to my delightful little family of teenage boys and unruly dogs, for being such thoroughly agreeable folk.

iii

contents

Abstract Acknowledgements Contents Introduction Chapter One:
Deathways Among the Scottish Working Classes, 1840-50

ii iii iv 1 12

Chapter Two:
`And Down She Sank to a Sailor's Grave': Death at Sea, 1840-1890

34

Chapter Three:
`Baith Bleart an' Blin' Wi' Tears': Death and Bereavement in the New World, 1840-1890

61

Conclusion Bibliography

96 100

iv

Introduction
On March 2nd 1840 John Hemery, Captain of the Bengal Merchant, wrote the following entry in his journal:

I witnessed a curious scene in a native village the other day, it was a kind of wake for the Chief who was killed, the whole tribe was collected making the most dreadful noise I ever heard, such as making the most horrid faces, sticking their tongues out of their mouths and barking and growling like wolves. The most awful performances were the women who kept cutting their faces and bodies with shrieks. Some of them were one mass of blood all over the body, and I don't think there were four inches of them without a deep gash which they had inflicted with a sharp part of a shell. The sight was most dreadful. 1 This scene was one of the first witnessed by the English captain on his arrival in New Zealand. His reaction to this `most dreadful' display of open and unrestrained mourning is revealing testimony. Only two weeks earlier Hemery had presided over the sea burial of a Scottish infant, and commented dryly on the family's `cool' response to the death of their baby:

[We] found the mother quite composed laying the baby out, surrounded by several other women who suggested several curious ways of clothing it ready for burial, among other things they put a half-penny over each of its eyes! They then asked me what I thought was the best way of doing it and I told them to put a white cap on its head and a nightgown on its body, which they did. After all was done they begged of me to give them a bottle of rum. 2 The baby's body was then placed into a wine cask and put over the side of the ship while the family got quietly drunk.

1

Journal of John Hemery reproduced in Ian McIlroy, The Voyage of the Emigrant Ship Bengal Merchant from Scotland to New Zealand, October 1839 to February 1840 (Christchurch: I. McIlroy, 2002), pp. 40-41. 2 Hemery Diary, entry for 16 February, p. 34. The texts of journals, diaries, and letters throughout this thesis have been slightly edited to improve readability. Editing consists mainly of inserting punctuation. Spelling and the use of upper case for emphasis remains the same as in the original or as in the text from which it has been cited.

1

The stark contrast between these two accounts of mourning highlights the complexity of cultural responses to death and grief. This thesis considers death and its subsequent practices as key cultural texts, and argues that these can be read to reveal nuanced understandings of grief and mourning. The experience of dying, and responses to death, are central to human experience and, as such, are at the core of social history. Studying histories of death and grief, and the framework of social conventions through which they are interpreted and dealt with, can offer a rich resource for the understanding of society.

Elaine McFarland, in her discussion on the rapidly expanding field of death history, laments that scholars of Scottish history have been slow to contribute to this important field. Scotland, she argues, `has remained relatively untouched by this thanatological revolution'. 3 McFarland aims to uncover new lines of enquiry for historians, yet to be examined in the Scottish context. She presents an agenda for research into death and mourning, urging historians to take the Scottish experience into broader research themes. While the subject of death in New Zealand society is beginning to be addressed by a small number of historians and scholars, it still remains for historians of New Zealand culture to make this a focus of their research. 4 New Zealand historians such as Jock Phillips have been calling for scholars to fill in the gaps in New Zealand's cultural history since 1990. Phillips identified the need for histories which, as he says, `can recover, in loving detail the diversity of cultures that once settled here, and the process whereby those diverse
3

Elaine McFarland, `Researching Death, Mourning and Commemoration in Modern Scotland' in Journal of Scottish Historical Studies 24:1 (2004), p. 22. 4 Frances Porter and Charlotte MacDonald's My Hand Will Write What My Heart Dictates (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1996) includes a section on death and mourning as portrayed in nineteenth century women's diaries and letters. This is one of only a few published works that reflects on death in a considered way. Local cemetery histories are another obvious exception. There have been several unpublished theses in the field of death history. These include Stephen Deed's `Unearthly Landscapes: The Development of the Cemetery in Nineteenth Century New Zealand' (MA thesis, University of Otago, 2004); Philip Cleaver's `Dealing with Death: The Pakeha Treatment of Death 1850-1910' (MA thesis, Victoria University, 1996); David Madle's `Patterns of Death by Accident, Suicide and Homicide in New Zealand 1860-1960' (PhD thesis, Victoria University, 1996; and Peter Luke's, `Suicide in Auckland 1848-1939' (MA thesis, University of Auckland, 1982).

2

cultures were given a New Zealand content'. 5 This thesis takes up the challenges laid down by McFarland and Phillips. Taking Scotland as a vantage point, it asks the central question: what effect did the process of migration have on beliefs and practices surrounding death and mourning? 6

David Hackett Fischer's cultural history, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America, offers a useful model for investigating the persistence of regional cultures in the wake of migration, and over time. He argues that distinct regional cultures in the United States have their origins in folkways that were `planted in the American colonies more than two centuries ago' by four different groups of British settlers. 7 He defines the term folkways as `the normative structure of values, customs and meanings that exist in any culture. This complex is not many things but one thing, with many interlocking parts'. 8 Significantly, Hackett Fischer argues that folkways are not static, but rather are `constantly in process of creation, even in our own time.' 9 Fluidity and hybridity are important themes in cultural studies of migration, and to be useful in this study Hackett Fischer's complex must be considered as a system of cultural customs and meanings, rather than a rigid structure. `Deathways' are listed among Hackett Fischer's categories of folkways which have left their mark on American society. A further consideration of this thesis is to test Hackett Fischer's hypothesis in the context of settler migration to this country. This includes a reflection on how the study of deathways might provide evidence for the persistence or renegotiation of cultural behaviours, and a tentative consideration of the ways that the origins and folkways of this country's early migrant communities might have contributed to a New Zealand culture.

Jock Phillips, `Of Verandahs and Fish and Chips and Footie on Saturday Afternoon' in New Zealand Journal of History, 24:2, (October 1990), p. 134. 6 This study has been undertaken as part of a larger project on the Scottish experience of migration to New Zealand currently being carried out by a team of historians headed by Dr Brad Patterson (Victoria University). The Scots were disproportionate numerically amongst migrants to New Zealand making them valuable subjects for a cross cultural study of this kind. 7 David Hackett Fischer, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), p. 11. 8 Hackett Fischer, p. 7. 9 Hackett Fischer, p. 8.

5

3

The subject of death as a historical study has received increasing attention in the past twenty-five years, with death studies now an important and influential field of historical enquiry. French historians have acted as pioneers in many areas of social and cultural history, and this is certainly the case regarding the history of death. The leading French historian Philippe Aries was among the first to focus on death and dying in a historical sense. In his seminal work, The Hour of Our Death, which was translated into English in 1981, Aries provided a model of five stages of death that moved chronologically from the middle ages to the end of the twentieth century. 10 His model has been much debated, and has permeated the work of later death historians, as well as other scholars working within an historical frame. According to Aries, Romanticism transformed death from an event regarded with fear and trepidation to an experience of beauty that was positively anticipated. This Romantic influence produced a model, coined by Aries as `the beautiful death', which became the formulaic view of death and dying for nineteenth century Europeans. This was eventually replaced in the twentieth century by the `invisible death', where increasing secularism, and the events of two world wars led to a denial of death and the dying process. The applicability of his model has been questioned by more recent scholars. Pat Jalland argues that Aries' emphasis on the experience of Catholic France limits his study for scholars of other areas. 11 Phillip Cleaver, in his unpublished study of Pakeha attitudes toward death in nineteenth and early twentieth century New Zealand, agrees, suggesting a presumptuousness on Aries' part in considering his conclusions are relevant to all Christian cultures in the West. Nevertheless, Cleaver convincingly applies Aries's model of death to the New Zealand context. 12 His research argues that the shift in attitude which Aries claims to have taken place around the turn of the twentieth century can be seen to have occurred in Pakeha New Zealand society.

10 11

Phillipe Aries, The Hour of Our Death, second edition (New York: Random House, 1981). Pat Jalland, Death in the Victorian Family (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 8. 12 Phillip Cleaver `Dealing With Death: The Pakeha Treatment of Death 1850-1910' (MA thesis, Victoria University, 1996)

4

In her book Death in the Victorian Family, Jalland questions the applicability of the `beautiful death' model for nineteenth-century Britons. Her research into the experience of middle and upper-class families suggests that the Evangelical `good death' fitted more closely with the British experience. Unlike Aries' model, the `good death' as an ideal had its focus on the dying person's readiness to face God, and though it was frequently romanticised in literature, in reality was less likely to be greeted with positive anticipation. 13 However, as Jalland points out, there are `multiple modes of death'. 14 The diversity of experiences surrounding death and mourning mean that no single model is appropriate.

Rather than attempting to find a model, or models, of a predominant cultural norm associated with Western death, the focus of this study is to consider the deathways of the working classes, particularly among those who resided in Scotland's larger cities and towns. This thesis argues that Scottish society in the nineteenth century was one in which the lower classes suffered immensely under class constraints and unequal opportunity. Within those constraints though, individual agency and strong social networks thrived. Teasing out the various threads of interweaving beliefs and mores is a methodological challenge. Rational thought and new theological understandings emerging from the Enlightenment, intercept, contradict and work alongside popular belief. Further complexities arise with distinctions of class, region, and religious affiliation. For the higher classes in Britain, by the middecades of the nineteenth century, funerary and mourning rituals had become highly complex and extravagant, and the working classes strove hard to emulate them. Even the lowest working classes in Scotland had a consuming interest in the gradations of social position, and death within the family served as a prime means of expressing, and defining that social placing. An amalgam of these ideas, and others informed by folklore and religion, guided the accepted cultural practices among the working classes. For the immigrant, these customs were essential

Jalland, Death in the Victorian Family, p. 8. Pat Jalland, Australian Ways of Death: A Social and Cultural History (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2002) p. 2.
14

13

5

components in the formulation of cultural and religious identities in colonial New Zealand.

In Britain, recent studies have highlighted the experience of death among the underclasses. 15 Julie Marie Strange's, Death, Grief and Poverty in Britain 18701914 provides an impressive overview of the experience of death among the British poor. In considering the dichotomous stereotypes of the respectable funeral and the pauper's grave, Strange contends that a shift is required `in the analytical gaze away from materialist paradigms and dichotomies between respectable and pauper funerals to consider flexible definitions of grief and mutable notions of respectability.' 16 With this in mind, she attempts to reframe the working-class narrative by looking for the fluid meanings behind public rituals of mourning and emphasising the complex nature of people's responses to death. The resignation towards death seemingly displayed by the working classes is a misrepresentation, according to Strange. As she says: `Poverty necessitated pragmatism, but that did not necessarily compromise the sentimental and emotional underpinnings of family life.' 17 This idea is strongly reinforced in the reading of personal journals and letters written by working class Scottish migrants to New Zealand.

The migrants whose lives provide the organising principle of this study effectively moved across three worlds, each overlapping and correlated, but nevertheless distinct in terms of physical reality. For migrants, Scotland could be seen to embody an Old World paradigm of deep-rooted cultural mores, while the settler communities of New Zealand came to represent the New World, where every aspect of their lives required renegotiation. Between the two came the experience of the sea-voyage. The three to five month journey from Scotland to New Zealand
These include Thomas Laqueur's, `Bodies, Death and Pauper Funerals' in Representations I:1, (February 1983), pp. 109-131; Ruth Richardson's Death, Dissection and the Destitute (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001) and `Why was Death so Big in Victorian Britain?', published in Death, Ritual and Bereavement, edited by R. Houlbrooke (London and New York: Routledge, 1989). 16 Julie Marie Strange, Death, Grief and Poverty in Britain 1870-1914 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005) p. 12. 17 Strange, p. 14.
15

6

represented a separate sphere where, for a time, a new community was forged around the exigencies of life at sea. While this was the cultural understanding of the migrant and settler experience, in reality there was much movement between the Old and the New Worlds and networks between them were retained.

As a cross-cultural study this thesis attempts to span these three interrelated worlds, necessarily drawing on distinct bodies of source material to frame its investigation. It analyses a range of materials within multiple frames of enquiry. This thesis is simultaneously an investigation of deathways, a migration study, a consideration of the working class experience, and a tentative venture into the history of emotion. As a corollary, source material has been wide-ranging and diverse, moving from nineteenth century cultural texts and recent theorisations on the Scottish working class experience, to government reports, statistical data, and the inscriptions on gravestones. While quantitative evidence has been used selectively to seek an understanding of collective patterns, my methodological approach is primarily qualitative. Of particular significance to this study is the testimony of the migrants themselves as evidenced in their diaries, journals, and letters. This thesis highlights the variety of migrants' experiences of death in all their complexity. Primarily though, its aim is to uncover ways that these experiences were interpreted and acted upon.

Despite attempts to conceptualise migration in ways that recognise its centrality in global histories, theories surrounding the `push or pull' effect on migration continually resurface. 18 Recent historians of British migration, such as Marjory Harper who writes about the Scottish experience, contend that migrants to Australia and New Zealand were more likely to have been adventurers rather than exiles. 19 The first chapter of this thesis, which looks at aspects of life and death in working class Scotland in the 1840s, provides evidence for caution against too ready an
18

An example of the former is Dirk Hoerder's, Cultures in Contact: World Migrations in the Second Millenium (Durham: Duke University Press, 2002) 19 Marjory Harper, Adventurers and Exiles: The Great Scottish Exodus (London: Profile, 2004)

7

acceptance of Harper's thesis. This chapter considers a most important facet of the push factor, namely, the very real fear of downward mobility. New Zealand scholars argue that the vast majority of those immigrating to New Zealand were individuals and families belonging to the labouring classes, though they were not necessarily those from the most depressed social groups. 20 For the lower middle and `comfortable' working-classes, the widespread existence of the abject poor contributed directly to fears of slipping further down the ranks into the underclass. All who occupied the working classes held an economic status that could only ever be described as fragile. The very real possibilities of accident and illness,

unemployment, widowhood or old age meant that these people lived daily with the possibility of falling into pauperdom and the ultimate fear of the pauper's grave. In Glasgow in the 1840s, over a quarter of all burials were `on the parish', the euphemistic term for a pauper's burial. 21 These generally involved mass interments into pits which were covered in quicklime to speed up decomposition. There was neither ceremony nor memorial to mark the place of burial. A funeral on the parish was the `ultimate degradation for the individual and the ultimate disgrace for a Victorian worker's family'. 22 It is a contention of this thesis that anxiety about downward mobility acted as a powerful inducement to migration. 23 I argue that the spectre of the pauper's grave was one of a complex of motivating factors prompting the movement to countries and colonies where, it was believed, there was a real possibility of `doing better'.

Chapter Two considers the sea voyage from Scotland to New Zealand. It contends that this voyage represented a liminal zone where death and burial at sea presented migrants with their first major challenge to traditional ideas and practices. The harsh and often callous reality of death at sea forced many migrants to confront the severing of familiar death practices and rituals. This chapter draws on shipboard
Tony Simpson, The Immigrants: The Great Migration form Britain to New Zealand, 1830-1890 (Auckland: Godwit, 1997), p. 155. 21 The Report on the Mortality Bills for the City of Glasgow 1851, cited in McFarland, p. 35. 22 Strange, p. 7. 23 R.S. Neale has explored this idea with reference to the `middling' class in his History and Class: Essential Readings in Theory and Interpretation (Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1983)
20

8

diaries, private letters, and autobiographical accounts as its main primary sources. These are extremely rich sources for an investigation into the private experiences of grief and mourning. While the majority of archived diaries and letters are written by paying passengers who travelled by cabin class, and who were a distinct minority among migrants travelling to New Zealand, widespread literacy among all classes of Britons in the nineteenth century means that the words of working class migrants travelling in steerage can also be found. 24 The archival evidence used here is complemented by a range of primary and secondary published sources including government reports, quantitative studies and ship surgeons' log books.

Unlike her earlier book, Pat Jalland's later work, Australian Ways of Death, moves across class and spatial boundaries making it more closely aligned with the concerns of this thesis. Because of the similarities between the New Zealand and Australian experiences, particularly during the sea-voyage, Jalland's study provides a useful model for my own research into death at sea. The experiences of British migrants during the passage to the Australasian colonies have been carefully researched and presented by historians such as Don Charlwood and David Hastings. 25 Robin Haines provides an interesting overview in the Australian context, drawing on both her own work on ship surgeons and her collaborative efforts with quantitative researchers on shipboard mortality. My own findings test Haines' celebratory view of the work of health professionals and officials, using the autobiographical testimony of passengers to offer an alternative reading. 26

The Waikato University Library houses a comprehensive collection of nineteenth-century autobiographical material. This collection of primary sources, which includes ship diaries, journals, and personal letters, has been compiled by Kathryn Parsons from repositories around New Zealand. 25 Don Charlwood, The Long Farewell (Victoria: Allen Lane, 1981); David Hastings, Over the Mountains of the Sea: Life on the Migrant Ships 1870-1885 (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 2006). 26 Robin Haines, Doctors at Sea: Emigrant Voyages to Colonial Australia (Hampshire and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005) and Robin Haines and Ralph Shlomowitz, `Deaths of Babies Born on Government-Assisted Emigrant Voyages to South Australia in the Nineteenth Century', in Health and History, 6:1 (2004).

24

9

Chapter Three considers death practices, grief and mourning among Scottish migrants after their arrival in New Zealand, with a special focus on the settlers who moved into the Old Auckland Province from 1840-1890. 27 Gerdien Jonker notes that rites associated with the life cycle acquire extra meaning when performed in a migrant context: they permit the expression of a former national identity while teaching younger generations about the customs and beliefs of their homeland. 28 As a study of Scots migrants, the focus, by necessity, remains upon immigrant New Zealanders. The cross-cultural transmission of deathways between Maori and Pakeha would constitute a separate study of its own and unfortunately lies beyond the scope of this thesis. Maori burial customs were subject to a great deal of regional variation and differed from iwi to iwi and hapu to hapu. Nevertheless, accounts of tangihanga ritual, such as that written by Captain John Hemery, offer a tantalising indication of the potential richness of such a study.

This thesis considers key themes important to the context of this period in New Zealand. Alcohol consumption, violence, suicide and disease were, in varying degrees, facets of working class experience. In chapter three, mortality figures and disease and crime statistics are used to suggest patterns, which are then scrutinised for meaning. 29 Letters and journals show gendered differences in every aspect of the death experience, while the ethnic dimension of cultural praxis is far less clear. The chapter includes an exploration into the division of gender roles in death practice, and gendered societal expectations in regards to mourning and grieving. Also included is a preliminary investigation into the colonial graveyard, with a special focus on Auckland's Symonds Street Cemetery. Stephen Deed has ably investigated the material culture of New Zealand cemeteries in his unpublished thesis, and my own study draws on his findings. His research demonstrates the ways that gravestones can be read to gain understandings of society, indicating such
A paucity of official source material in New Zealand before the 1870s required that the scope be widened to include the second half of the nineteenth century. 28 G. Jonker, `Death, Gender and Memory' in Death, Gender and Ethnicity, D. Field, J. Hockey and N. Small, eds, (London: Routledge, 1997), pp. 187-201.
27

10

factors as the importance of ethnicity. `The houses of the dead, like the houses of the living', Deed argues, `were a perfect expression of the reality, hopes, dreams, beliefs, and ideals of nineteenth century New Zealand'. 30

This thesis concludes with an exploration into the world of personal grief, taking as its source the journal of a migrant who used diary writing as a way to work through his personal mourning experience. Peter Stearns has insisted that `aspects of emotional experience are legitimate subjects for historical enquiry' that can help to push social history in new directions. 31 Chris Hilliard writes: `There is more to life than material life, but New Zealand historians have tended to keep their distance from research on emotion, self-presentation and self-understanding, the quotidian habits of thought and belief.' 32 This thesis reflects upon the emotional struggles experienced by grieving families and individuals, with awareness of the flexible and fluid definitions of grief and mourning. It is a study concerned with both the act, and the practical aftermath of death, as well as the `anatomy of private grief'. 33

Difficulty in disaggregating official figures by place of origin has proved a methodological problem. While the Irish are more often subcategorised in official statistics, the Scots are invariably grouped with the English as `British' migrants. 30 Stephen Deed, `Unearthly Landscapes: The Development of the Cemetery in Nineteenth Century New Zealand' (MA thesis, University of Otago, 2004), p. 59. 31 P.N. Stearns and C.Z. Stearns, `Emotionology: Clarifying the History of Emotions and Emotional Standards', in American Historical Review, 90 (1985), p. 814. 32 Chris Hilliard `Colonial Colonization and National Identity' in New Zealand Journal of History, 36:1 (April 2002), p. 86. 33 McFarland, p. 44.

29

11

CHAPTER one
deathways among the Scottish working classes, 1840-50
This chapter explores aspects of life and death among the Scottish working classes, with a focus on the urban communities from which large numbers of settlers to New Zealand hailed. 1 The chapter begins with an examination of the poor living conditions among the lower classes which led to disproportionately high mortality rates for endemic and epidemic disease. Patterns of life expectation and death are first surveyed, and then investigated for meaning. Key topics for focus are child mortality and the burial club schemes which were a form of life insurance that developed among the Scottish poor, and were often the only thing keeping families from a pauper's grave. The issue of human dissection relates directly to the experience of the lower classes and it will be argued that the practice of supplying the medical schools with the bodies of paupers for dissection contributed to the complex of push factors for migration. This chapter also aims to uncover customs relating to death practices in nineteenth century Scotland that might be translated into the colonial context. Aspects of the diverse pre-migration death practices among Scottish communities are investigated, with a focus on the waking tradition. Scotland underwent vast economic and social changes during the course of the nineteenth century, and attitudes to death and burial changed with them. The rapid increase in urbanisation meant that death became a `problem' to be dealt with by town planners and city officials, rather than a natural process managed by families and communities. This chapter concludes with a discussion on burial reform and the movement away from the traditional kirkyard burial grounds, to managed, landscaped cemeteries.

This is particularly true of the early period of settlement. A considerable number of migrants to New Zealand in the 1840s had first experienced internal migration within Britain and Ireland, and in particular from rural to urban areas.

1

12

In her book Death in the Victorian Family, Pat Jalland examines Christian mourning customs and ideas among the upper-middle classes in Britain during the latter half of the nineteenth century. She identifies the concept of `good' and `bad' deaths which came to be collectively understood among Christian denominations. 2 A `good' death was slow and protracted, where the dying had time to make peace with God. It required piety and the courageous acceptance of physical pain and suffering. Ideally the `good' dea