TURNOVER INTENTIONS: THE MEDIATION EFFECTS OF JOB SATISFACTION, AFFECTIVE COMMITMENT, AND CONTINUANCE COMMITMENT

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Psychology at The University of Waikato by DEREK RILEY

______________________

The University of Waikato 2006

ABSTRACT
Retention and productivity levels of a workforce are one of the essential ingredients for organisations to prosper in today's competitive business environment. Turnover intentions of the workforce are an important consideration for managers of organisations, employees, families, and communities alike. This study investigated a comprehensive model of turnover intentions that included two proximal variables, (job satisfaction, and organisational commitment), the distal variables of organisational justice, work strain, work overload, and work-tofamily conflict and family-to-work conflict with the turnover intentions. A questionnaire was completed by 114 participants of the Allied Health workforce at the Waikato District Health Board, from allied health occupational groups, psychologists, physiotherapists, social workers, dieticians, and speech language therapists. Job satisfaction, affective commitment, distributive, interactional, and procedural justice, strain and family-to-work conflict were correlated with turnover intentions. Results of the mediated regression analyses found that job satisfaction and affective commitment are significant mediators between distributive, interactional, and procedural justice, work strain, and family work conflict with turnover intentions. The major implications from this research are that managers of organisation need to foster job satisfaction and affective commitment within their organisation to reduce turnover intentions. In the final chapter, the conclusions are discussed in terms of its practical implications to organisations, employees and the need for future research.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Each of the people below has contributed to my academic journey in their unique way and without their valuable contribution, this thesis would not have been possible. I would like to thank Mike O'Driscoll as my supervisor for all his patience and guidance during the writing of my thesis. In my academic journey, I have met some inspirational lecturers in particular Tom Kalliath, who I admired for his faith and always had time to listen and support me through my first year of graduate study, I thank you. I am also indebted to the Waikato District Health Board and the allied health employees who volunteered to take part in this study. Also to the professional advisors who distributed the questionnaires to the participants without you this research would not have been possible. To the psychology department staff in particular, Rob Bakker, who has always been able and willing to help me with any computer problems. Your valuable guidance in computer technology has enabled me to realise my goals and finish my thesis. Thank you Rob for your expertise, and guidance. My special thanks to Maria do Carmo for your love, understanding, patience, and belief in my academic ability. Also to Sarah and Julie thank you for your continued love, support, and encouragement during my academic journey. I dedicate this thesis to you both.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract Acknowledgements Contents List of Tables List of Figures ii iii iv vi vii

Chapter One Introduction
Background Employee Turnover Consequences of Employee Turnover Purpose of This Research Minimizing Voluntary Turnover Theoretical Model with Turnover Intentions Proximal Variables Job Satisfaction Organisational Commitment Distal Variables Correlates of Job Satisfaction Correlates of Affective Commitment Correlates of Continuance Commitment Mediated relationships Job Satisfaction Affective Commitment Continuance Commitment Summary of Hypothesis 1 1 2 5 6 8 9 10 14 19 23 28 30 31 33

Chapter Two Method
Organisational Context Participants Instrument Measures Procedure 38 40 41 42 45

iv

Chapter Three Results
Descriptive Statistics Job satisfaction Correlations and Regression Affective Commitment Correlations and Regression Continuance Commitment Correlations and Regression Turnover Intention Correlation and Regression Mediated Regression Job Satisfaction Affective Commitment 47 49 52 52 54 57 63

Chapter Four Discussion
Proximal Variables Job Satisfaction Affective Commitment Continuance Commitment Mediated Relationships Practical Implications Job Satisfaction Affective Commitment Distal Variables Future Research Strengths of the Research Limitations of the Research Conclusions 70 71 72

82 83 85 87 88 89 92 93 113 115 117

References
Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C

v

LIST OF TABLES
Table
1. Number of Respondents for Each Allied Health Occupational Group 2. Descriptive Statistics 3. Correlations between Major Variables 4. Regression Equation: All Predictors with Job Satisfaction. 5. Regression Equation: All Predictors with Affective Commitment 6. Regression Equation: All Predictors with Continuance Commitment 7. Regression Equation: Proximal Variables with Turnover Intentions. 8. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5a. 9. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H5b. 10. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5c. 11. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5d. 12. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5g. 13. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5e. 14. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 5f. 15. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6a. 16. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6b. 17. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6c. 18. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6d. 19. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6g. 20. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6e. 21. Mediating Regression Equation Testing Hypothesis H 6f. 40 48 50 51 53 54 55 57 58 59 60 61 62 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 68

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
1. Turnover Intentions Model 2. The Geographical Boundaries of the WDHB. 8 39

vii

CHAPTER 1:

INTRODUCTION

A characteristic of organisations in the 21st century is the continuous and rapid pace of change. Volatile free market economic environments, rapidly changing technologies, global competition, workforce diversity, and new organisational structures are some of the challenges an organisation faces. Organisations may differ in the priority they attach to the human resource component, in their efforts toward achieving high productivity and competitive advantage, yet they all recognise the value of a qualified, motivated, stable, and responsive team of employees (Huselid, 1995). Retention and productivity levels of the existing workforce are an essential concern in human resource management. Employee turnover is one of the most studied topics in organisational psychology (Mitra, Jenkins, & Gupta, 1992) and is of interest to other professionals, including personnel researchers, and managers of organisations (Mobley, Griffeth, Hand, and Meglino, 1979).

Employee Turnover Employees may exit an organisation either voluntarily or involuntarily. For the purpose of this research, `turnover intention' is defined as an employees decision to leave an organisation voluntarily (Dougherty, Bluedorn & Keon, 1985; Mobley, 1

1977). Employees leave for a number of reasons, some to escape negative work environments, some are more in alignment with their career goals, and some to pursue opportunities that are more financially attractive. Involuntary turnover is usually employer initiated, where the organisation wishes to terminate the relationship due to incompatibilities in matching its requirements. Involuntary turnover can also include death, mandatory retirements, and ill health (Mobley, 1977). In literature, turnover intention has been identified as the immediate precursor for turnover behaviour (Mobley, Horner & Hollingsworth, 1978; Tett & Meyer, 1993). It has been recognised that the identification of variables associated with turnover intentions is considered an effective strategy in reducing actual turnover levels (Maertz & Campion, 1998).

Consequences of Employee Turnover An employee's exit from an organisation is a direct cost, in the form of having to select, recruit, and train a new employee (Dalton, Todor, & Krackhardt 1982; Staw, 1980). The exiting of employees also has indirect cost implications that include reduced morale, pressure on the remaining staff, costs of learning, and the loss of social capital (Des & Shaw, 2001). One of the main consequences for organisations that have a high turnover is the financial cost. The total costs of employee turnover are hard to measure, in particular the effects on the organisation's culture, employee morale, and social capital or loss of organisational memory (Des & Shaw 2001). The focus has been mainly on the tangible costs associated with turnover in the areas of selection, recruitment, induction and training of new staff, 2

and the cost of being short-staffed (Cascio, 1987). The cost of losing a high performer who has a high degree of knowledge, skills and abilities, or an employee, who is employed in an area where there is a labour market shortage, can be substantial to the organisations performance, productivity, and service delivery. Dalton and Rador (1986) have estimated the cost of turnover to an organisation has been on average one to one and a half times the employee's salary. Indeed, ClarkRayner and Harcourt (2001) estimate the costs of external recruitment of personnel at a New Zealand bank to be NZ$4,500 for non-management employees and NZ$12,500 for management employees. In addition, turnover can have a negative impact on other employees by disrupting group socialization processes and increasing internal conflict, which can lead to triggering additional turnover (North, Rasmussen, Hughes, and Finlayson 2005). Turnover of employees may in itself trigger additional turnover by causing a decline in confidence and by highlighting that alternative jobs are available. In addition, the interpersonal bond that is developed between employees is central to the communication patterns that are characteristic and unique to any organisation. Indeed Price (1977) argues that social dynamics and effective communication systems are central to the effective performance levels of work teams. Turnover can have a negative effect on the functioning of an organisation through loss of team integration, cohesion, and morale. It may also lead to increased in-group conflicts and breakdown of interaction with customers. It is widely believed that a significant amount of turnover adversely influences organisational effectiveness and disrupts performance and productivity (Horn and Kinichi, 2001). In terms of effectiveness, the cognitive withdrawal of the employee 3

prior to separation, and in terms of productivity by reducing the organisations skill level as high turnover disrupts the process of production, leading to inefficiencies (Alexander, Bloom, and Nuchols, 1994). High turnover requires organisations to spend considerable time in inducting the new employees to the social, performance norms and culture of an organisation. This requires a greater degree of control to ensure the organisation's products and services are delivered to the customer (Katz and Kahn, 1978, Staw 1980; Price 1977). According to Shaw, Gupta, and Delery (2005) a negative relationship between workforce performance and turnover has been well established in literature. Indeed, they found significant inverse relationship between quit rates and productivity and Alexander et al. (1994) found that voluntary turnover related negatively to cost effectiveness in a sample of hospitals. Overall, the empirical research indicates that voluntary turnover reduces an organisation's human capital component and therefore associates negatively with organisational performance. In sum, an overwhelming amount of research indicates that turnover is expensive (Mobley and Hall, 1973). Turnover can be positive and negative to individual employees, organisations and communities. On a personal level, the employee may decide to leave a stressful form of employment and move into a different job that may be more in line with their career objectives. On the other hand, the employee could lose also by disrupting the family's social support system and walking into a job that does not live up to expectations as promised by the organisation. Turnover is associated with an individual's ability to move into new organisations, which is vital for the future development of organisations. However, if turnover is excessive, organisational productivity may be decreased (Mobley 1982). 4

It also needs to be recognised that not all turnover is detrimental to an organisation. If employees who are poor performers are encouraged to leave, employees that are more productive can be employed in their place; therefore, the importance of effective recruitment and selection procedures as highlighted by Barrick and Zimmerman, (2005) are essential. This would then increase the human capital of the organisation (Tziner, & Birati 1996). Turnover may lead to movement of employees into new positions and promotion. According to Dalton and Todor (1979), moderate levels of turnover are acceptable and encouraged as the new employee may contribute fresh ideas, their knowledge, skills and abilities, creative approaches to problem solving, and different working styles that can enhance the social capital of the organisation.

Purpose of this Research Building a knowledge base on what causes an employee to choose to leave an organisation gives organisations the opportunity to curtail voluntary turnover and /or to manage the turnover process more effectively. Aspects of the work environment and employee retention strategies can then be created. The primary aim of this thesis was to undertake research at the Waikato District Health Board (WDHB), within the allied health work force, to identify the variables that influence turnover intentions. In particular, this research explored the concept of turnover intentions and extended previous theoretical research by investigating the mediating effects of job satisfaction, affective and continuance commitment.

5

Despite vast empirical research in the literature to date, the importance of understanding the factors contributing to an employee's decision to leave an organisation has not been given due importance. According to Dalton, Krackhardt and Porter (1981), further empirical research is required to gain greater understanding of the process of turnover. Morrell, Loan-Clarke and Wilkinson (2001 p. 5) argue, "there is yet no universally accepted account or framework for why people choose to leave". Indeed the amount of literature from a New Zealand allied workforce perspective is sparse. Therefore, this research into the most influential variables is of considerable benefit to the empirical body of knowledge and of practical value to large employing organisations, specifically the WDHB.

Minimizing Voluntary Turnover As mentioned, the coming of the 21st century brings with it challenges for businesses that want to enjoy a competitive edge over their rivals. This would need to include having a work force that is stable and reliable. An increasing amount of research suggests implementation of high performance work practices to reduce voluntary turnover. These high performance work systems are an approach to an organisation's drive to improve its production, service delivery, and quality to its customers (Huselid, 1995). They may include employee recruitment and selection procedures, remuneration incentives, performance appraisal systems such as 360degree feedback, and training, education and development that improve the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the employee. These are aimed at increasing the employee's motivation and effectively enhancing the retention of high performers within the organisation (Barrick & Zimmerman, 2005; Huselid, 1995). Huselid 6

(1995) has found direct evidence that these human resource management practices have a direct impact by lowering employee turnover, raising productivity, and improving financial performance. Worldwide, HR health managers are facing a crisis in how to retain their most productive workers during times of high staff turnover. Studies have shown that the health industry has one of the highest industry turnover rates (Numerof, Abrams, & Schank, 2002). The turnover of staff means a direct cost to the organisation and, further, the global demand for qualified health workers is on the increase, with most countries facing similar trends of an ageing workforce. In a New Zealand context, the implications for the health workforce are apparent, as outlined by the Ministry of Health (n.d.) which noted that the labour workforce pool to recruit from is getting older and smaller in number.

A theoretical model for turnover intentions Some variables are regarded as proximal that have a direct relationship with turnover intentions whereas the distal variables have more an indirect relationship. Figure 1 (see page 8) represents the theoretical model for turnover intentions utilized in the present research. Starting from the right side of the model the criterion variable turnover intentions. The proximal variables are: (1) organisational commitment, including affective and continuance commitment, and (2) job satisfaction

7

The rest are distal variables, which are grouped into five variables: (1) organisational justice including distributive, interactional and procedural justice (2) work strain (3) work overload (4) work-to-family conflict, and (5) family-to-work conflict Distal Variables Organisational Justice Work Strain Job Satisfaction and Organisational Commitment Turnover Intentions Proximal Variables Criterion Variable

Work Overload

Work-to-Family Conflict Family-to-Work Conflict Figure 1: Turnover intentions model

Background The selection of variables is based upon a literature review of the topic. A meeting was held with the Manager of the Human Resource Department and the Manager for Business Re-engineering of the WDHB to define the scope of the 8

research and the appropriateness of specific variables that would be applicable to WDHB. The theoretical reasoning for the selection of each of the variables is outlined below.

Proximal variables At the centre of some turnover models have been the proximal variables of job satisfaction and organisational commitment (Steel, 2002) and were mainly developed from the vast amount of research on job satisfaction and turnover (Porters & Steers, 1973). The models were extended to include the effects of organisational commitment (Porters, Steers, Mowday, & Bouliam 1974) and other forms of commitment (Allen, & Meyer 1990; Blau 1989; Chang 1999; Gaertner & Nollen 1989; Lee, Ashford, Walsh, & Mowday 1992). In this research both job satisfaction and organisational commitment (affective and continuance) are considered as proximal antecedents as they are strong direct predictors of turnover intentions.

Job Satisfaction is a subjective emotional evaluation made consciously or unconsciously by the employee and is defined as "a pleasurable or positive emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one's job or job experiences" (Locke, 1976, p. 1304). Job satisfaction is multidimensional in nature with specific facets; satisfaction with work, pay, promotion, co-workers, plus a global item for measuring overall job satisfaction (Rice, Gentile & McFarlin, 1991).

Work is such a large part of an employee's life and is represented by a belief that employees who are more satisfied with their work experiences and environment 9

will stay longer (Spector, 2000), will attend work regularly, and perform at an optimum level (Porters & Steers, 1973). Job satisfaction is included in this research because of its predictor strength of turnover intentions. Many researchers have shown that high levels of job satisfaction are negatively related to turnover intentions (Koslowsky, 1991), and turnover (Hom and Griffeth 1991;). More importantly, three meta-analyses have concluded that there is a distinct link (Carsten and Spector, 1987; Hom and Griffeth, 1991; Steel and Ovalle, 1984). Thus, employees who are satisfied with their job are less likely to want to leave their organisation. The present study tested the hypothesis that: H 1a: Job satisfaction will be negatively associated with turnover intentions.

Organisational commitment has become one of the most popular work attitudes studied by practitioners and researchers (Meyer, Allen& Smith, 1993; Mowday, Porter, & Steers, 1982). One of the main reasons for its popularity is that organisations have continued to find and sustain competitive advantage through teams of committed employees. Mowday, Porter and Steers, (1982) and Meyer, Paunonen, Gellatley, & Goffin, and Jackson, (1989) have found that committed employees are more likely to remain with the organisation and strive towards the organisation's mission, goals and objectives. Organisational commitment is defined as the degree to which the employee feels devoted to their organisation (Spector, 2000). Further research into this variable has concluded that commitment is a diverse construct. There is general acceptance that organisational commitment has three main facets: affective, continuance, and normative, each with its own underlying `psychological states' (Meyer & Allen, 1995). Affective commitment refers to the 10

emotional bond and the identification the employee has with the organisation. For the employees the positives include enhanced feelings of devotion, belongingness, and stability (Meyer, & Allen 1993). Continuance (economic/calculative) commitment refers to what the employee will have to give up if they have to leave the organisation or in other terms, the material benefits to be gained from remaining. Employees whose primary link to the organisation is based on continuance commitment remain with the organisation because they feel they need to do so for material benefits (Meyer, & Allen, 1993). Therefore, if the employees believe that fewer viable alternatives are available their continuance commitment will be stronger to their current employer. Lastly, normative commitment or moral commitment (Jaros, Jermier, Koehler, & Sincich, 1993) reflects a feeling of obligation to continue employment. Employees with a high level of normative commitment feel that they ought to remain with the organisation (Bentein, Vandenberghe & Stinglhamber, 2005). Jaros et al (1993) argue that the commitment is determined by being obligated to work in the organisation, a sense of moral obligation following their parents, who may have been long-term employees of the organisation therefore, a sense of duty to belong. The association between affective commitment and turnover has been well established in previous research (Iverson & Buttigieg, 1999; Mathieu & Zajac 1990; Mowday, Porters & Steers, 1982). The meta-analysis of Griffeth, Hom & Gaertner (2000) draws the inference that affective commitment is one of the best predictors of voluntary turnover. Research of Jaros, Jermier, Koehler, and Sincich, (1993) and Chen, Hui, and Sgo, (1999) has found a negative relationship between continuance commitment and turnover intentions. Normative commitment was omitted from this 11

research because the research of Meyer et al. (1993), and Sommers (1995) had found some overlapping of the constructs, normative commitment, and affective commitment. Furthermore, affective commitment has had consistent empirical evidence to its suitability.

An employee who has a high organisational commitment is willing to bring to bear extra effort on behalf of the organisation. Thus, employees with a strong emotional attachment (affective commitment) tend to work harder and therefore are more productive and have a strong emotional desire to remain with the organisation (Meyer et al. 1993). In contrast, the employee with strong economical/calculative ties to the organisation (continuance commitment) will stay because of the `side bets' they have invested in the organisation. The side bets can be monetary value, a pension plan, specific skills acquired whilst working there or status (Becker, 1960) and would be lost if he/she decides to leave. It is expected that both affective and continuance commitment will be negatively associated to turnover intentions (Meyer, Stanley, Herscovitch, & Topolynytsky, 2002). The present study tests the hypotheses that: H 1b: Affective commitment will be negatively associated with turnover intentions. H 1c: Continuance commitment will be negatively associated with turnover intentions.

12

Distal Variables The basic turnover model Mobley (1977) was mainly developed in the period from 1977 to 1981 and forms the basis for all succeeding models. The later models drew mainly from Mobley's (1977) process model, which dominated the early research on turnover. Further research by Mobley, Griffeth, Hand and Meglino, (1979); Mobley, Horner, and Hollingworth, (1978); Muchinsky and Morrow (1980) Price (1977) Price and Meuller, (1981); and Steers and Mowday (1981) has continued to shape the thinking of the turnover literature today. Mobley (1982) attributed turnover to four classes of determinants. The first class of determinants of turnover include the external antecedents such as the economy, employment-unemployment levels, labour-force composition and mix, and inflation. The second class are organisational determinants such as type of industry, supervisory style, remuneration, job content, reward system, and work environment. Individual aspects make up the last two determinants. The first of these involve individual non-work related factors such as demographics and personal factors e.g. age, tenure, sex, education, personality, ability, and vocational interests. The second class of individual aspects are work related antecedents including job autonomy, or unchallenging/uninteresting work, job satisfaction, career aspirations, and expectations, organisational commitment, stress, and intentions to stay. (Mobley, 1982). The distal variables chosen for the present research were organisational justice, (procedural, interactional, and distributive justices) work strain, work overload, work-to-family conflict and family-to-work conflict. These distal variables are examined based on their correlation with:

13

· Job Satisfaction
· · Affective Commitment Continuance Commitment

Distal variables - Correlates of Job Satisfaction Organisational Justice: Issues of justice and fairness are key concerns to employees within an organisation. Employees often ascertain whether their contributions to the organisation match the rewards, they receive. They also judge the fairness of the decision-making process, see if the processes are consistently fair, and do not discriminate against any employee (Bias, Shapiro, & Moag, 1987). The main types of organisational justice are distributive, procedural, and interactional justice. Distributive justice refers to the dissemination of resources and the criteria by which they are distributed to the employees. It includes essential elements of equity, equality and need (Muchinsky, 2000). In contrast, procedural justice refers to the fairness of the processes and procedures used to determine results (Aryee & Chay, 2001). Employees trade their knowledge, skills, and abilities and motivation for rewards. The rewards can be tangible, such as income and intangible, such as being treated with respect, dignity, and fairness. This reciprocal exchange is grounded in social exchange theory (Blau, 1964) and the mutual transaction of benefits to each party shapes the social interactions. It is reasonable to assume that employees are more likely to respond favourably to fair treatment than unfair treatment. Indeed psychological theory states that the importance of fairness is a basic need for the well

14

being and satisfaction of employees (Blau, 1964). Therefore, employees who perceive that they are being treated without prejudice are more likely to have a high degree of satisfaction and continue their employment with the organisation. Recently, interactional justice has come to the forefront and refers to the perceived fairness of interpersonal treatment by the employee's manager. Interactional justice perceptions are concerned with ensuring the employees are treated with dignity, sensitivity, and respect and whether manager's decisions are accurarely communicated and explained to the employees (Colquit, Conlon, Wesson, Porter & Ng 2001). In summary, employees who perceive they are not being treated fairly due to unfair interpersonal treatment or unfair procedures develop low job satisfaction and may seek alternative employment with another organisation in pursuit of equity (Adams, 1963; Folger, & Konovsky, 1989). Thus, employees who perceive strong levels of fairness (social exchange theory) will experience higher levels of job satisfaction (see Colquitt et al. 2001). This research tests the hypotheses that:

H 2a: Perceptions of distributive justice will have a positive association with job satisfaction H 2b: Perceptions of interactional justice will have a positive association with job satisfaction H 2c: Perceptions of procedural justice will have a positive association with job satisfaction

15

Work strain: has been the focus of many researchers because of its dysfunctional impact on employees and for the organisation as a whole. A stressor is defined as the particular relationship between the employees and their environment when they perceive it to be beyond their cognitive capabilities and endangering their personal well-being. Between the stressors of the environment and outcomes is the variable of strain. According to Koeske, Kirk, and Koeske (1993), strain is the consequence of stressors. Strain is `an internal state of the individual who perceives threats to physical/or mental well-being' (Krantz, Grunberg & Baum, 1985, p. 354). The indicators of stress manifest themselves around employees' experiences of strain, and are commonly linked to feelings of anxiety and depression and cognitive failure (O Driscoll & Brough, 2003) High levels of anxiety mean that the employees are mentally preoccupied and their cognitive mental processing framework and attention to the environment is diminished. This pre-occupation interferes with the employee's ability to process information adequately and to be able to plan effective strategies in their daily activities. Employees who are under work strain respond to their world differently both cognitively and affectively (O'Driscoll & Cooper, 1994).

One approach into health and well-being in the workplace was the stress or strain relationship that looks at the influence of job demands. A second approach is looking at enhancing employees' health and well-being through positive experiences in the form of variety and autonomy, leading to greater job satisfaction and performance (O'Driscoll & Brough, 2003). Occupational strain needs to be dealt with not only for the benefit of the individual, but also for the organisation as a whole. Increasing strain produces 16

anxiety that ultimately affects personal health, morale, productivity, organisational efficiency leading to absenteeism, job dissatisfaction, decreased organisational commitment, and voluntary turnover. Therefore, it is hypothesised that: H 2d: Work strain will be negatively associated with job satisfaction

Work overload: is defined as a stressor when the employee feels that they have too many responsibilities or tasks in a defined period (Cardenas, Major & Bernas, 2004). Overload results from an interaction between the employee and his/her environment. One employee may feel that the workload is reasonable where another may perceive it as over burdening. Work overload is therefore very subjective in nature. Overload may be of two different types: quantitative or qualitative. When employees perceive that they have too much work to do, too many different things to do, or insufficient time to complete assigned work, a condition of quantitative overload exists. Alternatively, qualitative overload occurs when employees feel they lack the ability to complete their jobs or that performance standards are too high, or they just have too much to do regardless of how much time they have. Therefore, an overburdening workload will re