Characterizing the Catalytic Action of -Calpain on Myofibrillar Protein Structure

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Masters of Science in Materials and Process Engineering at The University of Waikato by

EMMA LOUISE FRASER-SMITH

Hamilton, New Zealand 2006

©Emma Fraser-Smith, 2006

Wisdom is supreme; therefore make a full effort to get wisdom. Esteem her and she will exalt you; embrace her and she will honour you. Proverbs 4: 7-8

ii

ABSTRACT
Solving the problem of inconsistent meat tenderness is a top priority of the meat industry. This requires a greater understanding of the processes that affect meat tenderness and the adoption of such information by the meat industry. It is essential that we understand the mechanism of meat tenderisation of which, the calpain protease system is believed to play a central role. This thesis focuses on three aspects; characterisation of calpain activity, the effect of porcine -calpain on myofibril degradation and the effect of -calpain on specific proteins desmin and troponin-T. To study the effect of calpain activity, fluorogenic assays were used to determine: -calpain concentration for optimal peptide cleavage; calcium requirements and the effect of chelating substances on the activity of -calpain. In addition, the affinity of -calpain for substrates CalS-I and CalS-III were assessed. The effect of -calpain on myofibril degradation was evaluated through the use of myofibrillar fragmentation index and density marker beads. Myofibrils were digested at three different temperatures for varying time periods. Conflicting results were displayed and it was concluded that these methods are not accurate, thus further research should be conducted to ensure inconsistencies are eliminated. Specific proteins desmin and troponin-T have previously been shown to exhibit degradation in the presence of calcium and -calpain. SDS-polyacrylamide electrophoresis, western blotting and densitometry measurements were utilized to investigate this effect. It was concluded that -calpain plays a significant role in the post mortem proteolysis of myofibrillar protein. This thesis provides information and strives to give a better understanding of the proteolytic changes that occur within muscle. Understanding how these mechanisms affect meat on a cellular level, can help to control the influence they inflict on meat quality.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thank you to both my supervisors, Dr Suzanne Hurst and Professor Janis Swan. Sue, I thank you for your perseverance, the never-ending encouragement when you no doubt wondered if I would get anything done or ever understand the basic concepts in biochemistry. To Janis, thank you for the opportunities you have presented me with over the years, the ones I took up as well as the ones I missed. You have never stopped believing in me. To you both, you have my respect and gratitude. A special thanks goes to Peter Dobbie for your continued support and guidance. I am incredibly fortunate to have a overseer, mentor and friend all in one package. I would like to express my appreciation to MIRINZ AgResearch for providing me with a topic and an enjoyable workplace. Thank you for the laughs, the conversation and the helping hands as I've worked alongside a brilliant kaleidoscope of people. You are all special and I appreciate your friendship and hope the fun will continue. To my South African, my Bangli's and my German in Auckland, your friendship and assistance when I felt the need for a laugh or a "verbal punching bag" has been my lifeline over the past few months. Thank you for being boys, and for teaching me that even if I'm mad, you can make me madder!!! To my engineers, my friends and my incredibly understanding flatmates, we've finally made it!!!! Thank you for your endless source of encouragement and your confidence in me that I would accomplish this even though at times I've thought otherwise. Finally, to my family: To Clayton and Hadleigh, thank you for the brotherly love, the ups and downs and the fun. To my parents thank you for always being there, if only to just answer the phone to talk about nothing. You are both my role model, my best friend and my never ending source of love and encouragement. Thanks to you all for helping me become the person I am.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS List of Figures List of Tables List of Abbreviations iii iv v vii ix x

Chapter 1

PREFACE

12

Chapter 2

LITERATURE REVIEW

15 15 17 21 22 24 25 28 30 36 37 39 40 43 44 45 45 46 47 52

2.1

Muscle Structure 2.1.1 2.1.2 Muscle Proteins Connective Tissue

2.2 2.4

From Muscle to Meat Mechanisms of Tenderisation 2.3.1 2.3.2 2.3.3 Muscle Degradation Mechanical Degradation Proteolytic Degradation

2.4

Calpains

2.4.2
2.4.2 2.4.3 2.4.4 2.4.5

Calpain Structure Calpain Promoters Calpain Inhibition The Calpain System Degradation Products due to Calpain Activity

2.5

Assays 2.5.1 2.5.2 2.5.3 Fluorogenic Activity assays Myofibril Preparation Protein Measurement and Detection Methods

2.6

Research Objectives

Chapter 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

55 55 55 55

3.1 3.2 3.3

Introduction Muscle Materials

v

3.4 3.5 3.6
3.7

Myofibril Preparation BioRad Protein Assay -Calpain Activity -Calpain Incubation Degradation Markers 3.8.1 3.8.2 Myofibrillar Fragmentation Index Density Beads

55 56 57 57 58 58 58 59 59 59 61 62

3.8

3.9

SDS-PAGE and Western Blotting 3.9.1 3.9.2 3.9.3 Preparing Protein Samples Preparing Polyacrylamide Gels for SDS-PAGE Western blotting

3.10

Experimental Design

Chapter 4 4.1 4.2

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

65 65 65 65 65 67 71 72 75 75 78 81 85 85 89 93

Introduction Characterisation of Calpain Activity 4.2.1 4.2.2 4.2.3 4.2.4 4.2.5 Native -Calpain Denaturing -Calpain

-Calpain Activity
Calpain Digestion of myofibril Proteins Discussion

4.3

The effect of -calpain on Myofibril Degradation

4.3.1
4.3.2 4.3.3 4.4

Myofibrillar Density Myofibrillar Fragmentation Index Discussion

Calpain Digestion of specific proteins: Desmin and Troponin-T 4.4.1 4.4.2 4.4.3 Desmin Degradation Troponin-T Degradation Discussion

Chapter 5 5.1 5.2

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

97 97 98

Conclusions Recommendations for Further Research

REFERENCES

100

vi

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 2.1 Figure 2.2

Diagrammatic representation of macroscopic and microscopic muscle structure. (adapted from Aberle et al., 2001) 16 A diagram of a contractile unit, showing banding patterns, thin and thick filaments, and the areas of overlap that form cross-bridges adapted from (Cairney, 2001). 17 The effect of extension or shortening before rigor completion on the toughness of meat cooked in rigor. Length change is shown as a percentage of the initial excised length. Vertical bars: mean shearing force +/- s.e. (Carse & Marsh, 1974) 30 Model of activation of calpains and tenderisation (Dransfield, 1994) 35 Calpain molecule structure 38

Figure 2.3

Figure 2.4 Figure 2.5 Figure 2.6

Inhibition of calpain I by calpastatin, expressed as the calpain I activity with calpastatin as a percentage when there is no inhibitor at pH 7.0 (Dransfield, 1993). 41 Diagrammatic representation of Density beads within a Myofibril Sample. Effect of increasing porcine -calpain from 1.5 g to 15 g.. Samples run on 10% native-PAGE and Silver stained. MW: kaleidoscope pre-stained protein standard molecular weight marker. 58

Figure 3.1

Figure 4.1

66

Figure 4.2

Effect of increasing concentration porcine -calpain from 1.5 g to 15 g on Western blot. Samples run on 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membrane. Bands indicate the large (~80 kDa) and the small (~30 kDa) -calpain subunits 66 Kinetic assay monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-I by varying amounts 0 to 5 L of porcine -calpain in Tris-MES buffer, pH 7.4. 68 Kinetic assay monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-I by varying amounts 0 to 5 L of porcine -calpain in the presence of calcium. Kinetic assay monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-I by varying amounts 0 to 10 L of 5 mM CaCl2 in the presence of -calpain. Kinetic assay monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-I by varying amounts 0 to 20 L of EGTA in the presence of -calpain. Kinetic assay monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-III by varying amounts 0 to 10 L of CaCl2 in the presence of -calpain.

Figure 4.3

Figure 4.4

69 69 70 70

Figure 4.5

Figure 4.6

Figure 4.7

viii

Figure 4.8

Kinetic assay, monitoring catalysis of 1 mM CalS-III by varying amounts 0 to 20 L of EGTA in the presence of -calpain.

71

Figure 4.9

Silver stain of bovine myofibrils incubated with -calpain and calcium at (A) 0°C for 0-72 hours and (B) 40°C for 0-24 hours. There is no 30-minute sample as too little supernatant produced. 72 76 77 78

Figure 4.10 Effect of storage time at 0°C on relative myofibril density. Figure 4.11 Effect of storage time at 15°C on relative myofibril density. Figure 4.12 Effect of storage time at 40°C on relative myofibril density.

Figure 4.13 Effect of storage time at 0°C on myofibril length (m). Points are means plus or minus standard errors (vertical lines) of measurements, each sampling time point measured in triplicate 80 Figure 4.14 Effect of storage time at 40°C on myofibril length (m). Points are means plus or minus standard errors (vertical lines) of measurements, each sampling time point measured in triplicate 80 Figure 4.15 Effect of storage time at 15°C on myofibril length (m). Points are means plus or minus standard errors (vertical lines) of measurements, each sampling time point measured in triplicate. 81 Figure 4.16 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal desmin antibody at 40°C. 86 Figure 4.17 Degradation of desmin by -calpain at 40 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 86 Figure 4.18 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal desmin antibody at 15°C. 87 Figure 4.19 Degradation of desmin by -calpain at 15 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 88 Figure 4.20 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal desmin antibody at 0°C. 89 Figure 4.21 Degradation of desmin by -calpain at 0 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 89 Figure 4.22 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal troponin-T antibody at 40°C. 90 Figure 4.23 Degradation of troponin-T by -calpain at 40 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 90

ix

Figure 4.24 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal troponin-T antibody at 15°C. 91 Figure 4.25 Degradation of troponin-T by -calpain at 15 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 91

Figure 4.26 Western blots of myofibril samples run on 12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. Blots were incubated with monoclonal troponin-T antibody at 0°C. 92 Figure 4.27 Degradation of troponin-T by -calpain at 0 °C, as indicated by densitometry of the band on the Western blots. 93

LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1 Summary of key changes that occur in skeletal muscle during post mortem storage at 2-4°C (adapted from (Koohmaraie, 1992) 27 Separation techniques in chromatographic purification (adapted from Amersham Biosciences Handbook, United Kingdom) 49 Volumes and Reagents within Preparation of Polyacrylamide Separating Gels 59 Volumes and Reagents within Preparation of Polyacrylamide Stacking Gels 60

Table 2.2

Table 3.1

Table 3.2

x

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AC ADP AP ATP BASS BCA BSA CalS-I CalS-II CalS-III CP EDTA EGTA FRET HRP IEX MCP MFI MHC PBS PMSF SDS SDS-PAGE Affinity Chromotography Adenosine diphosphate Alkaline Phosphatase Adenosine Triphosphate Boric Acid Salt Solution Bicinchonic Acid Bovine Serum Albumin Calpain substrate-1 Calpain substrate-2 Calpain substrate-3 Creatine Phosphate Ethylene Diamine Tetraacetic acid Ethylene Glycol Tetraacetic Acid Fluorescence resonance energy transfer Horseradish Peroxidase Ion Exchange Chromotography Multi-catalytic Protease Complex Myofibrillar Fragmentation Index Myosin Heavy Chain Phosphate Buffered Saline Solution Phenyl-methylsulfonyl Fluoride Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate-polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis TBS TBST TEMED Transfer buffer solution Transfer buffer solution with 20 % w/v Tween Tetra Methyl Ethylene diamin

x

Chapter 1 Preface

11

Chapter 1 Preface

Chapter 1

PREFACE
Tenderness is an important factor affecting consumer acceptance of beef. The National Beef Quality Audit indicated inconsistencies and inadequate tenderness, and reported that this costs the New Zealand beef industry over $217 million annually (Kalchayanand et al., 2000). In New Zealand, there is an increasing consumer demand (and expectation) for a lean tender beef product. The key element is to ensure New Zealand has a financially successful meat industry and that the eating quality of meat products have the higher possible appeal to the consumer.

Producing tender meat and the degree to which tenderness can be controlled will largely depend on the extend to which we (a) know about the different post-mortem events and causative agents when muscle is converted into meat and (b) can improve our knowledge of the role of muscle structure (Ouali, 1989)

Although the process by which meat becomes tender appears to involve the post mortem proteolytic degradation of structural proteins in muscle, the details of this process are not well understood. Several protease enzymes have been implicated in this process, particularly the calpain enzyme system (Koohmaraie, 1990), and the lysosomal cathepsin proteases (Ouali, 1989). A significant effort has been devoted to describing the behaviour of these enzymes in meat. However, equally important to understanding the process of proteolytic tenderisation are the interactions between the protease systems and the structural proteins they degrade. It is unclear which structures within meat/muscle need to be degraded and, moreover, what role these proteins may play in the problem of variability in tenderness in meat.

Muscle is the primary component of meat and an understanding of muscle biology is essential for meat science and meat industry practice. Chapter 2 of this thesis describes muscle structure, the mechanics of tenderisation, and these mechanisms influence the quality of muscle. Further emphasis is placed on the processes within 12

Chapter 1 Preface the conversion of muscle to meat and the important of the calpain system in proteolytic tenderisation.

The Methodology used is described in Chapter 3. This section provides details and explanation of the materials and the methods used to determine and evaluate myofibril degradation.

The data collected using several experimental procedures in trials was done to determine the effect of calpain on myofibrillar proteins are presented and discussed in Chapter 4. Firstly -calpain is characterised using fluorogenic substrates; secondly myofibril degradation is assessed using density marker beads and myofibrillar fragmentation index and thirdly, poly-acrylamide gels and Western blotting are used to determine the degradation of the specific proteins desmin and troponin-T and the relevance of the degradation to meat tenderness is explored.

Conclusions and recommendations are presented in Chapter 5. Further work and opportunities for research are discussed within the area of -calpain degradation on myofibrillar proteins.

This study considers the role of key structural proteins and their response to factors that affect proteolytic degradation with time and temperature. This thesis does not make a direct comparison of whole meat tenderness and protein degradation; rather, it searches to provide evidence that there is a connection that exists through the literature reviewed and analysis of the data obtained

13

Chapter 2: Literature Review

14

Chapter 2: Literature Review

Chapter 2

LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Muscle Structure

The carcass is the product of the animal slaughtering process, and involves removing blood, viscera, head, hair, skin and other tissues from a recently slaughtered animal (Aberle et al., 2001). Carcass meat consists of lean meat, fat, bone and connective tissue. The most important component of the carcass is the muscle. Because people's concept of meat is usually associated with muscle; hence the terms meat and muscle are often used interchangeably. Except in excessively fat animals, skeletal muscle constitutes the bulk (35 to 65%) of the carcass weight (Aberle et al., 2001). Meat also contains some smooth muscle, primarily as a component of blood vessels. Another specialized form of muscle tissue, cardiac muscle, is confined solely to the heart. Skeletal and cardiac muscle also are referred to as striated muscle because of the transverse banding pattern observed microscopically. et al., 2001). The animal body has more than 600 muscles of various shapes, size and action. Specific characteristics of each muscle are dictated by the specialized function that particular muscle performs. Each muscle is covered with a connective tissue sheath, which is continuous with connective tissue that extends into the interior of the muscle (Figure 2.1). Nerve fibres and blood vessels enter and exit the muscle along these connective tissue networks (Aberle et al., 2001). Mammalian skeletal muscle fibres are long, unbranched, threadlike cells that taper slightly at both ends. Although fibres can be up to many centimetres long, they generally do not extend the length of the entire muscle. Fibre diameter can vary considerably, ranging from 1 µm to 100 µm within the same species and even within the same muscle (Warriss, 2000). Fibres contain all organelles normally Skeletal muscle is also termed voluntary muscle, while smooth and cardiac muscles are called involuntary muscles (Aberle

15

Chapter 2: Literature Review found in cells such as nuclei, mitochondria and an extensive sarcoplasmic reticulum all within the sarcoplasm. The mitochondria contain the enzymes involved in aerobic metabolism, the sarcoplasmic reticulum acts as a store for calcium ions, which are released to initiate muscle contraction and reabsorbed to stop it. The sarcoplasm also contains lysosomes, which act as a reservoir of various proteolytic enzymes.

Figure 2.1

Diagrammatic representation of macroscopic and microscopic muscle structure.

(adapted from Aberle et al., 2001)

A unique feature of muscle fibres is the regularly arranged fibrils embedded within the sarcoplasm. These fibrils may occupy about 80% of the volume of each fibre. Each fibril is itself made up of smaller elements called filaments. These are two types - thick filaments consisting mainly of the protein myosin, and thin filaments consisting mainly of the protein actin. Under specific conditions these filaments will react together to produce contraction of the system and therefore the whole muscle (Warriss, 2000). This arrangement of myofibrils, together with the fact that thick and thin filaments overlap in certain regions along their longitudinal axes produces the banding or striated appearance of the myofibril. The dark bands in muscle seen under the polarizing microscope are called A-bands and the intervening bands as called Ibands. The A-band is formed by the thick filaments, together with the

16

Chapter 2: Literature Review overlapping thin filaments. The I-band is mainly thin filaments. Early

microscopists also identified various other lines and zones, including the H-zone, and the M and Z-lines (Warriss, 2000). The Z-line (Figure 2.2) is of particular Desmin Nebulin
I band A band

Titin (inextensible)

Thick (myosin) filaments 1.65µm Titin (extensible)
Z line

M line H zone

Z line

Thin (actin) filaments 1.05µm

Sarcomere

Figure 2.2

A diagram of a contractile unit, showing banding patterns, thin and thick filaments,

and the areas of overlap that form cross-bridges adapted from (Cairney, 2001).

functional significance. It is really a disc through which the thin filaments pass and hence is often known as the Z-disc. Adjacent Z-lines delineate the functional unit of the myofibril referred to as a sarcomere. A myofibril consists of thousands of sarcomeres. Sarcomere length, defined by the distance between two Z-lines, varies with the state of contraction of the muscle but averages between about 1.5 to 2 m (Warriss, 2000). 2.1.1 Muscle Proteins

There are more than 20 different proteins associated with the myofibril (Aberle et al., 2001). Proteins constitute 16-22 percent of skeletal muscle tissue and are generally classified by their function as myofibrillar (contractile); sarcoplasmic (regulatory); or stromal (structural) proteins. Contractile Proteins The sliding filament model for contraction proposed in 1954 (Huxley, 2004) has the thick and thin filaments sliding past one another to produce a change in

17

Chapter 2: Literature Review sarcomere length. Contraction of skeletal muscle direction involves four of the myofibrillar proteins: Myosin, actin, tropomyosin and troponin. Actin and myosin are the contractile proteins and form the actin and myosin filaments of the myofibril. Cross-bridges are formed between the actin and myosin filaments and conformational changes in myosin generate the contractile force during contraction. In the relaxed state, a muscle generates very little tension, and can easily be stretched by a force pulling on it. This means that there are no cross-bridges between actin and myosin filaments and the filaments of each sarcomere slide passively over one another. There is still another state called rigor mortis, which occurs after death where permanent cross-bridges form and prevent the sliding of these filaments, so that the muscle becomes inextensible. In contrast to actin and myosin, tropomyosin and troponin play the role of regulatory proteins and assist in turning the contractile process `on' and `off'. The proteins in the thick filament are myosin, C-protein and M-line proteins. The function of these proteins has not been determined although several theories have been proposed. A C-protein binds to myosin at low ionic strength. The two types of M-line proteins are creatine kinase and M-line protein. Creatine kinase is an enzyme involved in a reaction that forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine from creatine phosphate (CP) and ADP. M-Line protein binds to both myosin and creatine kinase; however, its function is not fully understood (Betchel,, 1998). Myosin is the major contractile protein and comprises approximately 45% of myofibrillar protein (Aberle et al., 2001). This molecule is an elongated rod shape. The thickened portion at one end is called the head region, and the long thin portion is called the rod or tail portion. The region between the head and the rod regions is called the neck. Myosin molecules assemble into bipolar thick filaments with heads protruding at either end of the filament in a helical arrangement and rods comprising the backbone of the filament (Aberle et al., 2001). The protruding heads are the functionally active sites of the thick filament. They contain enzymic ATPase and are able to bind actin, the main component of the thin filament.

18

Chapter 2: Literature Review

The length of the thin filament varies from one species to another. The distance from the Z-disk to the tip of the filament is 1.05 m in rabbit and 1.20 m in beef (Knight & Offer, 1988). The main component, actin, is a roughly globular protein that forms a helical polymer with the appearance of two strings of beads twisted together. Rod-like tropomyosin molecules, 40 nm long, lay end-to-end alongside each of the two strings of actin subunits. The monomer form, called G­actin, polymerises to form F-actin. The F-actin forms the backbone of the thin filament and provides a binding site for tropomyosin and troponin. Each tropomyosin molecule has a tadpole-shaped troponin molecule bound towards one end of it. The thin filament is a polar structure and all thin filaments on one side of the adisk have the opposite polarity to those on the other side. Regulatory Proteins Tropomyosin and troponin are involved in regulating skeletal muscle contraction (Bechtel, 1986). Tropomyosin prevents contraction by steric inhibition of actin and myosin binding. When free calcium ion (Ca2+) concentration increases, tropomyosin moves so that myosin can bind to G-actin binding sites on the Factin filament. The effects of Ca2+ on tropomyosin are mediated by the troponin complex, which binds Ca2+ and regulates the action of actin and myosin. There are three forms of troponin - troponin-C, troponin-I and troponin-T. Troponin-C binds calcium and troponin-I bind to the N-terminal of troponin-C and inhibit magnesium-activated ATPase of actomyosin. Troponin-T interacts with tropomyosin and fixes the position of the entire troponin complex within the thin filament.

Structural Proteins The relative positions of myofilaments in the myofibril are maintained by a cytoskeleton made up of several other proteins including titin (sometimes called connectin), nebulin and desmin. Titin (approximately 3000-3700 kDa) is the most abundant cytoskeletal protein in muscle, making up about 10% of myofibrillar proteins (Aberle et al., 2001). It is a long, slender elastic protein that spans from the M-Line to the Z-line. Titin 19

Chapter 2: Literature Review binds to and is rendered inextensible by myosin thick filaments along most of its central length. The remaining segments act as an elastic spring to connect the ends of thick filaments to the Z-Line. Degradation or extraction of titin reduces stiffness of relaxed myofibrils (Bulinski et al., 1988). As well as maintaining the resting tension of striated muscle cells, the size and position of titin within the myofibril may help maintain the overall structural integrity of the myofibril by keeping the thick filament in a central position within each sarcomere. Nebulin (600kDa) makes up about 4% of myofibrillar proteins. It is located close and parallel to the thin filament. Nebulin extends longitudinally along the entire length of the thin filament from the Z disk (Aberle et al., 2001). This protein appears to provide the template to define the length of the thin filament in the muscle. Nebulin has been hypothesised to form a regulatory complex with troponin and may help in cross-bridge cycling while maintaining the myosin heads close to actin that prevents random actin-myosin interaction in resting muscle (Huff-Lonergan & Lonergan, 1999). Desmin, which has an estimated molecular weight of 55 kDa by SDS-gel electrophoresis, is a major component of the 10-nm diameter intermediate filaments. These cytoskeletal structures are found in nearly all vertebrate cells, including skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and smooth muscle. Within skeletal muscle, desmin is proposed to not only sit in the Z-lines but also in the connection between the Z-lines of adjacent myofibrils. The role of intermediate filaments in maintaining the continuity of a sarcomere has been emphasized. It is suggested that several intermediate filaments run longitudinally from the periphery of a Z-line to that of the adjacent one. Since myofibrils may be stretched to twice their resting length by tension generation they must have be able to return to their initial stage on release (Maruyama, 1985). Any intermediate filaments linking neighbouring Z-lines must be elastic and be slack in the resting stage of myofibrils. Although the content in skeletal muscle is very small, the desmin intermediate filaments must play an important role in the structural organisation of the myofibrils.

20

Chapter 2: Literature Review 2.1.2 Connective Tissue

The connective tissue of muscle is a minor component comprising approximately 1-4 percent of dry weight in most muscle types, but with the critical functions of fibre adhesion, force transmission, tissue organization and providing an outer protective cover of epimysium (Hopkins & Taylor, 2004). Connective tissue connects and holds various parts of the body together. Connective tissues are distributed throughout the body as components of the skeleton, in the framework of organs and blood and lymph vessels and in sheaths that surround structures such as tendons, nerve trunks and muscles (Aberle et al., 2001). The two types of protein fibres identifiable in the connective tissue of muscle are collagen and elastin. Collagen fibres contain a regularly oriented array of In polypeptide chains, resulting in a highly fibrillar structure. Elastic fibres consist of the protein elastin in which polypeptide chains are arranged randomly. and have high tensile strength (Bailey & Sims, 1981). tendons external and internal to the muscle, collagen fibres are packed densely The epimysium, the connective tissue on the outside of a single muscle, is very thick and strong when it forms part of the tendinous apparatus of the muscle. It is continuous with the internal muscle connective tissue, the perimysium, which branches within the muscle to enclose bundles of muscle fibres. network of collagen fibrils. The relevance of muscle collagen to meat production is due to the peculiar properties of the collagen molecule (Hopkins & Taylor, 2004). To construct a tendon from polypeptide chains, these chains must first be woven together to form collagen molecules, then linked to form collagen fibrils, which in turn form collagen fibres. The binding of collagen molecules to form a collagen fibril is due to cross-linking (Bailey & Sims, 1981). These cross-linkages are fewer in number, and more easily broken in young animals. As the animal grows older, the number of cross-linkages increase and the linkages are convertible to stable linkages. The layer of connective tissue surrounding individual muscle fibres is endomysium. This contains only a light

21

Chapter 2: Literature Review

2.2

From Muscle to Meat

An understanding of the living function of muscle tissue is basic to understanding changes that take place during its conversion to meat. In the living state, all organs and systems within the body work together to maintain an internal environment, so each can perform its function efficiently. Most parts within the body, including muscle, function effectively within a narrow range of physiological conditions. biochemical changes. There is normally a time interval between slaughtering an animal and consuming the meat. In practical terms, the carcass cools down and becomes stiffer, the meat surface dries and the fat becomes firmer. With time, texture and flavour of the lean meat improve. These effects are accompanied by significant biochemical changes in the muscles: acidification, development of rigor mortis, and then gradual resolution of rigor and tenderization by a process called conditioning. The process of converting muscle to meat begins with exsanguination, which stops the delivery of nutrients and oxygen to muscle and the clearance of accumulating metabolites (Huff-Lonergan & Lonergan, 1999). This event has a dramatic impact on skeletal muscle, including: · · · · · A shift in aerobic to anaerobic metabolism, which favours lactic acid production A gradual depletion of energy Accumulation of lactic acid and a resultant decrease in pH Loss of homeostatic regulation mechanisms Development of rigor bonds Disturbances can produce major structural or

The muscle does not become meat immediately the animal is killed. One of the most serious consequences of circulatory collapse is that the oxygen supply to the muscles is disrupted (Aberle et al., 2001). In living animals, oxygen is picked up in the lungs and carried to muscle fibres by blood haemoglobin. A myoglobin store for oxygen until it is used for cell metabolism. As the oxygen supply becomes depleted, the mitochondrial electron transport chain, which depends on oxygen as the final electron acceptor, stops functioning. Energy metabolism then 22

Chapter 2: Literature Review shifts to the anaerobic glycolytic pathway, in much the same way that oxygen debt occurs in living muscle during intense exercise. Even though less energy in the form of ATP is produced through the anaerobic pathway, the tissue still has an energy source that will maintain the structural and functional integrity of the cell for some