Stress, Health, and Mindfulness: Exploring Relationships and Mechanisms Using Self-Report Measures

A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Social Sciences in Psychology at The University of Waikato by Kristal Claire Foster

The University of Waikato 2007

i Abstract

The relationship between stress and physical health has been well established in the medical and psychological literature. Mindfulness meditation is a practice that has been successfully used to reduce stress in several populations, and the construct itself has recently begun to be measured as a naturally occurring characteristic. A recent study demonstrating the significant relationships between mindfulness, stress, and physical health prompted the investigation in the present study of the possible mechanisms underlying these relationships. It was hypothesised that the relationship between mindfulness and physical health would be largely mediated by stress, and that in addition, mindfulness would explain a significant proportion of the variance in health after stress had been accounted for. Participants were 129 undergraduate students who completed a battery of self-report questionnaires including the Perceived Stress Scale, the Short-Form 36 Health Survey, and two recently developed measures of mindfulness; the Mindful Attention and Awareness Scale and the Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills. Perceived stress was shown to account for a large proportion of the relationship between mindfulness and health, and mindfulness was also shown to explain a significant proportion of the variance in physical health after stress had been controlled for. An additional finding was that acceptance demonstrated stronger relationships with both physical and mental health than any of the other components of mindfulness studied. Potential mechanisms of mindfulness that may help explain these findings are discussed.

ii Acknowledgements

I would like to thank first of all my fellow mindfulness researchers who have put so much effort into developing this important literature. It was your work that provided the inspiration for this study, and I hope to be able to one day follow in your footsteps and also add useful research to this field of study. A heartfelt thanks goes to my supervisors Mary and Nicola. The wealth of knowledge you both brought and the way you were both able to use your experience to clearly and calmly guide me through this process when things felt challenging helped me immensely. I always left our meetings re-energised and inspired, and several times considered how pleased I was to have chosen you both as supervisors! To my wonderfully supportive family- Mum, Sarah, James, Dad, and my special Nicole and Nathaniel, thank you for putting up with not seeing me for weeks on end, and for always believing in me. You cannot possibly know how much you have all meant to me throughout this process. Now that this is over I will be coming to visit again! Thank you to my fellow classmates, who are now my family within the clinical programme- seeing you complete your research projects and still keeping up with clinical work gave me encouragement and hope that I would be able to do the same. One final important thank you goes to the Kaupapa Maori Psychology Student Support group. Being with you while so many of you presented your research findings at the NZ Psychological Society conferences was an incredibly inspirational experience, and has helped me realise how much can be achieved with support and belief in yourself.

iii Contents

Page

Abstract.........................................................................................................................i Acknowledgments........................................................................................................ii Contents......................................................................................................................iii List of Tables and Figures...........................................................................................iv Introduction..................................................................................................................1 Method.......................................................................................................................25 Results........................................................................................................................29 Discussion..................................................................................................................43 References..................................................................................................................57 Appendix A: Research Advertisement.......................................................................69 Appendix B: Cover Letter..........................................................................................71 Appendix C: Mindful Attention and Awareness Scale..............................................73 Appendix D: Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills..........................................75 Appendix E: Perceived Stress Sale............................................................................78 Appendix F: Short-Form 36 Health Survey...............................................................80 Appendix G: Factor Analysis for Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills (Baer, Smith, and Allen, 2004)..................................................................................85

iv List of Tables and Figures

Table

Page

Table 1

Descriptive Statistics for Measures of General Health

30

Table 2

Descriptive Statistics for Measures of Mindfulness

33

Table 3

Correlations Between Mindfulness Measures

34

Table 4

Items and Factor Loadings for a Principal Components Factor Analysis of the Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills

35

Table 5

Correlations Between Mindfulness and Measures of Mental Health

38

Table 6

Correlations Between Mindfulness and Measures of Physical Health

39

Table 7

Predictions of SF-36 Total Physical Health by Stress and Mindfulness Measures

40

Table 8

Summary of Heirarchical Regression Analysis for Variables Predicting Physical Health

41

Table 9

Summary of Heirarchical Regression Analysis for Variables MAAS and Acceptance Predicting Mental Health

42

v Figure Figure 1 Three phase model of stress ("General Adaptation Syndrome") developed by Hans Selye, (1956). Figure 2 Self-regulation mechanism of mindfulness as described by Shapiro and Schwarz, (1999) 13 Page 2

1 Introduction A vast number of studies over several different disciplines have been conducted with the aim of understanding more about stress and how it affects human beings. Many negative effects have been demonstrated by stress, and numerous treatment approaches have been developed in an attempt to reduce or prevent these ill effects. One approach to have emerged in psychology relatively recently with promising initial results is mindfulness meditation, a practice involving the non-judgemental observation of what is occurring in the present moment. The present study aims to explore the relationships between stress, health, and general level of mindfulness, and further investigate the validity of two recently developed psychometric measures of mindfulness.

Stress Hans Selye (1956) describes stress as essentially the process by which the body responds to external demands ("stressors"). Some of the internal changes that can occur are signs of damage as the body attempts to respond to the stressors, while others are evidence of the body's adaptive reactions to the demands (Selye, 1956). In order to explain the body's response to sustained and unrelenting stress, Selye introduced a three phase model called "general adaptation syndrome" (GAS). During phase one of the GAS model (the alarm reaction) the autonomic nervous system is activated by the stress. If the stress is too powerful for the system to adapt to, gastrointestinal ulcers form, the adrenal glands become enlarged, and the thymus begins wasting away. Phase two (the resistance phase), is characterised by either the occurrence of damage, or the organism's adaptation

2 to the stress. The last phase is that of exhaustion, where the organism either dies or suffers irreversible damage as a result of the ongoing stress (see Figure 1).

Phase 1 The Alarm Reaction ANS activated by stress

Phase 2 Resistance Damage occurs or organism adapts to stress

Phase 3 Exhaustion Organism dies or suffers irreversible damage

Figure 1. Three phase model of stress ("General Adaptation Syndrome") developed by Hans Selye, (1956).

Selye proposed that the stress response evolved as an adaptive process, but that severe or prolonged stress could lead to tissue damage or disease. McEwen (1998) used the term "allostatic load" to describe this process, and defined allostatic load as the effect of excessive exposure to the physiological stress response (McEwen, 1998). Selye's consideration of stress as a response to environmental conditions was not universally accepted by researchers in the field of stress however, as criteria for stressful conditions were not able to be clearly defined. Using this conceptualisation, any event that could cause a physiological response in the form of a stress reaction would be defined as a stressor, although several events that would not be considered stressful (e.g. anticipating a pleasurable event) can cause these same responses. As a result, several theorists began to look upon stress as a stimulus, and identified it with a variety of

3 objective events or environmental conditions (e.g. electric shock, catastrophic life events, uncontrollable stimuli, sleep deprivation, and daily hassles). Psychometric instruments made up of lists of such events (Social Readjustment Rating Scale, Holmes & Rahe, 1967; Assessment of Daily Experience, Stone & Neale, 1982) began to enter the psychological literature as measures of stress. Problems are also evident with the definition of stress as a stimulus however, as research has since demonstrated that not all individuals exposed to the same "stressful" events experienced negative effects of stress (Wheaton, 1990). According to Lazarus (1966) the way an individual cognitively appraises an environmental situation determines whether or not they will show a physiological stress response. Lazarus theorised that a person experiences the effects of stress when they perceive the demands of a situation to be beyond their perceived resources (Lazarus, 1966). Several psychological studies have been conducted investigating this relationship, and the majority have found that perceived stress is a better predictor of poorer health outcomes than exposure to particular stressors (Brosschot, Godaert, Benschop, Olff, Ballieux, & Heijen, 1998, Lazarus & Folkman, 1984).

Assessment of Stress In response to the need for a measure that investigated an individual's perceived level of stress, Cohen, Karmarck, & Mermelstein, (1983) developed the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS). Unique in that it is the only measure of perceived stress developed for use with a general population, the PSS is now a widely used and well-validated measure that is used to obtain a subjective report of an individual's experience of feelings and

4 behaviours related to stress over the past four weeks. A 14 item test with answers rated on a 5-point Likert scale, the PSS has good psychometric properties, with the authors reporting coefficient alpha reliabilities of .84, .85, and .86 in each of three samples. Concurrent and predictive validity has also been shown with studies demonstrating significant positive relationships between the PSS scores and number and impact of life events, depressive symptoms, and social anxiety, and prediction of the utilisation of health services (Cohen et al., 1983).

Stress and Health The work by both Selye and Lazarus demonstrate the major mechanisms by which stress can affect physical health. Selye established that a series of non-specific negative physiological effects can arise when an organism is placed under severe or sustained stress, and Lazarus demonstrated how an individual's appraisal of an environmental condition as stressful or not determines whether a stressor is present. The specific effects of stress on health have been a major topic of research for several years now, and as a result the effects of stress on physical health are well known and accepted in medical and psychological literature (see Schneiderman, Ironson, & Siegel, 2005; and Dougall & Baum, 2001, for reviews). Such effects have been shown to include reduced immunity, (Cohen, Doyle, Skoner, Frank, Rabin, & Gwaltney, 1998; Cohen, Tyrell, & Smith, 1991; Cobb & Steptoe, 1996) increases in atherosclerosis (a precursor to cardiovascular disease) in animals (Kaplan et al. 1982), and increased risk of cardiovascular disease, (Yusuf, Hawken, & Ounpuu, 2004; Black, 2003) and hypertension (Ironson, 1992) in humans, increased insulin resistance, (Black, 2003) and increased likelihood of

5 headaches (De Benedittis, Lorenzetti, 1992) and other forms of chronic pain (Bomholt, Harbuz, Blackburn-Munro, Blackburn-Munro, 2004). Chronic diseases are now a major cause of death and disability in developed countries (World Health Organization, 2005) and many such illnesses are exacerbated by stress (Leserman, Pettito, Golden, Gaynes, Gu, & Perkins, 2000; Lutgendorf, Antoni, Ironson, Fletcher, Penedo, Van Riel, 1995; Mohr, Hart, Julian, Cox, Pelletier, 2004). Stressful conditions and circumstances are also associated with higher rates of behaviours that often contribute to poorer health outcomes, such as smoking, substance use, and disordered eating. Populations who live in environments characterised by higher levels of stress have higher rates of smoking than the general population, and increased mortality from lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (Colby, Linsky, & Straus, 1994). A longitudinal study that examined this phenomenon more specifically showed that Navy seamen from the United States smoked more cigarettes on days of high stress (Conway, Vickers, Ward, & Rahe, 1981). Stressful life events and chronically stressful life conditions have also been linked to the onset of bulimia (Welch, Doll, & Fairburn, 1997), and higher consumption of alcohol (Linsky, Strauss, & Colby, 1985), and it has been proposed that alcohol may be used as selfmedication by people experiencing stress-related disorders such as anxiety (Zimmerman Wittchen, Hofler, Pfister, Kessler, & Lieb, 2003). An illustrative prospective community study by Zimmerman et al. (2003) of over 3000 adolescents and young adults showed that those with certain anxiety disorders (social phobia and panic attacks) were more likely to go on to develop problems of abuse or dependence on alcohol or other substances over a four year follow-up period. Together, these studies illustrate numerous

6 pathways by which stress can lead to negative effects on the human body and reduce overall health.

Assessment of Health Although current health status in most western societies is usually determined by objective testing, self-report instruments are widely used to assess current health status in the general population for clinical and research purposes. Subjective measures such as questionnaires on health perceptions have demonstrated predictive validity of morbidity and mortality rates (Idler & Angel, 1990; Idler & Kasl, 1991; Wolinsky & Johnson, 1992), and changes in disability (Ferrero, Farmer, & Wybraniec, 1997; Idler & Kasl, 1995, Wilcox, Kasl, & Idler, 1996) and are thus perceived and used as valid measures of generic health status. One widely used health assessment tool that has been normed on several populations, including New Zealanders, is the Short-Form 36 Health Survey (SF36) (Ware, & Sherbourne, 1992; Scott, Tobias, Sarfati, & Haslett, 1999). It is a 36-item instrument including eight different subscales designed to measure four facets each of physical and mental health (general health, physical functioning, bodily pain, role limitations due to physical health problems; and vitality, emotional well-being, social functioning, and role limitations due to personal or emotional problems). Each subscale contributes to a compound score of either physical or mental health, and these scores are combined to create a score reflecting overall health. Studies examining the psychometric properties of the SF-36 indicate good reliability, with the authors reporting Cronbach's alpha coefficients of over .8 for all scales of the SF-36 apart from social functioning, which was .76 (Jenkinson, Coulter, & Wright,

7 1993). Studies have found the SF-36 is also more sensitive to lower levels of dysfunction and disability than other commonly used measures, making it more suitable for use with general non-medical populations (Ware & Sherbourne, 1992). Several research articles on the validity of the SF-36 have been published, and independent researchers report that content validity compares favourably with other widely used generic health surveys (McDowell & Newell, 1996). Scott et al. (1999) report that the SF-36 demonstrates satisfactory psychometric performance in a New Zealand population, including appropriate factorial structure in which the two factor orthogonal solution (physical and mental health subgroups) explained 67% of the variance in the data. The pattern of factor loadings was also reported as similar to that of US (Ware, Kosinski, & Keller, 1994) and Western European (Ware, Kosinski, & Gandek, 1998) population samples. The SF-36 also reflected the New Zealand population subgroup disparities seen in objective measures of health, though to a lesser degree, adding to the validity of this instrument as a measure of general health in this population (Scott et al., 1999).

Meditation and Stress Reduction The serious consequences of stress on health described above emphasise the need to develop effective ways to reduce the impact of stress on individuals, and unsurprisingly many methods within the field of psychology and other disciplines have been developed to realise this aim. One particular method, meditation, has been used for many years for this purpose (Miller, Fletcher, & Kabat-Zinn, 1995). One particular type of meditation, Mindfulness, has emerged in the medical and psychological literature as an effective

8 treatment for psychological and physiological symptoms of stress (see Grossman, Niemann, Schmidt, & Walach, 2004; and Smith, Richardson, Hoffman, & Pilkington, 2004, for reviews). Mindfulness has been described as the act of "paying attention in a particular way: on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgementally" (Kabat-Zinn, 1994, p. 68) and "bringing one's complete attention to the present experience on a moment-to-moment basis" (Marlatt & Kristeller, 1999, p. 4.). As a practice, mindfulness involves cultivating conscious awareness of internal and external phenomena through sustained attention to observable internal and external events (e.g. thoughts, symptoms of physiological arousal, tactile sensations). The roots of mindfulness lie in Eastern contemplative traditions, particularly Buddhism. Although it has been called the "heart" of Buddhist meditation (Kabat-Zinn, 2003; Thera, 1962), mindfulness is not a fundamentally esoteric or religious concept (Grossman et al, 2003). It is potentially available and applicable to all people (Kabat-Zinn, 2003). Although mindfulness has existed for many centuries in contemplative traditions, this practice was incorporated into the field of psychology relatively recently. An intervention originally developed by Jon Kabat-Zinn (1982) for use with chronic pain patients, Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR), attracted considerable attention after several treatment outcome studies demonstrated the efficacy of the approach for this population (Kabat-Zinn, 1982; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, & Burney, 1985; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, Burney, & Sellers, 1987). The Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction program is an 8-10 week group therapy course that focuses on gradually increasing participant's ability to sustain mindful awareness, or mindfulness, in everyday life. Participants in

9 groups of about 30 meet weekly for 2-2.5 hours where they receive instructions in and the opportunity to practice mindfulness meditation skills, as well as discussion on stress and coping, and homework assignments. Mindfulness is taught using several different exercises. A 45-minute body scan exercise is used in which participants lie down with their eyes closed and direct their attention to each part of the body in turn, carefully observing the physical sensations occurring there at that time. Participants also engage in a sitting meditation, in which they sit up in a wakeful posture and attend to the sensations of their breathing. Hatha yoga postures are also used to teach mindfulness of bodily sensations during gentle movements and stretching. Participants are also encouraged to practice mindfulness during ordinary activities such as walking, standing, and eating. Groups in MBSR programs are also instructed to practice these skills outside group meetings for at least 45 minutes a day, six days a week. After about six weeks, an intensive 7-8 hour mindfulness session is held where participants spend an entire day engaging in the practice. Since initial studies of the effectiveness of MBSR that suffered from methodological problems such as lack of control group, MBSR has been evaluated more rigorously in randomised controlled trials, and is associated with substantial reductions in psychological morbidity associated with medical illness (Reibel, Greenson, Brainard, & Rosenzweig, 2001; Speca, Carlson, Goodey, & Angen, 2000; Carlson, Ursuliak, Goodey, Angen, & Speca, 2001). Mindfulness-based approaches have also been successfully used in the treatment of behavioural and emotional disorders of which distress is often a component, including borderline personality (Linehan, Armstrong, Saurez, Allmon, & Heard, 1991), generalised anxiety (Roemer & Orsillo, 2002; Wells,

10 1999), and post-traumatic stress disorder (Wolfsdorf & Zlotnick, 2001). Treatment approaches incorporating mindfulness have also been introduced and used successfully for other psychological difficulties including recurrent depression (Teasdale, Segal, William, Rdgeway, Soulsby, & Lau, 2000), substance abuse (Marlat, 2002), and eating disorders (Kristeller & Hallett, 1999; Telch, Agras, & Linehan, 2001).

Mindfulness and Physical Health The use of mindfulness in medical populations has focused mainly on reducing the symptoms of psychological stress and morbidity that often occur alongside serious medical conditions, however recent findings suggest that mindfulness practice may potentially influence physical health. Physical differences observed after training and practice in mindfulness include reduced cardiopulmonary and gastrointestinal symptoms in individuals receiving conventional treatment for cancer (Speca, Carlson, Goodey, & Angen, 2000), increased clearing of skin during phototherapy and photochemotherapy in psoriasis patients (Kabat-Zinn, Wheeler, Light, Skillings, Scharf, Cropley, et al., 1998; Bernhard, Kristeller, & Kabat-Zinn, 1988), and decreased ratings of pain in chronic pain patients (Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, & Burney, 1985; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, Burney & Sellers, 1987). The impact of mindfulness meditation on immunity has also recently begun to be measured, and has shown some promising effects; including increased antibody titers in response to influenza vaccinations (Davidson, Kabat-Zinn, Schumacher, Rosenkranz, Muller, Santorelli, et al., 2003), decreases in the suppressive influence of strenuous physical activity on the immune system (Solberg, Halvorsen, Sundgot-Borgen, Ingjer, & Holen, 1995), and changes in lymphocyte and cytokine cells

11 in individuals diagnosed with depression to an immune profile less consistent with that of a depressed person (Carlson, Speca, Patel, & Goodey, 2003). Such findings suggest that mindfulness interventions may have a wider applicability to well-being than originally believed, and have been followed with literature theorising the mechanisms of action underlying mindfulness-based interventions (Shapiro, Carlson, Astin & Freedman, 2006).

Mechanisms of Mindfulness Bishop, Lau, Shapiro, Carlson, Anderson, & Carmody, et al. (2004) proposed an operational definition of mindfulness comprising two components reflected in generally accepted definitions ­ self-regulation of attention, and an orientation to experience characterised by curiosity, openness, and acceptance. Shapiro, et al. (2006) further separate these components into three elements; intention, attention, and attitude, which they believe encapsulate the moment-to-moment process that is mindfulness. Shapiro et al. (2006) propose that from these three elements (or "axioms") a fundamental shift in perspective arises, which they term "reperceiving". Reperceiving is defined as the ability to disidentify from the content of one's consciousness (e.g. thoughts and emotions) and thereby perceive one's moment to moment experience with a greater degree of clarity and objectivity. This is contrasted with detachment, which is described as distancing from one's experience to the point of numbness or apathy. Shapiro et al. (2006) explain that the process of reperceiving simply allows a person to "deeply experience each event of the mind and body without identifying with it or clinging to it". From this shift in perspective, Shapiro et al. (2006) highlight four additional mechanisms that may

12 contribute to positive outcomes in mindfulness practice: 1) self-regulation and selfmanagement, 2) emotional, cognitive, and behavioural flexibility, 3) values clarification and 4) exposure.

Mindfulness Mechanisms and Stress Reduction. As outlined above, mindfulness has been used extensively as a method of stress reduction, and several of the above mechanisms relate directly to stress. Exposure to distressing observable internal and external can stimuli serve to create tolerance through desensitisation to such stimuli, decreasing the level of stress associated with them (Baer, 2003). Increases in selfregulation and emotional, cognitive, and behavioural flexibility allow for more adaptive responses to stressful situations/stimuli as habitual responses to stress are interrupted, and access to a wider range of coping responses is created (Shapiro et al. 2006). Lazarus and Folkman (1984) define coping as "constantly changing cognitive and behavioural efforts to manage specific external and/or internal demands that are appraised as taxing or exceeding the resources of the person" (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984, p. 141). Mindfulness may therefore aide in coping by facilitating more flexible and adaptive responses to environmental demands, through increasing one's ability to see the present situations as they are in this moment and "to respond accordingly, instead of with reactionary thoughts, emotions, and behaviours triggered by prior habit, conditioning, and experience" (Shapiro et al. 2006, p. 381).

Mindfulness Mechanisms and Health. As the relationship between stress and health has been well established, and mindfulness interventions have demonstrated

13 effectiveness in reducing health, a strong arguement for the effects of mindfulness on health is through the reduction in stress. Another mechanism has been proposed by which mindfulness may affect health in a more direct way (Shapiro & Schwartz, 1999, 2000). The relationship of mindfulness to self-regulation and self management occurs through the capacity of active mindful awareness to increase an individual's ability to attend to bodily and environmental processes, and adjust their behaviour as is required to maintain optimal health (Shapiro et al., 2006). Self-regulation is described as the process by which systems maintain functioning through monitoring and feedback loops, the information from which is used to facilitate successful adaptation to change (Shapiro and Schwartz, 1999, 2000). According to Shapiro and Schwartz, intention and attention serve to enhance these feedback loops and generate better health:

intention  attention  connection  regulation  order  health

Figure 2. Self-regulation mechanism of mindfulness as described by Shapiro and Schwarz, (1999).

Intentionally cultivating non-judgemental awareness through attention creates connection with the body, which in turn leads to self-regulation, and ultimately to greater order and health (Shapiro and Schwartz, 1999, 2000). According to this model increased attentiveness to one's physical sensations allows a connection to take place, in which an individual becomes consciously aware of all of their physical experiences, however subtle these may be. As a result of the increased information gained through

14 this conscious awareness, an individual is better equipped to respond in a self-regulatory manner that restores order to their physical system. This basic idea has been explained in terms of the effects of mindfulness on chronic pain patient's experiences and responses to pain. As Kabat-Zinn (1990) describes, increased ability to recognise the early signals of pain allows a person to use that information to choose to behave in ways that are less likely to make the pain worse, or more likely to decrease it. The application of mindfulness to binge-eating disordered populations further illustrates this point. Clinical studies exploring the effects of a mindfulness-based intervention for individuals diagnosed with binge eating disorder showed that by learning to bring mindful awareness to their everyday experiences, including eating, this population was less likely to engage in as many binge eating episodes, and ingested a reduced quantity of food when they did overeat (Kristellar & Hallet, 1999; Telch, Agras, & Linehan, 2001). Although different populations with alternative treatment goals, what these applications demonstrate is the self-regulatory effect that can arise when full attention is given to bodily sensations (pain, hunger/satiation) and the behaviours associated with those sensations. Such attention theoretically improves an individual's ability to maintain order and health by increasing their capacity to self-regulate, a hypothesis that has received initial empirical support in a study examining the relationship between mindfulness and self-regulated emotion and behaviour (Brown & Ryan, 2003).

Assessment of Mindfulness Although mindfulness has largely been studied as an intervention, recent studies have emerged examining mindfulness as a naturally occurring characteristic (Brown & Ryan,

15 2003; Baer, Smith, & Allen, 2004). This initial research has shown that individual differences in general tendency to be mindful do exist, and that self-report questionnaires appear to be a useful way to measure this construct (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Baer et al., 2004). In the past five years, several such mindfulness measures have been developed and included in the psychological literature (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Buchheld, Grossman, & Walach, 2001; Baer et al., 2004). To date, these measures have been mainly examined in terms of their correlations with measures of psychological wellbeing (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Baer Smith, Hopkins, Krietmeyer, & Toney, 2006). Mindfulness measures have been found to be positively related to several measures of psychological wellbeing including openness to experience, emotional intelligence, self-compassion, self-esteem, positive affect, life satisfaction, vitality, competence, and relatedness, and negatively related to scales measuring anxiety, angry hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness, vulnerability, neuroticism, and negative affect (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Baer et al, 2006). With significant correlations in expected directions ranging from .15 (MAAS with NEO-Personality Inventory Openness to Experience scale; Costa & McRae, 1992) to .74, (Describe subscale of the KIMS with the Toronto Alexithymia Scale; Bagby, Parker, & Taylor, 1993; Bagby, Taylor, & Parker, 1993) and averaging .29 (average of the correlations with psychological constructs reported in Baer et al., 2004 and Brown & Ryan, 2003). This is a similar pattern to the outcomes of studies using mindfulness as a stress-reduction treatment, as individuals receiving mindfulness treatment have shown significantly lower scores on total mood disturbance, depression,

16