EVALUATING THE BALLOON ANALOGUE RISK TASK (BART) AS A PREDICTOR OF RISK TAKING IN ADOLESCENT AND ADULT MALE DRIVERS

A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Social Sciences in Psychology
at

The University of Waikato
by

MARK ADAM GORDON

___________________

The University of Waikato 2007

ii Abstract

Young drivers between the ages of 15 and 24 are overrepresented in automobile crash statistics worldwide. Despite the common assumption that young drivers are more at risk of crashing than older drivers due to inexperience, age appears to be the main factor influencing crash risk, even after experience has been taken into account. It is possible that young drivers are involved in a high number of crashes because of their risk-taking tendencies. Accident involvement is not so much influenced by errors and lapses by the driver, but by the willingness to commit driving violations intentionally. However, studies that attempted to measure the risk-taking tendencies of drivers have so far used mainly self-report questionnaires, which are limited in their ability to predict real-world behaviour. This thesis used a new behavioural measure of risk-taking known as the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART). In this task, participants engage in computer simulation where a balloon is pumped in order to accumulate money, but when the balloon is pumped too high it explodes, and the money that could have been gained is lost. A group of 50 male drivers were the participants of this study, and these were separated into three age groups: adolescents, aged 16-17, young adults, aged 20-21, and older adults, aged 25 years and over. In addition to the BART, the participants answered a series of questionnaires that focused on risk-related constructs, such as impulsiveness and subjective risk assessment, as well as driving attitudes and intentions. The expectation was that younger drivers would be shown to have greater risk-taking tendencies than older drivers. The results showed that the BART showed no relationship with either driving attitude scores (apart from a small correlation with attitudes towards close following), or any of

iii the self-reported measures of risk. The other self-report risk measures, however, showed many correlations with various aspects of driving attitudes and intentions. Over age groups, the level of impulsiveness was found to decrease, and the attitudes became less in favour of taking physical risks. Adolescents were also found to be more approving of using a cell phone while driving, and of overtaking in risky circumstances. They had greater intentions to commit violations in the future, and were more likely to get a thrill from driving. The failure of the BART to reveal any significant findings may have been because so far it has only been shown to correlate with self-reported real-world behaviour, and not so much with attitudes and risk-related constructs. The other suggestion of this thesis was that the BART does not simulate risk-taking in the truest sense because there are no specific negative consequences for risk taking, only the removal of a possible benefit. The finding of greater risk taking in adolescent drivers was discussed in relation to Risk Homeostasis Theory and Problem Behaviour Theory, with a focus on how age-related factors might influence driver risk taking. As further discussed, these age-related factors might include the effect of incomplete brain development, the motives for driving, and the lifestyle of the individual.

iv Acknowledgements

I would first like to thank my supervisors Robert Isler and Nicola Starkey, who gave me very helpful feedback on my writing, and pointed me in the right direction whenever I felt a little lost. I acknowledge Robert as the person who sparked my interest in the study of driving behaviour, and I am grateful for his commitment to road safety research and the work he has done. I thank Andrea Hodgetts, who was also involved in this project, and put a lot of work into the ethics proposal and revising the questionnaires. I would like to thank Andrew Malcolm for adapting the BART program for this study; also Rob Bakker and Allan Eaddy for their hard work in getting the questionnaires working online on the computers. These three people were extremely helpful and were always willing to provide assistance whenever there were any technical issues. I thank Dianne Parker, who was very helpful in sending us the Driving Attitude Questionnaire and allowing us to use it for this study. Also, David Llewellyn, who kindly sent an electronic copy of his thesis that included the Physical Risk Assessment Inventory. My thanks go to Keith McKenzie, who responded very quickly to our request for high school student participants and generously offered the students in his Life Skills course. Without his assistance, I may have been left with a very small sample size indeed. I thank my Mum and Dad for supporting me throughout this experience. I appreciate the fantastic job my Mum did on the proofreading of my writing and picking out the grammar mistakes I never would have found. My Dad also

v deserves thanks for teaching me to drive, and I could not have asked for a better teacher. Finally, my special thanks go to my amazing wife Emma, for putting up with grumpy old me and giving me so much support this past year. I could not have done it without her.

vi Ethics

Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the Psychology Department's ethics committee of the University of Waikato ethics committee. Each participant signed a consent form and was able to withdraw from the study at any time without penalty. Participants were briefed about the details of the study before giving consent, and were provided with the opportunity to ask questions about the study after they had completed the tasks. They were also given the option of receiving a summary of the study's findings through email once the study was complete. Each participant received a $10 MTA voucher for completing the tasks in this study. First year Psychology students also received course credit for their participation.

vii TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page Abstract Acknowledgements Ethics Table of Contents List of Figures List of Tables List of Appendices Introduction General Young drivers Young drivers in New Zealand Factors affecting the crash risk of drivers Age versus experience as predictors of driving skill and accident risk Gender differences and marital status Socioeconomic status and lifestyle Driving skill and driving safety The relationship between driving skills and safety skills How drivers rate their skills How drivers perceive risk and their accident likelihood Theories of risk taking Risk Homeostasis Theory

i ii iv vi vii x xii xiii 1 1 4 5 8

8 9 11 13 13 15 17 20 21

viii Problem Behaviour Theory Understanding why adolescents take risks on the road: A case of brain development? Measuring the risk taking tendencies of drivers The problem of treating young drivers as a homogenous group Comparing risk-related constructs with driving behaviour Attitudes and behaviour Measuring the intent to commit violations A behavioural measure of risk-taking: The Balloon Analogue Risk Task Other possible measures of risk taking The present study Method Participants Materials Procedure Data analysis and statistical consideration Results General Driving history of the sample Descriptive data obtained from the measures The correlations between the BART scores and the self-report measures The differences in BART scores between age groups The effect of age on self-report measures of risk 61 61 64 38 40 42 45 45 46 52 53 57 57 58 60 27 30 30 32 34 37 24

ix The effect of age on self-reported driving attitudes and intentions The distribution of risk taking among adolescents Correlations between self-report measures of risk and the driving questionnaires Comparing drivers based on violation and accident involvement Self-ratings of driving skill compared to the average driver The consistency and honesty of questionnaire responses Summary of the results Discussion References Appendices 77 83 85 87 90 94 127 138 67 72

x LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1.

A view of the BART at the beginning of each trial.

52

Figure 2.

The mean average adjusted number of pumps on the BART between the three age groups. 62

Figure 3.

The mean total money earned in dollars on the BART between age groups. 62

Figure 4.

The mean number of trials in which a balloon exploded on the BART between age groups. 63

Figure 5.

The mean scores on the attentional component of the Barratt Impulsivity Scale between age groups. 65

Figure 6.

The mean Barratt Impulsivity scores between age groups.

66

Figure 7.

The mean scores on the physical component of the Attitude Towards Risk (RISK) questionnaire between age groups. 66

Figure 8.

The mean scores on the cell phone use component of the Driver Risk Taking questionnaire between age groups. 68

xi Figure 9. The mean scores on the dangerous overtaking component of the Driver Risk Taking questionnaire between age groups. 69

Figure 10.

The mean scores on the Driving Violations questionnaire between age groups. 70

Figure 11.

The mean ratings between age groups on the response to the statement, "I often get a thrill from driving." 71

Figure 12.

Histogram showing the distribution of mean scores on the Driving Violations questionnaire over the adolescent group. 75

Figure 13.

Histogram showing the distribution of scores on the Driver Risk Taking Questionnaire over the adolescent group. 76

Figure 14.

Histogram showing the distribution of scores on the Driver Attitude Questionnaire over the adolescent group. 76

Figure 15.

The mean scores on the close following component of the Driver Attitude Questionnaire between participants who had not been caught violating in the last 12 months and those that had. 85

Figure 16.

The mean scores on the Marlowe Crowne Social Desirability Scale between age groups. 88

xii LIST OF TABLES

Table 1.

Driving history of the sample.

58

Table 2.

Distribution of scores for the adolescent group, including the mean, standard deviation, the skewness and the standard error of the skewness. 73

Table 3.

Intercorrelations among each of the self-report measures of risk and the driving questionnaires 79

Table 4.

How participants rated their skill compared to the average driver. 86

xiii LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix A

Advertisement

138

Appendix B

Information Sheet

139

Appendix C

Demographics Questionnaire

141

Appendix D

Driving Violations Questionnaire

144

Appendix E

Accident Concern Questionnaire

145

Appendix F

Manchester Driving Attitude Questionnaire (DAQ)

146

Appendix G

Driver Risk Taking Questionnaire

148

Appendix H

Physical Risk Assessment Inventory (PRAI)

150

Appendix I

Attitude Towards Risk (RISK) questionnaire

152

Appendix J

Marlowe Crowne Scale

153

Appendix K

Barratt Impulsivity Scale

154

Appendix L

Consent Form

155

xiv Appendix M Participant Instructions 156

Appendix N

Descriptive Data from Driving Measures

158

Appendix O

Descriptive Data from Other Measures

160

1

Introduction General Driving a motor vehicle is a risk that many people over the world are willing to take on a daily basis. In many cases, such as for those people living in rural areas, owning and driving a motor vehicle is a necessity. Unfortunately, the same tool that is regarded to be a necessity is also the tool that presents one of the greatest risks to our health. According to Evans (1991), there are more pre-retirement years lost through motor vehicle accidents than via any other factor. In the United States, motor vehicle crashes are targeted as a major public health problem. They are the most common cause of death for people under 34 years of age (cited in Jessor, Turbin & Costa, 1997). Young people as a group have consistently been found all over the world to be involved in a disproportionate number of crashes, even though they only make up a small proportion of the driving population (Deery, 1999). It would appear that the most common reaction to the problem of young drivers is to assume that these accidents occur through a simple lack of experience or vehicle control skills. In other words, we tend to blame the actions of drivers on skill deficits. However, this response is not consistent with the evidence that the risk of crashing is more strongly associated with age factors rather than factors related to experience (MacDonald, 1994a). It does not explain why younger drivers are more at risk of crashing than older drivers, even when the levels of experience are the same. It is possible that too often we focus on errors, or unintentional mistakes, when studying risky driving behaviour. Perhaps we should be focusing more on the

2 intentional risky behaviour of drivers, the actions they undertake willingly and presumably with an awareness of the potential risks involved. This is the approach taken by Parker, Reason, Manstead and Stradling (1995), who have devised a selfreport driving behaviour questionnaire that specifically distinguishes deliberate violations from errors and lapses. Involvement in accidents tends to be reflected in the self-reported instances of violations, while errors and lapses are not so predictive of accident involvement. Therefore, the tendency to have a motor vehicle accident comes as a result of intentional risky behaviour, rather than poor skills, or `performance'. Unfortunately, there are very few methods available to researchers in order to measure the exact `risk-taking tendencies' of drivers, other than self-reported measures. These self-reported measures rely on the assumption that participants will answer the questions honestly, and the self-reported behaviour will actually be consistent with their driving behaviour in the real world. Likewise, results from driving simulator tasks are also limited in terms of ecological validity, and can never truly reflect driving behaviour outside the laboratory (Horswill & McKenna, 1999). This study included the use of a promising behavioural measure of risk-taking tendencies, known as the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART; Lejuez et al., 2002). The BART is a computer-based task that requires participants to pump up a balloon in order to collect money over several trials. If the balloon is pumped past a certain point, it pops, and participants lose the money they have accumulated on that particular trial. Therefore, the risk-taking tendency of the participant is measured by the average number of pumps they will engage in before choosing to collect the money on each trial.

3 The aim was to evaluate the BART as a predictor of risk taking in young male drivers. It was hoped that the task would prove to be a much more reliable representation of driver risk taking than simple self-report measures of risk taking and attitudes, which are limited by the level of honesty that each person puts in to their responses. Lejuez et al. (2003) suggested that the BART might be able to tap into a conceptually different aspect of risk taking not covered by other self-report measures of risk-related constructs such as impulsivity and sensation seeking. The BART simulates scenarios in which there are no negative consequences for risky behaviour, only the removal of a potential benefit that could have been gained. Since McKenna and Horswill (2006) have suggested that drivers tend to modify their risk taking based on the perceived benefits, and are less affected by the perceived negative (and much less likely) consequences, then perhaps the BART is the ideal programme to simulate the kind of risk taking that drivers indulge in. The BART was used along with self-report measures of risk and attitudes to determine if young drivers are more willing to take risks than older drivers, therefore resulting in young people being overrepresented in the road crash statistics. If adolescence is a period typically characterised by increased risk taking, then the risks young drivers take on the road may just be another symptom of the risky adolescent lifestyle. The other question asked was whether all young drivers are responsible for taking risks, or just a minority that accounts for the majority of unsafe driving.

4 Young drivers Young people, particularly those among the 15-24 year old age group, are overrepresented in road traffic death and injury statistics. This is a problem that can be found worldwide. This overrepresentation is particularly a concern because young people only make up a small minority of road users. For example, in Canada, people within the 16-24 year old age group constitute only 17% of the population, but account for about a third of all fatalities and traffic-related injuries (data cited in Trimpop & Kirkcaldy, 1997). MacDonald's (1994a) review of crash statistics from several different countries shows that young drivers between the ages of 18-24 are consistently more at risk of crashing than those over 25. The conclusion was that young drivers have a relatively higher crash risk, both per licensed driver and per distance travelled. Wylie (1996) also reviewed Australian driver fatality statistics from 1991 and suggested that when you take into account that much older drivers are generally more physically frail than their younger equivalents (and therefore more susceptible to fatality due to a car crash), driver crash involvement among those aged 17-20 could be as much as 12.5 times higher than that of drivers aged 45-49. USA statistics from the late 1970s show that per licensed driver, more deaths are associated with 18 year olds than for any other ages ­ the next highest associations were for 16, 17 and 19 year olds respectively (Karpf & Williams, 1983). Williams (1985) determined that the number of fatal crashes by mileage is highest for 16 year old males. The characteristics of crashes in which young people are involved are also viewed to be unique in comparison with the crashes that older people are involved in. For example, young people (particularly 15 year olds without a licence) are

5 more likely to be involved in single-vehicle crashes (Williams, Preusser, Ferguson & Ulmer, 1997). These include incidents where no other parties are specifically involved, such as hitting a stationary obstacle or losing control on a bend. The tendency to strike vehicles from behind in rear-end collisions also seems to be related to the age of the driver. Yan, Radwan and Abdel-Aty (2005) found that the Relative Accident Involvement Ratio (RAIR) for rear-end collisions as the driver of the striking vehicle was particularly high amongst the youngest group and only began to decrease after the age of 26.

Young drivers in New Zealand In New Zealand also, young drivers are overrepresented in the number of traffic accidents. Unfortunately, New Zealand appears to be one of the more severe examples of this phenomenon. Langley, Wagenaar and Begg (1996) reported that New Zealand has a much greater fatality rate among 15-24 year olds compared with the United States of America (USA), Canada and the United Kingdom (UK). Information provided by the New Zealand Ministry of Transport suggests that between April 2005 and April 2006, 183 drivers were killed, and 26% of these were between the ages of 15 and 24 (Ministry of Transport, 2006a). In addition to this, 8131 drivers were injured between October 2004 and October 2005, and 32% of these were between the ages of 15 and 24 (Ministry of Transport, 2006a). In other words, this group of young drivers represents over a quarter of all road deaths and almost a third of all road injuries among drivers in New Zealand. In terms of who is deemed to be at fault in road accidents, drivers in the 15-24 year old group are also clearly overrepresented. Inspection of data provided by the

6 Ministry of Transport (2006b) suggests that in 2005, 83% of fatal crashes and 79% of serious injury crashes were deemed to be the fault of drivers in the 15-24 year old group. It appears that speed, followed by alcohol, is by far the major contributing factor for young driver crashes. This is generally consistent with the finding that worldwide, the highest proportion of young driver crashes involved `reckless' driving (MacDonald, 1994a). In 1987, New Zealand introduced the Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS), in order to reduce the high occurrence of young driver crashes. Prior to the introduction of the GDLS, people could apply for a full licence at 15 years of age. Under the graduated system, people are only able to obtain a learner's licence at 15 years of age. At 15 and a half years old, they can obtain a restricted licence, with certain conditions on carrying passengers, driving at night, and drinking alcohol. Then, if the driver participates in a defensive driving course, they may apply for their full driver's licence after one year. Therefore, currently in New Zealand, someone as young as 16 and a half years old can legally drive an automobile with no restrictions or supervision. This is still a very young age compared with other countries. In most European countries the minimum age is at least 17 or 18 years. In New South Wales, Australia, one cannot obtain a full driver's licence until the age of 20. In the USA, laws vary across states, but most states have a minimum age of 16 years. The purpose of integrating a restricted licence into the process is generally to protect novice drivers from the conditions in which they are most at risk. Primarily these would be the effects of driving with passengers, at night, and/or after drinking. There is certainly much evidence that young drivers are at greater risk of crashing during the nighttime hours, particularly on weekends (MacDonald,

7 1994a; Ministry of Transport, 2006b; Williams, 1985). In New Zealand, around 50% of fatal crashes on Friday and Saturday nights involve a young driver (Ministry of Transport, 2006b). Data cited by Elander, West and French (1993) showed that the risk of being killed or injured in a crash during the nighttime/early morning hours was two and a half times greater than at any other times of the day. Other data also suggests that 16 year old drivers are found to be carrying the highest average number of passengers during crashes (Karpf & Williams, 1983). Leigh (1999) also reviewed data that suggested that although young drivers may be less likely to drive intoxicated, they are much more vulnerable than older drivers when they do drink and drive. There is undoubtedly a problem with the compliance and enforcement of the conditions on restricted licences in New Zealand. Harré, Field & Kirkwood (1996) discussed this problem, and found that young males are more likely to break the conditions of the 10pm curfew than young females. Langley, Wagenaar and Begg (1996) determined that the effect of the GDLS on fatal accidents overall has probably been very small. The reduction in crash injuries among 15-19 year olds could be anywhere between 7 and 23 percent, and the authors speculated that this effect could be attributed to an overall reduction in exposure rather than a reduction in exposure to the specific high risk situations targeted by the GDLS. In any case, the relative severity of New Zealand's young driver crash rate compared to other countries certainly shows that additional policies need to be introduced.

8 Factors affecting the crash risk of drivers Age versus experience as predictors of driving skill and accident risk Arguably, most people attribute the high rate of road accidents among young people to a simple lack of experience. Certainly, there is some evidence for this, such as the finding that the crash rate for novice drivers is highest during the first month, and then decreases dramatically during the first seven months (Mayhew, Simpson & Pak, 2003). There is also an argument for this when the effect of anxiety in novice drivers is taken into account, as Näätänen and Summala (1974) suggest. For example, inexperienced drivers may have high anxiety when certain conditions or parties (e.g. passengers, following vehicles) force them into driving at a speed they are not normally comfortable with. However, there is more evidence to suggest that age may in fact be a more important factor in determining the risk of crashing than experience. Harrington and McBride (1970) found that the frequency of each type of traffic violation decreased with age. Mayhew et al. (2003) determined that during the first few months of driving, 16 year olds are involved in more crashes than recently licensed older drivers are. Yet, the interaction between age and experience in terms of crash risk is not always clear. While Mayhew et al. (2003) found that experience has a relatively greater effect on 16-19 year olds in terms of decreasing crash rates, MacDonald (1994a) concluded that experience tended to have a greater effect on older drivers. In addition to this, MacDonald (1994a) also found that for young males, age seems to be the main factor, while for older people and possibly females, experience has a greater effect on crash rates. In support of this, Lajunen and Parker (2001) found that driver anger and aggression in males was

9 negatively correlated with age, while driver aggression in females was negatively correlated with annual mileage. Obviously the quantity of experience alone is meaningless unless the actual quality of the experience is taken into account. The level of risk that drivers are exposed to during their experience varies; however, as Brown (1982) noted, even when the external conditions are identical, some individuals are simply guilty of creating more opportunities than others for accidents to happen (i.e., through poor hazard detection and recognition). Jonah (1986) suggested that even when we control for the quantity and quality of exposure to risk, young drivers (16-19 years old) still have the greatest risk of accident involvement. The lifetime exposure or experience as a passenger could also have some significant effect on the attitudes of people when they come to learn to drive. Job (1990) noted that repeated exposure as a child passenger might lead to systematic desensitisation of driving as a fear-inducing situation, especially if very few threatening encounters occur during this time. Despite the common belief that young drivers are involved in a high number of crashes as a result of inexperience and undeveloped driving skills, the majority of evidence suggests that age itself is the main contributing factor to the high rate of accidents.

Gender differences and marital status The first point regarding gender differences in driving behaviour is that overall there are more male drivers than there are female drivers (Harré, Field & Kirkwood, 1996) and males spend a greater proportion of time driving; however,

10 it is possible that this gender difference is much smaller among younger groups of drivers (Williams, 1985). These facts would presumably be reasonable explanations for the high rate of male drivers involved in accidents, but findings suggest that their accident involvement goes beyond simple numbers of drivers. When Mayhew et al. (2003) studied young novice drivers over the first few months of driving, they found that males showed a relatively smaller decrease in crash rates over time, compared with female novice drivers. Males (at least those younger than 55 years of age) have a higher ratio of involvement in rear-end accidents, as the striking vehicle, compared with females (Yan et al., 2005). Indeed, many studies show that males are generally more at risk of crashing than females (see MacDonald, 1994a). In addition, there also seems to be clear differences in the types of violations that each gender is more likely to commit, and in the possible causes for their accidents. Males tend to have a greater number of speeding, equipment, passing, and major (e.g. drink driving) violations compared to females, while females tend to have a greater number of sign and right-of-way violations (Harrington & McBride, 1970). MacDonald (1994a) provided a tentative conclusion that young male drivers are more likely to be involved in crashes due to excessive speed, while young female drivers are more likely to be involved in crashes due to inadequate driving skills. Harré et al. (1996) questioned young New Zealand drivers and found that males drive faster than females on the open road (speed limit 100km/h), although there was no significant difference on urban roads (speed limit 50km/h). It was also found that males are more likely to have driven after smoking marijuana, and are more likely to have the intention to drive themselves home after drinking at a

11 social event. Females in fact are more likely to be the passengers in a drunk driver's vehicle. The effect of marital status on driving behaviour has not been studied extensively. However, Harrington and McBride (1970) drew the conclusion that there is a general tendency for single drivers to have a higher rate of committing traffic violations than married drivers. Female drivers also tend to show a decrease in risky driving after they get married (Jessor, Turbin & Costa, 1997). Findings such as these suggest the way people behave on the road is somewhat reflected by the type of lifestyle they lead. While young drivers as a group must be treated as having a high risk of crashing, it cannot be denied that it is males who are much more at risk. The variables involved in crashes may not be the same for both male and female drivers, with male drivers more often involved in accident because of intentional risk taking.

Socioeconomic status and lifestyle Murray (1998) found that the young drivers who are involved in accidents tend to be from a lower socioeconomic status (SES) background, and their school marks are lower than the average of the population. This finding was particularly evident among males. MacDonald (1994b) also concluded that drivers from a low SES background seem to have a higher crash risk than others, along with some other interesting facts relating to car ownership and the age at which a licence was acquired. Among males, car ownership seems to be associated with more driving, more crashes, and poor academic performance. It was also found that males gain

12 their licence at younger age than females, and that people who have high school grades and highly educated parents tend to acquire their licence at a later age. It is very likely that the problem with young drivers is not an issue of skills or experience, but rather the lifestyle and motives of young people in general. Hatakka, Keskinen, Gregerson, Glad and Hernetkoski (2002) acknowledge this issue in relation to driver training ­ too much focus is on vehicle manoeuvring and skills, with little attention given to how goals and risk assessment can improve their safety on the road. The motives that people have for driving can have a great effect on the way that people drive. Näätänen and Summala (1974) explain that motivation can have an effect on perception, expectancy, subjective risk, and desired action. One possible example would be the effect of being in a hurry when it comes to deciding whether to overtake dangerously. The lifestyle and motives of young drivers may make them more susceptible to road accidents. The danger of driving at night could be attributed to the effect of darkness and reduced visibility. However, as Clarke, Ward and Truman (2005) point out, the danger is probably more related to the motives that young people have for driving at night. These include driving for recreation and pleasure (usually with their peers) which presumably are associated with speeding and other risky driving behaviours. This is in contrast with older drivers who are typically involved in driving connected with getting to work and transporting family members (Hatakka et al., 2002). Gregeren and Berg (1994) were able to categorise young drivers into six different clusters based on their lifestyle. These included a `high-risk' group that was predominately male, often drinks, and often has extra motives for driving (such as showing off). On the other end of the scale, a `low-risk' group was

13 predominately female and was particularly characterised by the fact that they seldom drove. There is also a link between risky driving and non-organised activities with friends (Bina, Graziano & Bonino, 2006). It is presumed that adolescents who frequently meet friends with no other purpose than to `hang out' are more likely to drive for fun, and exhibit r