THE RELATION BETWEEN PREFERENCE AND DEMAND FOR LITTER SUBSTRATES IN THE DOMESTIC HEN

A thesis Submitted in partial fulfilment Of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Psychology at the University of Waikato by AIMEE REBECCA HARRIS

University of Waikato 2006

ii ABSTRACT Six hen's preferences between 5-min access to each of two litter substrates, sand and sawdust, were measured using dependent concurrent VI 60-s VI 60-s schedules of reinforcement. The obtained preferences were small and idiosyncratic. Demand functions were generated separately for each of the two substrates by requiring the hens to perform under increasing FR schedules. The demand functions were disorderly, some were linear, some were of mixed elasticity, and others curved upwards. No clear relation between the individual hens' preference and demand measures was found. The overall response rates, running response rates and average post-reinforcement pause durations were atypical compared to previous demand research, possibly due to low levels of reinforcer collection, but were similar for individual subjects in both demand conditions. During the demand assessment, dustbathing took place in a similar proportion of reinforcers for each substrate. During the preference assessment, a greater proportion of dustbathing took place during sand reinforcers. Individual hens did not consistently dustbathe more in their preferred substrate. It was argued that the inconclusive results were a product of the substrates used. The atypical demand functions, response rates and average PRP durations may have been due to behaviour that was not schedule related occurring during key time (i.e., the subjects may have been continuing a dustbathing bout). It is possible, that the two substrates were too similar, and thus the subjects did not have a clear preference for one over the other. In future research preference should be assessed prior to demand, to ensure a clear preference can be obtained, with reinforcers that are qualitatively more different than those used in the present experiment.

iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would firstly like to thank my supervisors, Drs Catherine Sumpter, Bill Temple, Mary Foster and Nicola Starkey for their exceptional guidance, patience and persistence throughout this entire process. A special thank you to Cath, for encouraging me to do things that I never imagined I could (i.e., presenting my thesis to a room full of professors!). As a result I have much more confidence in my own abilities. Thanks also to Bill for the nice and encouraging comments, simply because I needed them! Many thanks to my family and friends. A huge thank you to my parents, Carin and Austin Harris. Your financial and emotional support, and unwavering belief in me has made this experience possible. Thank you Dege, for your support and for simply being there for me every day. You are simply amazing to have coped with an entire year of moodiness, sleeplessness, anxiety and hours of raving on about chickens! A special thank you to Julie-Anne for your friendship and for being available anytime to talk on the phone. This process has been so much more fun having been able to suffer through it with you! Many thanks to Jenny Chandler for her endless help with my equipment, Matlab, and proof reading. Also a big thank you to the members of the Animal Behaviour and Welfare Research Centre for your friendship and support, and for running my experiment, especially to Renée and Anna for their proof reading. Thanks also to Dora Wickham, and Lisa Gregg for their proof reading.

iv DEDICATION This thesis is dedicated in loving memory to my Oma, Johanna Mesman, who sadly passed away just weeks before it was to be completed. Oma, your constant kindness, encouragement and support throughout my time at university, even while you were sick, has meant everything to me. By simply remembering the person you were, every day I strive to better myself. I love you.

v CONTENTS

PAGE Abstract Acknowledgements Dedication Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices Introduction Method Results Discussion References Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ....................................... ii iii iv v vi vii viii 1 25 38 70 96 105 110 118

vi LIST OF TABLES

TABLE 1 Summary of experimental conditions and highest FR in each condition. 2 Parameters of lines fitted to consumption data for the sand condition (Condition 1). 3 Parameters of lines fitted to consumption data for the sawdust condition (Condition 2). 4 Parameters of lines fitted to consumption data for the sand and sawdust conditions. 5 Summed and median estimates of log c (overall bias) for response and time data, for all subjects in the preference assessment (Condition 3). 6 7 Summary of demand measures and preference assessment. Numbers and proportions of total and dustbathing trips in the sand and sawdust conditions. 8 Numbers and proportions of total and dustbathing trips in the preference assessment. 9 Average room temperatures during each condition.

PAGE 32

42

49

52

58

60 62

65

68

vii LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE 1 2 Experimental apparatus. Overall response rates, running response rates, and average post reinforcement pause durations for all subjects for the sand condition (Condition 1). 3 4 Consumption for all subjects in the sand condition. Overall response rates, running response rates, and average post reinforcement pause durations for all subjects for the sawdust condition (Condition 2). 5 6 Consumption for all subjects in the sawdust condition. Average consumption for all subjects in the sand and sawdust conditions. 7 Logarithms of response and time ratios for all subjects and sessions in the preference assessment (Condition 3). 8 Summed and median point estimates of log c for response and time data for every second five-session period for all subjects in the preference assessment. 9 Total number and number of dustbathing trips of each subject for the sand and sawdust conditions.

PAGE 27 39

41 45

47 51

55

57

64

viii LIST OF APPENDICIES

APPENDIX A Raw data presented for all subjects for the sand and sawdust conditions (Conditions 1 and 2). B Raw data presented for all subjects for the preference assessment (Condition 3). C Home and experimental room temperatures during each condition.

PAGE 105

110

118

1 The welfare and living conditions of animals under intensive farming systems are increasingly of concern to the public. One such system is the battery cage system, which is the most physically restrictive poultry production method (Appleby, Mench, & Hughes, 2004). In New Zealand, typically between five and seven birds are confined to a single battery cage, composing just one unit of a multilayer style caging system. Each bird within the cage is entitled to a minimum space allowance of 450 cm2, an area smaller than an A4 piece of paper (National Animal Welfare Advisory Committee, 2004). Welfare concerns include the barren environment of the battery cage (Appleby et al., 2004), and the prevention of many `normal' behaviours, seen in less constrained species members, such as roosting, ground scratching and dustbathing (Dawkins, 1977). As well as the prevention of behaviour, the restriction of barren environments, such as battery cages, is thought to encourage the development of problem behaviours such as feather pecking and cannibalism (Hughes & Duncan, 1972). One behaviour that is generally not available to hens in battery cages is dustbathing. Concern over the effects of not being able to perform this behaviour has led to the function of dustbathing being widely studied to determine its importance for hens (Appleby et al., 2004). According to van Liere (1992), dustbathing is a maintenance behaviour that removes stale feather lipids (fatty deposits), and as a result increases the quality, fluffiness, and insulation of feathers. It has been found that when hens are given access to a suitable substrate (e.g., peat), dustbathing occurs for approximately 20 minutes every two days, most commonly in the afternoon (van Liere, Kooijman, & Wiepkema, 1990; Vestergaard, 1982), and in warm temperatures (Duncan, Widowski, Malleau, Lindberg & Petherick, 1998). In an early study, Vestergaard (1982) deprived

2 hens of suitable dustbathing substrates from 24 to 101 hours. He found that as the duration of deprivation increased, longer and more frequent bouts of dustbathing were performed when the hens were given the opportunity. After 32 days of deprivation van Liere and Bokma (1987) observed that, when compared with a control group of hens with free access to sand, the feathers of hens deprived of access to suitable dustbathing substrates had excess lipids, were less fluffy and therefore had less insulation capacity. These deprived birds performed `sham' or `vacuum' dustbathing (the performance of dustbathing behaviour in the absence of a dustbathing substrate; Lindberg & Nicol, 1997), and when given access to sand at the conclusion of the deprivation period, they performed dustbathing behaviour more often and for longer periods than the control group. More recent studies have explored the link between deprivation of dustbathing substrates and the development of feather pecking, a major problem in intensive poultry systems (Blokhuis & Arkes, 1984). Vestergaard, Hogan and Kruijt (1990) and Vestergaard, Kruijt and Hogan (1993) compared the behaviour of two groups of hens. One group was raised with free-access to sand, grass and perches, and the other group was raised in a plain wire cage. The `wire' birds performed `vacuum' dustbathing, showed higher rates of damaging feather pecking, and appeared to use the feathers as a substrate for dustbathing. Johnsen, Vestergaard and Norgaard-Nielsen (1998) explored this link further, by raising three groups of hens on sand and straw, straw, or wire for the first four weeks of life. From weeks five to 17, all birds had access to both sand and straw, and at 18 weeks the birds were moved to an egg laying facility with a straw covered floor, and observed until 45 weeks of age. Across all substrates, birds initially reared on wire displayed the highest rates of feather pecking, the highest mortality rates due

3 to cannibalism, the lowest instances of dustbathing, a reduced plumage condition, showed the most fear in tonic immobility tests, and they laid the fewest eggs. The above results detailing the consequences of the deprivation of access to suitable dustbathing substrates suggests that dustbathing may be a behavioural need, essential for the wellbeing of domestic hens. As Dawkins (1977) points out, physiology and productivity were, in the past, widely supported indicators of animal suffering. Such measures included poor physical health indicated by a slow growth rate in broiler hens, and an inferior quality or number of eggs produced in laying hens. These measures may be of use if an animal is suffering from an injury, disease, or food deprivation, but do not necessarily indicate whether an animal is suffering from the deprivation of the performance of a behaviour such as dustbathing (Dawkins, 1983). Behavioural indicators of such deprivation must be identified and observed to assess and address the welfare of animals living in such conditions (Dawkins, 1988). Animals can tell us about their welfare needs by their behaviour. According to Dawkins (1983), the behavioural assessment of an animal's welfare should involve both an assessment of what an animal likes and dislikes, also known as preference assessment, and an assessment of their needs, which may be achieved with demand assessment. There are three main ways in which to assess the preferences of animals; free-access, T-maze, and the concurrent schedules of reinforcement procedure (Sumpter, Foster, & Temple, 2002). In a free-access procedure, the animal is given unrestricted access to at least two simultaneously available but incompatible options. The time spent in or interacting with each option (known as dwell time) is taken as the measure of preference (Sumpter et al., 2002). This procedure has

4 been successfully used to assess preferences of hens, including their preference between wire floor types (Hughes & Black, 1973), wire verses litter floors (Hughes, 1976), cage size (Dawkins, 1977), and dustbathing substrates (Santroa, Vestergaard, Agger, & Lawson, 1995). The second preference procedure, the T-maze, requires the animal to turn left or right in a T-maze in order to enter one of two environments for a predetermined period of time (Sumpter et al., 2002). Preference is measured by the number of times each alternative is selected and/or the latency to choose the alternative. For example, using latencies, Dawkins (1977) found a preference for an outside run over an inside cage in hens with the use of a T-maze. Free-access and T-maze procedures are easy to implement and require simple responses from the animal (Sumpter et al., 2002). However, they also have several limitations. Firstly, the use of dwell time as an indicator of preference can be problematic. As explained by Duncan (1978, 1981), the time spent in an activity/environment is not necessarily indicative of the value of that activity/environment. An animal may only spend 10% of the time available in one environment, but this environment may be just as important for the welfare of the animal as the environment in which the animal spends 90% of its time. For example, while laying is a behaviour that only occupies a small proportion of the day, it has been suggested that access to a nesting site is important for hens (as it has been observed that hens will develop methods in which to gain access to such a site by opening a one-way door; Smith, Appleby & Hughes, 1990), and therefore dwell time as a measure may undermine the importance of access to a nesting site for hens.

5 Another limitation is bias due to choice alternatives that differ in size. If the animal does not prefer one of the alternatives to the other, an apparent, but false preference for the larger environment may be suggested by a time spent measure, simply because it is more likely that the animal will spend more time in the larger environment if they are randomly wandering (Sumpter et al., 2002). For example, Dawkins (1977) assessed hens' preference between a battery cage (38 × 43m) and pen floored with wood shavings (260 × 82 cm) using the Freeaccess method, and found no apparent preference for either environment. Given the differing sizes of the two environments, a preference for the larger environment might be expected, but in this case, as no clear preference for either environment was found, the data was difficult to interpret. A third problem in free-access and T-maze procedures is that preferences may vary depending on the procedure used. In his 1976 preference assessment of floor type in the domestic hen, Hughes found that during a free-access procedure in which the subjects had continuous access to both litter and wire, no preference was evident. However, a preference for a litter floor over a wire floor was obtained using a second procedure, which required the birds, after making a choice, to remain in the environment for several hours. Most importantly, a problem often encountered when using free-access and T-maze procedures is exclusivity of choice. This means that if one option is highly preferred, it is likely that the animal will choose that option on most or all trials. Exclusivity of choice means that it is difficult to get a quantitative measure of preference (how much one alternative is preferred over the other) from either the free-access or T-maze procedures (Sumpter et al., 2002).

6 The third preference assessment procedure, the concurrent schedules of reinforcement procedure, provides a quantitative measure of preference. The concurrent schedules procedure involves the simultaneous presentation of two or more incompatible response manipulanda (e.g., two keys which can be pecked; Sumpter et al., 2002). The animal is required to respond (e.g., key peck) on the manipulanda, each of which is associated with a different intermittent schedule of reinforcement, and/or consequence (e.g., different foods; Matthews & Temple, 1979). Access to the consequence is achieved when the schedule requirements are met for the particular option. The measure of preference for one alternative over another is derived from the relative amount of time spent and/or responses made by the animal on each alternative to gain access to each outcome (McAdie, Foster, Temple & Matthews, 1993). The requirement may be time-based or response-based, but typically time-based schedules are used, the most common being concurrent variable-interval (VI) schedules (Davison & McCarthy, 1987; Sumpter et al., 2002). Under VI schedules, reinforcement is provided following the first response made on an alternative after an average period of time has elapsed since the previous reinforcer (Martin & Pear, 2003). For example, on a VI 30-s schedule, the first response made after an average of 30 s has elapsed since the previous reinforcer was received will produce reinforcement. Concurrent VI VI schedules of reinforcement are commonly used because, under such time-based schedules, the subject will tend to sample both alternatives, thereby increasing their reinforcement rate (Sumpter et al., 2002). Concurrent VI VI schedules may be arranged independently or dependently. When the schedules are independent, the delivery of a reinforcer for responding on one alternative is not affected by the arrangement of the reinforcer

7 for the other alternative (Herrnstein, 1961). When a reinforcer becomes available on one alternative, the other alternative continues timing; meaning that at any one time both alternatives may have a reinforcer available (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). In contrast, when the schedule pair is arranged dependently, both alternatives stop timing when a reinforcer is available on either of the alternatives (Stubbs & Plisskoff, 1969). When the reinforcer has been collected, both schedules continue timing (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). Dependent scheduling means that the subject must sample both alternatives (Sumpter et al., 2002). If a subject has a choice between two alternatives, one highly preferred, and one nonpreferred, responding will tend toward the preferred alternative. However, the preferred alternative will be indefinitely unavailable unless the non-preferred alternative is selected, because the timing of both alternatives stops when a nonpreferred reinforcer is available. This means that exclusivity of choice is prevented under dependent scheduling, ensuring that the preference measures are quantifiable. By contrast, exclusivity of choice is a problem faced with independent schedules when the preferences are extreme (i.e., the relative frequency of responding on the highly preferred alternative is 1.0, and on the nonpreferred alternative is 0.0), making quantification of the preference impossible (Stubbs & Pliskoff, 1969). Dependent scheduling also ensures that the subject experiences the reinforcement ratios as arranged by the experimenter (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). However, Matthews and Temple (1979) found that this does mean that the observed preferences may be less than the `actual' preferences. This is because in order to obtain a highly preferred alternative, the less preferred alternative must be sampled occasionally.

8 Subjects tend to switch between alternatives under concurrent VI VI schedules to maximise the rate of reinforcement (Catania, 1966). Switching between alternatives may be inadvertently reinforced, which may encourage further switching and thus produce inaccurate measures of preference (Herrnstein, 1961). This alternation between options may be reduced with the introduction of a changeover delay (COD; Herrnstein, 1961). A COD specifies a minimum amount of time that must pass between the changing of alternatives and the possibility of a reinforcer. This period of time is usually between 1 and 3 s depending on the species of the subject (Sumpter et al., 2002). Herrnstein (1961) compared concurrent VI VI schedules with and without a COD, and reported that a COD was essential for behaviour to be sensitive to the rate of reinforcement. Temple, Scown and Foster (1995) established that (using hens as subjects) behaviour was least sensitive to the reinforcement rate when no COD was programmed, and became more sensitive as the COD increased up to 2 s. However, additional increases in the length of the COD beyond 2 s did not appear to further increase the sensitivity of the hens' behaviour to the reinforcement rate. In an early choice study using concurrent VI VI schedules and pigeons, Herrnstein (1961) found that the relative behaviour allocated to each alternative was proportional to the relative reinforcement rate provided on each alternative. This matching relation is known as the Strict Matching Law (SML; Herrnstein, 1961), and may be quantified by the equation; B1 / ( B1 + B2 ) = R1 / ( R1 / R2 )
B

(1),

9 where B reflects the number of responses or times spent, R reflects the number of reinforcers obtained on each alternative, and the subscripts 1 and 2 represent the two alternatives (Baum, 1974, 1979). Matching data may be graphed by plotting the log ratios of the responses made or times allocated (y axis), against the log ratios of the reinforcers obtained (x axis). When strict matching has occurred, a regression line fitted to these data has a slope of 1.0, and a y-intercept of 0.0 (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). However, in more recent studies (i.e., since Herrnstein) it has been found that behaviour under concurrent schedules of reinforcement typically does not result in strict matching. In order to account for deviations from strict matching, Baum (1974) formally introduced the Generalised Matching Law (GML), now the most common way in which to quantify behaviour under concurrent schedules (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). Expressed logarithmically the GML is; log ( B1 / B2 ) = a log ( r1 / r2 ) + log c (2),

where B reflects the behaviour allocated (number of responses made or the times spent) to each of the alternatives (subscripts 1 and 2), and r represents the number of reinforcers received on the two alternatives. The parameter a (slope) measures how sensitive the organism's behaviour is to any changes in the relative reinforcement rate, and the parameter log c (y intercept) is a measure of bias, or `preference', for one alternative over another irrespective of the reinforcement rates on the two alternatives (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). The GML accounts for three main types of deviation from perfect matching; overmatching, undermatching, and bias. Baum (1974) used the term overmatching to describe values of a greater than 1.0. This occurs when more

10 behaviour than is predicted by the SML is allocated to the richer schedule of reinforcement. More commonly under concurrent schedules (Baum, 1974), a values are found to be less than 1.0, an occurrence known as undermatching (Baum, 1974). Typically, a values are found to be around 0.8 (Baum, 1979; Myers & Myers, 1977). Undermatching occurs when less behaviour than would be predicted by the relative reinforcement rate or the SML is allocated to the richer schedule. Baum (1974) suggested that undermatching results from the subject responding under the concurrent schedules procedure having poor discrimination between the alternatives, or from the use of a COD that is too short in length. The third deviation from strict matching described by Baum (1974, 1979) is bias. Bias is evident when more behaviour than predicted by strict matching is allocated to one alternative across all relative rates of reinforcement. On a regression line, bias is shown when the y-intercept (log c) is not equal to 0.0. When the concurrent alternatives are the same, bias is thought to be inherent (Baum, 1979). For example, the subject may prefer one key to the other due to the colour or force required to emit a response, or due to a positional preference (Baum, 1974). Another type of bias noted by Baum (1979) can be experimentally arranged. For example, different reinforcers may be deliberately arranged on each alternative, such as different foods (e.g., wheat and puffed wheat), in order to measure the degree of preference for one food over the other. In order to obtain a true measure of preference for these experimentally arranged variables, inherent bias must be measured and then deducted from the total bias measure. Matthews and Temple (1979) proposed the following equation to separate the two forms of bias;

11 log ( B1 / B2 ) = a log ( r1 / r2 ) + log b + log q (3),

where log b is the inherent bias, log q is the bias due to deliberate experimentally arranged differences to the alternatives (e.g., food quality), and B, r, and the subscripts 1 and 2 are as previously defined. log b + log q is equal to log c in Equation 2. In order to assess preference assuming the GML and using equal schedules and different reinforcers, a minimum of two conditions (one being an experimental condition) are required to account for inherent bias (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). Inherent bias may be removed by either using the same reinforcer on both alternatives (e.g., Foster, Temple, Robertson, Nair & Poling, 1996; Matthews & Temple, 1979; Tannahill, 2004) or by reversing the reinforcer alternatives (Davison & McCarthy, 1987). The concurrent schedules procedure together with the GML has been successfully used to assess the food and environmental preferences of many species. Examples include the assessment of food preferences in possums, hens and cows (Bron, Sumpter, Foster & Temple, 2003; Flevill, 2002; Foster et al., 1996), the assessment of sound preferences in hens (McAdie et al., 1993), and the assessment of social preferences in hens (Walker, 1996; Tannahill, 2004). While valuable information has and can be obtained from preference testing procedures, there are some limitations with preference measures however they are obtained. Firstly, preference measures are only ever relative to the testing situation, and as such do not provide any information about the absolute properties of the alternatives (Duncan, 1978). For example, a subject indicating a preference towards one alternative may dislike both alternatives on offer (Duncan, 1978). Additionally, Duncan (1978) notes that experimental subjects may not

12 make choices in the interest of their long-term welfare, giving the example of hens at the time of oviposition choosing nest boxes in which to lay, resulting in deprivation of food, water and social contact for hours. In order to address these problems and to assess and quantify the needs of animals, Dawkins (1983) suggested using operant methods derived from consumer demand theory (known as behavioural economics). Dawkins (1988) went on to propose that the importance of different commodities/environments to a subject may be measured by comparing the demand (how hard the animal will work), or the way in which consumption changes with price for each commodity. In economics, demand refers to how much the consumers' consumption of a commodity changes across increases in price. In behavioural economics, the subject is the consumer, and typically the number of responses made to gain access to the reinforcer (the commodity) is taken as the price (Green & Freed, 1998). Ratio schedules are most directly analogous to price in consumer economics (Green & Freed, 1998), and fixed ratio (FR) schedules of reinforcement are most commonly used in behavioural economic procedures, although other manipulations such as force required and type of response may also be used to change the price of the commodity (Sumpter, Temple & Foster, 1999). Under an FR schedule, a reinforcer is obtained after a specified number of responses have been emitted. Thus, the price of the reinforcer may be increased by increasing the FR schedule and therefore the number of responses required (Lea, 1978). A small initial FR value is typically increased by a base percentage each session in behavioural economic experiments (Hursh, 1984). The number of reinforcers obtained each session (consumption) may then be graphed

13 logarithmically as a function of the log schedule size (Lea, 1978). This is known as a demand function. Demand Theory maintains that the curve of the demand function should slope downwards from left to right for most goods, demonstrating a decrease in consumption as price increases (Hursh, Raslear, Bauman & Black, 1989). Hursh (1980) suggested the importance of different reinforcers may be determined by the slope or elasticity of the demand function. A shallow demand function or one with a slope less steep than -1, reflects inelastic demand (Hursh, 1980). Reinforcers that demonstrate inelastic demand are said to be `necessities' because the demand for these commodities is relatively unaffected by changes in price (Dawkins, 1983). This means that as the price of the commodity increases, the subject will increase their response rate in order to maintain a relatively steady level of consumption (Hursh, 1980; Hursh & Winger, 1995). When the demand function shows a slope steeper than -1, demand is said to be elastic (Hursh, 1980). Reinforcers demonstrating elastic demand are said to be `luxuries', because when the price (FR) increases, the demand for these commodities decreases (Dawkins, 1983). This decrease occurs because the subject does not increase their response rate in order to maintain a constant level of the commodity across increases in price. In such cases the response rate decreases rapidly with increases in price (Hursh, 1980, 1984). A demand function with a slope of exactly -1 is said to reflect unit elasticity (Hursh, 1980). Unit elasticity occurs when responding for a commodity remains constant across changes in price, meaning that consumption decreases proportionally to price increases (Foster, Blackman & Temple, 1997).

14 The demand function for a commodity may be either elastic, inelastic or of unit elasticity, however, the elasticity for a commodity does not always remain the same across all prices (Green & Freed, 1998). That is, a demand function may change from inelastic to elastic demand as the price increases (Hursh, 1984). The demand for a commodity demonstrating a curvilinear demand function such as this is said to be mixed (Hursh, 1980); a common finding in many animal experiments (Sumpter, Temple & Foster, 2004). Hursh, Raslear, Shurtleff, Bauman and Simmonds (1988) proposed an equation that allows the quantitative description of curvilinear demand functions showing mixed elasticity. In natural logarithms the equation is: ln Q = ln L + b ( ln P ) ­ a P In this equation, Q reflects the total consumption per session (e.g., reinforcers obtained or amount consumed), L estimates the level of consumption at the minimal price (e.g., FR 1), b is the initial elasticity of the demand function at the minimal price, P reflects the price in terms of the response requirement (FR size), and a represents the rate of change of the elasticity of the demand function across increases in price (Hursh et al., 1989). The point at which demand changes from inelastic to elastic, or the price (FR value) generating the maximal response output, is known as Pmax (Hursh et al., 1989), and may be determined by the equation; Pmax = (1 + b) / a where the parameters a and b are the same as defined in Equation 4. There are many variables that may affect the elasticity of demand functions. Hursh (1984) has shown that these variables include the type of economic system, and the commodity itself. (5), (4).

15 An economic system may be open or closed. A closed economy is one in which the subject has access to the commodity within the experimental sessions only (Hursh, 1980). By contrast, in an open economy the subject has access to the commodity outside the experimental session (Hursh, 1980). Generally, demand for food has been found to be inelastic under cl