PEAK SHIFT IN REMEMBERING

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Social Sciences at the University of Waikato by ANDROS HOAN

_________

University of Waikato 2003

ii ABSTRACT

If remembering is discriminative behaviour along the dimension of time and if, as Sargisson and White (2001) argued, generalisation around a peak can occur in this behaviour, then the peak shift which has been shown in discrimination along so many other stimulus dimensions, might also occur in remembering. To examine this hypothesis, 6 hens were trained in a delayed matching-to-sample procedure at delays of 2 and 4 s. The probability of reinforcement for correct responses was initially 0.9 at both delays until performance stabilised. A generalisation probe was then carried out by inserting unreinforced trials at delays of 0, 1, 1.5, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4.5, 5 and 6 s in a session amongst normal training delay trials. The generalisation functions had a slight peak around 2 s. After further training, a second generalisation probe showed a slightly declining function. The probability of reinforcement at the 2 s delay was then dropped to 0.1, so that in the terms of the classical generalisation/peak shift paradigm, 2-s delay trials became S ¯ and 4-s delay trials became S+. A third generalisation probe then was conducted. This resulted in a flat function from 0 s to 3 s, and a large, clear peak in discriminative performance at 4.5 s over all hens. After more of the same differential reinforcement training, a fourth generalisation probe showed a broad curve peaking at 3 s, with minima at 1 s and 6 s and a global maximum at 0 s. Another training condition was then run, with the probability of reinforcement at the 2-s delay dropped to 0, to see if increasing the "aversiveness" of S¯ would again result in a peak shift. A fifth generalisation probe was then conducted. This showed a sharp decline in discriminability at shorter delays, a dip around 2 s, and a very small area shift beyond 4 s, but no clear peak shift. This was interpreted as being due to overlearning, with the consequences of remembering at S¯ no longer significantly affecting performance at S+. A final training condition was then run, with S¯ moved from 2 s to 3 s with zero probability of reinforcement, and for only a short period, to prevent overlearning. It was predicted that this would cause peak shift to re-occur. A sixth generalisation probe was then conducted. This found a further decline in discriminability at shorter delays, a shift in the dip from 2 s to 3 s, and a large, clear peak at 4.5 s. This demonstration of peak shift in a remembering process would not have been predicted by any traditional theory of memory, but strongly supports the conception of remembering as discriminative behaviour along the stimulus dimension of time.

iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I wish to give special thanks to Dr Mary Foster, without whose support at some crucial times, I would have abandoned the university system, and this thesis would never have been written. Thanks also to Dr Bill Temple for some memorable insights. Thanks to Dr James McEwan, whose graduate module in behavioural perception provided the rare intellectual stimulus which led eventually to the idea for this research. Finally I want to thank Jenny Chandler, who built the equipment and introduced me to MED programming, and my fellow graduate students at the Animal Behaviour and Welfare Research Centre, especially Karen Smith, who helped to make it happen.

iv CONTENTS Page

Abstract Acknowledgements Contents List of Figures List of Tables List of contents of Appendix D: CD-R disc General Introduction Experiment 1 Method Results Discussion Experiment 2 Method Results Discussion Experiment 3 Method Results Discussion Experiment 4 Method Results Discussion General results

ii iii iv vi viii ix 1 12 12 16 22 24 24 24 29 30 30 31 37 40 40 40 45 47

v

General Discussion References Appendix A: Summary of the conditions and contingencies in the study Appendix B: The cumulative data from training sessions Appendix C: The cumulative data from generalisation probe sessions Appendix D: CD-R disc

53 80 98 99 111

(Inside back cover)

vi LIST OF FIGURES Page Fig. 1. Fig. 2-1 Fig. 2-2 Conceptual origins of the present study Time series graph of Log d: TR2-GP3 Time series graph of Latency to choice: TR2-GP3 3 17 17 18

Fig. 3-1. Generalisation probes 1, 2 and 3: Log d versus delay

Fig. 3-2. Generalisation probes 1, 2 and 3: Percentage correct versus delay19 Fig. 3-3. Generalisation probes 1, 2 and 3: Latency to choice versus delay 20 Fig. 4-1. Generalisation probe 4: Log d versus delay Fig. 4-2. Generalisation probe 4: Percentage correct versus delay Fig. 4-3. Generalisation probe 4: Latency to choice versus delay Fig. 5-1 Fig. 5-2 Time series graph of Log d: PS3-GP5 Time series graph of Latency to choice: PS3-GP5 25 26 27 32 32 33 34 35 42 43 44 48

Fig. 6-1. Generalisation probe 5: Log d versus delay Fig. 6-2. Generalisation probe 5: Percentage correct versus delay Fig. 6-3. Generalisation probe 5: Latency to choice versus delay Fig. 7-1. Generalisation probe 6: Log d versus delay Fig. 7-2. Generalisation probe 6: Percentage correct versus delay Fig. 7-3. Generalisation probe 6: Latency to choice versus delay Fig. 8-1 Fig. 8-2 Time series graph of Log d: TR1-GP6 (whole study)

Time series graph of Latency to choice: TR1-GP6 (whole study) 48 49 50 51 59 60 61

Fig. 9-1. Generalisation probes 2-6: Log d versus delay Fig. 9-2. Generalisation probes 2-6: Percentage correct versus delay Fig. 9-3. Generalisation probes 2-6: Latency to choice versus delay Fig. 10-1. Generalisation probe 1: Log d Sessions 1, 2 and 3, and mean. Fig. 10-2. Generalisation probe 2: Log d Sessions 1, 2, and mean. Fig. 10-3. Generalisation probe 3: Log d Sessions 1, 2, and mean.

vii Fig. 10-4. Generalisation probe 4: Log d Sessions 1, 2, and mean. Fig. 10-5. Generalisation probe 5: Log d Sessions 1, 2, and mean. Fig. 10-6. Generalisation probe 5: Log d Sessions 1, 2, and mean. Fig. 11. A possible conceptual future for DMTS remembering studies. 62 63 64 78

viii LIST OF TABLES Page Table 1. List of selected studies in which peak shift was found 8

ix CONTENTS OF APPENDIX D: CD-R DISC

READMEFIRST.doc (Microsoft Word for WindowsTM file) Appendix A.doc (Microsoft Word for WindowsTM file)......Summary of the conditions and contingencies in the study Cumulative data (folder)......The cumulative data Eventdata (folder)..............The consecutive within-session event data Excelcumdata (folder).........The cumulative data analysed in Microsoft ExcelTM MEDPCpgms (folder).........The MEDSTATE NOTATIONTM programs used to run the experiments PEAKSHIFTR.ppt (Microsoft PowerPointTM file)....PowerPointTM Presentation of the key results of this study

1 Instead of "memory," we should say "remembering"; instead of "thought" we should say "thinking, " instead of "sensation" we should say "seeing, hearing," etc. But like other learned branches, psychology is prone to transform its verbs into nouns. Then what happens? We forget that our nouns are merely substitutes for verbs, and go hunting for the things denoted by the nouns; but there are no such things, there are only the activities that we started with, seeing, remembering, and so on...(Woodworth, 1921, cited in Catania, 1979, p. 307)

"It all depends on where you look for your causes." (W. Temple, personal communication, March 2000) The systematic quantitative study of forgetting is generally considered to have begun with Ebbinghaus (1885/1964). Since then a vast literature, and a bewildering number of theories of memory have arisen. The question, "how do we remember?" is addressed by perhaps four broad classes of theories, the first two of which clearly dominate the recent memory literature: (a) Physiological trace theories, going back at least to Sechenov (1863/1965), which assume as given that memory is something built up in the brain. Even when they manipulate external contingencies, workers in this tradition are not satisfied that they have found a cause until an internal correlate has been identified or hypothesised. See McGaugh (2000) for recent review. (b) Structuralist "information processing" (IP) theories, which attempt to answer the question by modelling humans and/or other animals as computers (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). In this paradigm, an observed outcome is considered to be explained by a model, if hypothetically, receiving similar inputs as the subjects did under similar circumstances, it would produce similar output. As Roediger III (1979) pointed out, people have long used analogies to the technology of their time, from the wax tablet to the computer, to explain remembering. Not surprisingly, IP theories have arisen mostly since the advent of computers in the 1950's, and have become extremely complicated. (c) Ecological remembering approaches (Bartlett, 1932), which consider remembering in its social context. Writers in this tradition tend to regard physiological approaches, and some or all experimental approaches, as sterile, and not reflecting the richness of the experience of remembering, or its function(s) in real lives. See Neisser (1982) and Neisser and Winograd (1995) for recent expositions.

2 (d) Radical remembering theories, which reject the notion that memory is a "thing" stored, either as a copy or some other representation in a physiological or mental filing cabinet, and then retrieved. Instead, researchers focus on the act or behaviour of remembering (Branch, 1977; Ben Zeev, 1986; Palmer, 1991; Wilcox & Katz, 1981). The present thesis arises from this perspective, cross-fertilised with ideas from the stimulus discrimination and generalisation literature, which will therefore be briefly discussed. The narrower question, "why do we forget?", has been predominantly addressed by two types of theories: (a) Trace decay theory­ essentially this is the idea that perception creates and stores a copy, or representation of the thing perceived. This copy/representation is assumed to start at its maximal value, and then to decline monotonically, according to a physiologically more or less pre-ordained curve, similar to that shown in Figure 1(a). Originally regarded as a physiological construct by Sechenov (1863/1965) and Pavlov (1927/1960), the memory trace was later adapted as a psychological construct, (e.g. Hebb, 1949/1961; Hull, 1952/1964; Wickelgren, 1974) but has never lost its pseudophysiological connotations. See Gomulicki (1953), for a historical background. Trace decay is a primitive, inadequate, but remarkably resilient idea. (b) Interference theories - a class of attempts to address the manifest inadequacies of simple trace decay theory by considering the effects of environmental contingencies on forgetting. McGeoch (1932) viewed these effects in terms of competing responses, but nowadays they are usually interpreted in terms of various hypothesised internal mediating constructs affecting the storage or retrieval of memory traces (Postman & Underwood, 1973). See Anderson and Neely (1996) for a recent overview. Regardless of the proportions of decay or interference posited, advocates of both views nearly always agree that forgetting follows monotonically declining functions. Rubin and Wenzel (1996) analysed 210 sets of published data on forgetting functions, and concluded that there were four candidate functions ­ all monotonically declining, which fit the data about equally well. Even behaviourally oriented writers such Staddon, Chelaru and Higa (2002, p. 74) (incorrectly citing the year as 1999) have boldly endorsed Rubin and Wenzel's (1996) results as representing, "The empirical forgetting function". Thus it can fairly be said that the currently dominant psychological view of the course of forgetting functions over periods of up to about a minute, is that of a monotonically declining function such as that shown in Figure 1(a). Figures 1 (b), (c), and (d) illustrate the evolution of the idea for the present study, from the conventional view, via a radically different interpretation of the nature of memory, to a prediction of a phenomenon never before demonstrated in remembering.

3

Memory strength

(a)

Conventional "memory decay" curve - reinterpreted by White (1985) as discrimination along the dimension of time with respect to the stimulus at time zero. Time

Discriminability (log d)

(b)

Generalisation along the dimension of time around a peak in this discriminative behaviour - caused by reinforcing correct remembering at time delay T (Sargisson & White, 2001). T Time

Discriminability (log d)

(c)

One possible hypothetical result of training at two delays, T1 and T2.

T1 Discriminability (log d)

T2 Peak shift?

Time

(d)

If we train at two delays, but reinforce poorly at one, (S¯), and richly at the other, (S+), will the peak in discriminative performance shift to a delay on the far side of S+ away from S¯?

S¯

S+

Time

Figure 1. Conceptual origins of the present study.

4 White (1985, 1991) proposed a theory of direct remembering, which treats remembering as an act of discrimination along the stimulus dimension of time. White's theory arises from the radical remembering perspective in general, but in particular, from a fusion of the direct perceptual ideas of Gibson (1977, 1979), and Skinner's (1938/1991, 1974) operant conditioning. To remember is to respond to a stimulus, some time after it was presented, i.e., at a distance in time away from its presentation. Forgetting over time, in the Direct Remembering (DR) view, is due to the stimulus being a greater distance away in time, just as a landmark becomes more distant as we walk away from it, till eventually it can no longer be seen. Furthermore, DR theory argues that remembering and forgetting, like other behaviours, can be modified by their consequences. It thus provides a theoretically coherent experimental paradigm for the functional analysis of remembering behaviour. DR theory differs from traditional interference theories which, while rejecting a simple decay model, still treat memories as things which are stored and then retrieved. The "interference" in interference theories interferes with these processes. In DR studies, the accuracy of remembering is measured at various times, or delay points, after the presentation of some stimulus, and plotted graphically. However, lines drawn through these points, or any mathematical function fitted to them, constitute a relational behavioural description, not an intrinsic property of an internal event or construct. DR theory views remembering performance at any one of the infinite number of delay points along the temporal dimension as a function of contingencies, such as the consequences of remembering, applying at that particular delay, independently of those at other delays. This directed research toward investigating the effects of systematically modifying contingencies at various delays. The experimental methodology generally used in this type of research (both with humans and animals), is that of delayed matching-to-sample (DMTS). DMTS has a long history (D'Amato, 1973), but the seminal modern experimental studies were done by Blough (1959), and Berryman, Cumming, and Nevin (1963). In a typical DMTS procedure, a sample stimulus (e.g. a red light) is presented to the subject for a defined length of time, and then withdrawn. After a further amount of time (the delay), comparison stimuli are presented (e.g. a red light and a green light), and the subject is required to choose one of these. If the comparison stimulus chosen matches the earlier sample, (in this case, the red light), then reinforcement is given, and the subject can learn to choose correctly upon subsequent trials. The extent to which subjects choose correctly, which usually declines rapidly as the delay interval is lengthened (Wixted, 1989), may be taken as a measure of how well they remembered the sample stimulus.

5 Medin (1976, p. 115) argued that, "Animal research may help to disentangle those aspects of human memory that depend uniquely on language from those that do not". Zentall (1973, p. 126), also pointed out, that in DMTS, "the fact that an animal can perform at a high level accuracy on control trials involving only the sample and comparison stimuli presentation indicates that the task 'instructions' have been learned" in a way comparable to humans who have been given explicit instructions. Laming and Scheiwiller (1985) argued that in many studies of memory, with both humans and animals, similar functions have been obtained under similar contingencies. The present author proceeds from the view that it is appropriate to assume, on the grounds of neutrality, parsimony, and the desirability of conceptual coherence in psychology, that similar laws may well apply to human as apply to other animal behaviour, unless or until in a particular domain, the evidence shows otherwise. The preferred measure of remembering strength in White's Direct Remembering theory, is log d, a bias-free measure of discriminability (Davison & Tustin, 1978; McCarthy, 1983; McCarthy & White, 1987), derived from the generalised matching law. In a situation where a subject has only two choices, and each time they choose, the only possible outcomes are that the choice is either correct, or incorrect, then log d is half of the logarithm (to base 10) of, the ratio of correct to incorrect responses made to the one stimulus multiplied by the ratio of correct to incorrect responses made to the other stimulus. Or, as Adamson, Foster, and McEwan (2000, p. 154) put it, log d , "is the logarithm of the geometric mean of the ratios of correct to incorrect responding on trials with the two different sample stimuli". As applied to the present study, in which the choice must be made between a red stimulus and a green stimulus, the equation for log d is:  Correct red  Correct green    log d = 0.5 log      Incorrect red  Incorrect green  (1)

Log d is easier to interpret at very high or very low discriminability than proportion correct, which is bounded at 0.5 (a chance level of performance) and 1.0 (perfect performance). Sargisson and White (2001), extended the use of log d to describe remembering performance in terms not only of temporal distance from time zero, but also in terms of generalisation of discriminative performance along the stimulus dimension of time, as follows: log d = a. exp(- b.t ) + c. exp(- d . t - T

)

(2)

6 Equation (2) describes a function which looks more or less like Figure 1(b). The first term defines the temporal distance component (the part between the Y-axis and the peak), while the second term defines the generalisation component. Where T is the training delay (the time delay from the origin at which correct remembering was reinforced), t is any given time (i.e., along the stimulus dimension of time) at which the value of the function is being defined. Stimulus discrimination Behaviour, including making choices, occurs in an environment. If an aspect of that environment provides an occasion, or setting, in which a subject's behaviour will have different consequences than would follow the same behaviour in a different setting, then the setting allows for a conditional choice, or discrimination. Stimulus discrimination has been studied widely with animals, along a range of stimulus dimensions, such as coloured lights, sounds, etc. When values of the training stimulus vary along a dimension, such as colour, this is termed intradimensional training. Generalisation The concept of stimulus generalisation was articulated by Pavlov (1927/1960), but its systematic experimental study was established by Guttman and Kalish (1956), and reviewed by Honig and Urcuioli (1981). When an organism is trained to respond to a particular stimulus, e.g. by being reinforced for that particular response, some responses will also occur to stimuli on either side of the target stimulus. "A stimulus generalisation gradient is the function obtained when the total number of responses to each of the stimulus values presented during the generalisation test are plotted against the dimension of generalisation" (Rilling, 1977, p. 423). Stimulus generalisation gradients are often used to study the degree of stimulus control achieved, peak performance being normally found at the training stimulus. Peak shift Hanson (1959), conducted intradimensional discriminative training at two points along a stimulus continuum, namely wavelength of light. Responses to one colour were reinforced. This was called a positive stimulus (S+). Responses to another colour were never reinforced (i.e., extinction was in effect). This was called the negative stimulus (S ¯ ). When generalisation tests were carried out at a range of wavelengths around the two trained wavelengths, it was found that highest rate of responding occurred not to the stimulus where correct choices were reinforced (S+), but to a stimulus displaced away from S ¯ , on the far side of S+. This was called peak shift. Overviews of peak shift research have been done by Purtle (1973), Rilling (1977), and Honig and Urcuioli

7 (1981). As Cheng, Spetch and Johnston (1997) noted, individual differences exist, and some individuals fail to show the effect (see Purtle, 1973). Peak shift has also been found in classical conditioning studies (e.g. Moore, 1972), but those will not be further considered in this thesis. As Table 1. shows, the peak shift phenomenon has subsequently been found to occur, both with a wide range of species, and along many very diverse stimulus dimensions. If Sargisson and White (2001) are correct in interpreting their results as generalisation of discriminative performance around a peak at a delay where correct responding was reinforced, then it may be that peak shift might occur in discrimination along the stimulus dimension of time, that is, in remembering, in a manner analogous to the peak shifts found in response rates along other stimulus dimensions. Indeed if White's DR theory is correct in treating discrimination along the temporal dimension as being in principle no different from discrimination along other dimensions, then peak shift ought to occur also in remembering. Figure 1 (c) illustrates how generalisation of discriminative performance might occur around two peaks at two time delays, T1 and T2, if correct responding were reinforced at those delays. Figure 1 (d) then illustrates how peak shift in remembering might occur. If correct responding at time delay T1 were reinforced poorly or not at all, but correct responding at time delay T2 were reinforced richly, then trials at T1 could function as an S ¯ , while trials at T2 could function as an S+, just like the S¯ and S+ stimuli along other dimensions such as light wavelength. Hence, during generalisation testing, the highest remembering accuracy might occur at a delay longer than the S+ delay, and at which correct responding would never have been reinforced. The purpose of the present study was to see if such a peak shift would occur in remembering. Reasons for the particular design of the study No previous studies existed on peak shift in remembering. Therefore, in order to gain guidance from the existing literature on peak shift in response rates, it was necessary to assume, at least as a working hypothesis, that discriminative performance along the temporal dimension might follow similar patterns under similar contingencies to those previously found with response rates along other dimensions. The possibility of trying to obtain peak shift toward the y-axis was considered, but rejected for two reasons. First, it would be theoretically much more interesting to find a peak shift in remembering away from the y-axis. Second, it would be difficult to show that any improved performance closer to the y-axis constituted a peak shift rather than the ordinarily expected better remembering at shorter time delays. For any given data

8 Table 1. Studies in which peak shift has been found Author(s) Ames & Yarczower Baron Bloomfield Blough Bushnell & Weiss Capehart & Pease Cheng, Spetch & Johnston Doll & Thomas Dougherty & Lewis Dukhayyil & Lyons Ernst, Engberg & Thomas Galizio & Baron Gerry Grusec Guttman Hanson Hendry, Switalski, & Yarczower Honig & Stewart Klipec, Akins & Koerner Klipec, Lindblom & Lindblom Lyons, Ferraro, Lyons, Sullivan & Downey Lyons, Klipec & Steinsultz MacKinnon Mariner & Thomas Marsh McCoy & Lange Newlin, Rodgers & Thomas Nicholson & Gray 1973 1972 1969 1972 1969 1979 1971 Rats Humans Pigeons Pigeons Monkeys Humans Humans Angularity (line-tilt) Weight lifted Light wavelength Light wavelength Gravity Light intensity Angularity (line-tilt) Date 1965 1973 1967 1973 1980 1968 1997 1967 1991 1973 1971 1979 1971 1968 1959 1959 1969 1993 1979 1979 1973 Subjects Goldfish Humans Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Humans Pigeons Humans Horses Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Humans Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Humans Rats Pigeons Pigeons Rats Rats Stimulus dimension Light wavelength Sound frequency Angularity (line-tilt) Light wavelength Light wavelength Weight lifted Spatial location Light wavelength Circle size Light wavelength Light wavelength Light intensity Sound frequency Sound frequency Light wavelength Light wavelength Light wavelength Arm movements Sound click-rate Relative numerosity Light wavelength Angularity (line-tilt) Floor inclination

Dysart, Marx, McLean & Nelson 1974

Hedges, Dickinson & Modigliani 1983

9 Nicholson & Gray Pierrel & Sherman Pierrel & Sherman Riccio, Urda & Thomas Rudolph & Honig Sloane Spetch & Cheng Stevenson Terrace Terrace Terrace Thomas & Burr Thomas, Mood, Morrison & Wiertelak Thomas, Ost & Thomas Thomas & Setzer Thomas, Svinicki & Vogt Weinberg Wheatley & Thomas Wildemann & Holland Wills & Mackintosh Winton & Beale Yarczower, Dickson & Gollub Yarczower, Gollub & Dickson Zentall, Collins & Hearst 1960 1972 1973 1973 1974 1971 1998 1971 1966 1969 1971 Pigeons Humans Rats Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons 1972 1960 1962 1966 1972 1964 1998 1966 1964 1966 1968 1969 1991 Humans Rats Rats Pigeons Chickens Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Pigeons Humans Angularity (line-tilt) Sound intensity Sound intensity Floor inclination Light wavelength Light wavelength Light flicker rate Light duration Light wavelength Light wavelength Light wavelength Light wavelength Light wavelength Light intensity, & Angularity (line-tilt) Light wavelength Light intensity Sound click-rate Light wavelength Circle size Angularity (line-tilt) Light wavelength Light wavelength Angularity (line-tilt) Rats, Guinea pigs Sound intensity

Rudolph, Van Houten & Maddox 1971

Pigeons, Humans Symbolic arrays

Note. This table is not an exhaustive list of peak shift studies. It deliberately excludes those studies which investigated but did not find a peak shift. It also does not include classical conditioning studies.

set, a sceptic could simply fit a traditional "decay curve" higher up than otherwise, with the alleged peak lying above this curve, to account for the data. Convincingly defeating this criticism would require both a clear peak shifted from S+ toward the y-axis, and an excellent database showing at the half-second resolution level exactly where the curve

10 would have been expected to lie in the absence of the differential reinforcement contingency. This information did not yet exist, and was not feasible to obtain within the time and other resources available. It was therefore decided to use trials at a shorter delay as S ¯ , and trials at a longer delay as S+. Smith (1997), showed that domestic hens with no prior matching to sample training, could learn to choose, under a DMTS procedure, at a delay of 4 s. In Sargisson and White's (2001) study, with training delays of 2, 4, and 6 s, the clearest visible peak in performance during generalisation testing, occurred at the 4-s delay. Using the 4-s delay as the S+ stimulus point therefore seemed to offer the best chance of observing a shift of the expected peak in remembering accuracy at that delay. White and Cooney (1996), using reinforcement probabilities for correct responses ranging from 0.1 to 0.9, showed that pigeons' DMTS remembering performance at delays of 0.1 s and 4 s was independent. This suggested that a 4-s gap between the two training delays would be too large for the present study, as occurrence of peak shift implies dependence of performance at one delay on the consequences of remembering at the other delay. The close proximity to the origin of an S¯ at the 0.1-s delay, would also make it difficult both to distinguish between performance at that delay and initial discriminability at time zero, and to discern the shape of the discriminative performance function around S ¯ . Previous work with hens (e.g. Etheredge, 1997), has shown that hens can respond differentially at delays of 2 and 4 s after DMTS training. Comparability with Sargisson and White's delays, linearly spaced 2 s apart, was also desirable. It was therefore appropriate to use trials at the 2-s delay as the S¯ . While Hanson (1959) used a variable interval (VI) schedule at S+ , and nonreinforcement at S ¯ , Guttman (1959) showed that a lower rate of reinforcement at S¯ (as opposed to extinction used by Hanson) compared to that at S+ still produced a peak shift. This would help to maintain responding during generalisation probe sessions. Wheatley and Thomas (1974) obtained a peak shift from a VI12/VI24 reinforcement schedule. These results, together with those of White and Cooney (1996), suggested that a reinforcement schedule whereby correct responses to S¯ are reinforced with probability 0.1, while correct responses to S+ are reinforced with probability 0.9, should be able to produce peak shift in DMTS remembering performance. Generalisation testing in previous DMTS studies has usually been done either at linearly or logarithmically spaced multiples of 2-s delays. However, it was felt in this case, that a 2-s gap might be too big to allow peak shift to be detected. Theoretical explanation of either the occurrence or not of peak shift, would also be facilitated by a

11 more closely defined discriminative performance function. Testing intervals of 0.5 s were therefore considered to be appropriate. Testing only at delays from 2 s to 6 s, would minimise the number of delays per series and so maximise the number trials per session. However, as Cheng, Spetch and Johnston (1997) advised, "the potential for range effects should be considered in all studies of peak shift" (p. 470). In order to exclude the possibility of an adaptation-level effect (Helson, 1947), causing any peak shift found, the generalisation test delay set needs to be arrayed symmetrically around the 2-s and 4-s training delays (assuming linear timing, after Sargisson and White, 2001). Testing at delays from 0 to 6 s would meet this requirement. Generalisation testing is often done in extinction, after Guttman and Kalish (1956). However, the standard session length in this lab is 40 min, and extinction was undesirable, as a baseline performance measure was needed and so ongoing responding was required after the testing. Continuing to reinforce correct responses at the training delays during generalisation probe sessions, while not reinforcing correct responses at the novel test delays tends to produce sharper generalisation gradients (Pierrel, 1958). Nevertheless, Gerry (1971) maintained responding at S+ with a VI 60 s schedule during generalisation testing, but still found a peak shift. Sargisson and White (2001) maintained responding during generalisation testing, by adding 3 reinforced trials at the training delay to each block of 9 trials. It therefore seemed reasonable to include 3 reinforced trials per block at both the S¯ and S+ delays in the present study. There is mixed evidence as to effect of the number of test sessions, and of the delay between training and testing, on the likelihood of finding peak shift. Pierrel and Sherman (1960) used one generalisation test session daily for 7 days, and found peak shift occurring only on the first four tests. Wildemann and Holland (1971) found peak shift occurring only on the first three tests. Thomas, Ost and Thomas (1960) administered generalisation tests 24 hours, 1 week or 3 weeks after the end of training, and found that all produced similar gradients. In contrast, Perkins and Weyant (1958), found flatter gradients after 1 week delay to testing. Taking all the above factors into account, it was decided to run 