Institutional responses to mental deficiency in New Zealand, 1911-1935: Tokanui Mental Hospital
A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts
at

The University of Waikato
by

Adrienne Hoult

The University of Waikato 2007

Abstract
This thesis considers the response of one New Zealand institution, Tokanui Mental Hospital, to legislation and policies for `mental deficiency' introduced during the first half of the twentieth century. Institutional reactions to these policies have been under examined in New Zealand. While psychiatric or mentally ill patients have been the subject of a number of New Zealand histories of the asylum, `mental defectives' have often been overlooked. Yet during the early-twentieth century, `mental defectives' were thought to be a source of a number of social problems, and the New Zealand government considered a range of measures aimed at limiting the spread and effect of mental deficiency in society. Policies for `mental deficiency' were influenced by contemporary anxieties about crime, sexuality and hereditarism. As a policy of segregation was formally prescribed, more `mental defectives' were committed to mental hospitals and other institutions than ever before. An understanding of the responses to this perceived problem also provides an insight into wider social policies in New Zealand in the first half of the twentieth century. This thesis argues that gender was a significant factor in the decision to commit mental defectives to Tokanui. Subsequent categorisation and treatment within Tokanui was also affected by gender. Official reports inform us about the policies that were in place, and historical materials from Tokanui show how these worked in practice. Most of the archives of Tokanui Mental Hospital have been unexamined by historians before now, and close analysis of patient cases also reveals more about institutional practices. The connection between Tokanui and neighbouring Waikeria Prison is also explored, in the context of contemporary fears surrounding mental deficiency and crime.

ii

Acknowledgments
This thesis would not have been possible to write without access to Tokanui Mental Hospital's archival materials, which the Mental Health and Addictions Service at the Waikato District Health Board kindly granted. The staff at the Auckland Branch of National Archives were particularly helpful during research trips. Te Awamutu Museum, particularly Toni Fortune, also provided additional information and assistance. Thanks to my supervisors, Drs Cathy Coleborne and Bronwyn Labrum for their suggestions and critiques throughout the research and writing stages. Thank you also to Peter Gibbons for his useful comments during the drafting process and Nepia Mahuika for proofreading the final draft. Many thanks to my friends who provided welcome distractions and a reminder of life beyond this research. Most importantly, thank you to my parents and brother for their support, encouragement and inspiration over the last few years; I couldn't have done this without you.

iii

Table of Contents
Title page Abstract Acknowledgments Table of Contents List of Tables i ii iii iv v

Introduction Chapter One: Legislation and policy for mental defectives in New Zealand, 1911-1928 Chapter Two: Patients at Tokanui: committal, classification and hospital life Chapter Three: `She cannot guard herself from ordinary physical dangers': The care and control of patients at Tokanui Chapter Four: Male mental defectives and criminality: `a constant source of trouble' Conclusion

1

16

37

58

77 96

Bibliography

100

Appendix

112

iv

List of Tables
Table 2.1 Category of mental defective admitted to Tokanui, 1912-1935 (number of admissions and percentage of total sample) Table 2.2 Ages of mental defectives upon admission to Tokanui, 1912-1935 Table 2.3 Number of mental defectives admitted to Tokanui, 1912-1935 (number and percentage of total sample) Table 2.4 Outcomes for mental defectives at Tokanui 1912-1935 (number and percentage of total sample) 43 Table 4.1 Criminal defectives: Number of admissions to Tokanui, 1912-1935 (number and percentage of total sample) Table 4.2 Criminal defectives: Outcomes, 1912-1935 (number and percentage of total sample)

39 40

41

79

83

v

Introduction
`Mental deficiency', now known as intellectual disability, was not officially recognised as a condition separate from lunacy until the early-twentieth century. In New Zealand the Mental Defectives Act (1911) first acknowledged the number of categories, including `idiot', `imbecile' and `feeble-minded', within the field of `mental deficiency'. This legislation also sought to resolve the `problem' of `mental deficiency'. This thesis locates institutional responses to legislation and policy for `mental deficiency' by examining one New Zealand mental hospital, Tokanui Mental Hospital, situated in the Waikato, in the early-twentieth century. An understanding of the responses to this perceived social problem also provides an insight into wider social policies in New Zealand in the first half of the twentieth century. The case study of Tokanui will consider how policies such as the Mental Defectives Act operated in practice. This thesis argues that `mentally defective' patients in mental hospitals during the early-twentieth century have been under examined in New Zealand histories of the asylum. Tokanui responded to the `mental deficiency problem' by diagnosis and classification of `mental defectives' in the hospital according to legal definitions, but also based on information provided by patients' families and their doctor's own expertise. These factors, as well as patient's actions and behaviour in the hospital, determined Tokanui's response to individual patients; that is, the type of work given to patients, whether they received parole, or eventually probation and discharge. Families were responsible for committal for most `mental defectives', and for care and control if `mental defectives' were discharged. Gender was an important factor in the decision to commit a `mental defective', and in their categorisation and experiences in Tokanui. Categorisation of `mental defectives' was initiated by medical, educative and governmental authorities and reinforced the power these authorities and institutions had over individuals. In this thesis, gender and the construction of these `medical'

1

categories are overarching themes. The thesis will also consider how gender and categorisation interacted with the following themes: policy and legislation; the care and management of `mental defectives', particularly those at Tokanui; the role of families in institutionalisation; the social control of defectives, especially `high grades'; and criminality. The terms used in this thesis to describe intellectual disability, `mental deficiency', `defective', `idiot', `imbecile', `feeble-minded', and `social defective', are obsolete and have been rarely used in the last 30 to 40 years in New Zealand. The use of quotation marks around these terms in histories of mental deficiency is a common indicator of how highly constructed these categories were in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. 1 This thesis argues that this was also the case for these categories in New Zealand. 2 Idiots and imbeciles were further categorised as `low grade' mental defectives in Tokanui, while the feeble-minded and social defectives were `high grade', or more intelligent defectives. These historically accurate terms will also be used throughout this thesis to describe the patients. The thesis is concerned to further explicate these categories where possible. The thesis also situates New Zealand within an international framework. This Introduction explores the historiographical context for this study, first examining themes in the international setting, and then turning to New Zealand. A number of British and American histories from the late 1970s have examined institutions and policies for defectives in those countries. 3 Some `idiots', the term
Mark Jackson, The borderland of imbecility (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2000), pp. 14-15. 2 However, quotation marks will not be used throughout the thesis for typographical reasons. 3 In Britain; Pamela Dale and Joseph Melling, eds, Mental Illness and Learning Disability Since 1850: Finding a place for mental disorder in the United Kingdom (London: Routledge, 2006); Jackson, 2000; Harvey G. Simmons, `Explaining Social Policy: The English Mental Deficiency Act of 1913', Journal of Social History, 11, (1978), pp. 387-403; Mathew Thomson, The Problem of Mental Deficiency: Eugenics, Democracy and Social Policy in Britain, c. 1870-1959 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998); David Wright and Anne Digby, eds, From Idiocy to Mental Deficiency: Historical perspectives on people with learning disabilities (London: Routledge, 1996); David Wright, Mental Disability in Victorian England: The Earlswood Asylum, 1847-1901, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001). In the United States James W. Trent, Inventing the Feeble Mind: A History of Mental Retardation in the United States (Berkley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1994); Steven Noll and James W. Trent, eds, Mental Retardation in America: A Historical Reader (New York: New York University Press, 2004).
1

2

most widely used to describe defectives during the nineteenth century, were institutionalised during this period. Mental defectives, in particular the feebleminded, began to be problematised from the late-nineteenth century, by doctors, educators and governments in Western countries. In Britain and New Zealand the introduction of compulsory universal education during this period has been identified as the beginning of the mental deficiency `problem'. 4 Internationally, a range of solutions were considered as possible responses to the problem of mental deficiency. For example, in Britain, the United States, and New Zealand, strategies such as marriage regulation, birth control, sterilisation, as well as segregation, were all considered. 5 By the early-twentieth century the feeble-minded were considered a menace, which coincided with the emergence of the `science' of eugenics. Eugenics aimed to `maintain or improve the genetic quality of the human species', by restricting the fertility of the `unfit' with a variety of measures, of which segregation was most widely adopted. 6 Included in this group of the `unfit' were the insane, alcoholics, criminals, prostitutes and the mentally defective. From about 1905 in Britain, the United States and other Western countries, eugenics movements found increased support, mainly from the middle-classes as the numbers of the `unfit' appeared to swell. 7 In New Zealand the eugenics movement centred on the Eugenics Education Society, established in Dunedin in 1907. Its members were mainly middle class, and academics, and doctors. Honorary Vice-Presidents of the Society included Prime Minister William Massey, Dr T.H.A. Valintine, InspectorGeneral of Hospitals and Chief Health Officer, and Dr Frank Hay, InspectorGeneral of the Mental Hospitals and Prisons Departments. Members of Parliament also served on the Society's council. 8 The Society sought politicians
4

Thomson, p. 13; Stephen Robertson, `"Production not Reproduction": The Problem of Mental Defect in New Zealand, 1900-1930', BA (Hons) Essay, University of Otago, 1989, p. 10. 5 David Barker, `How to Curb the Fertility of the Unfit: the feeble-minded in Edwardian Britain', Oxford Review of Education, 9, 3, (1983), p. 197. 6 P. J. Fleming, `Eugenics in New Zealand, 1900-1940', MPhil thesis, Massey University, 1981, pp. 2-4. 7 Barker, p. 197. 8 Fleming, pp. 24-27.

3

to join in hopes of influencing `worthwhile' legislation, such as the Mental Defectives Act. 9 By 1914, membership, and the influence of the Society were in decline due to limited financial and human resources. While the Society had disbanded, some support for eugenics in New Zealand continued through the 1920s until the 1930s when efforts to form a new eugenics organisation failed. 10 During the same period in Britain and the United States, eugenics movements also began to wane. Segregation, or institutionalisation, became the preferred measure for the control of mental defectives in New Zealand as well as Britain and the United States. Sterilisation was seriously debated in Britain, but authorities thought such a drastic measure would never gain public support beyond the eugenics movement. In the United States, individual states were responsible for mental deficiency policy; institutions were common in individual states, some of which also introduced sterilisation. Historians have shown that between the years 1907 and 1960 over 60,000 intellectually disabled and mentally ill individuals were sterilised in the United States. 11 Chapter One will show that sterilisation was also debated in New Zealand. As the apparent danger of mental deficiency increased, authorities realised there was no legal definition of the newly discovered categories of deficiency. New Zealand was among the first countries to legislate for mental deficiency. The results of the new legislation in different countries included enhanced classification systems and an increased number of potential defectives. Families had a significant role in the identification, certification and treatment of defectives. 12 The care and control of defectives had typically been the responsibility of families until the mid-nineteenth century, when the first institutions for mental defectives were established, and families were encouraged to place their defective family member into an institution, at least for the short
Fleming, p. 32. For a more expansive discussion of eugenics in New Zealand see Fleming; and R.W. Metcalfe, `The debate about eugenics: Eugenics and social legislation in New Zealand 1900-1930', MPhil thesis, Massey University, 2000. 11 Philip R. Reilly, The Surgical Solution: A History of Involuntary Sterilization in the United States (Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press, 1991), p. 2. 12 Wright, 2001, p. 6; Thomson, pp. 258-267.
10 9

4

term. However, when mental deficiency was redefined as dangerous and hereditary, long term custodial care was advocated. 13 The provision of care, treatment and management of defectives increasingly came under the control of government departments and institutions during the early-twentieth century. The villa, or colony, system was developed in Britain and the United States from the 1890s. It was intended to provide better classification and treatment of all mental hospital patients. From the 1900s the villa system was introduced in New Zealand mental hospitals. 14 Historians have argued gender was crucial in the categorisation of defectives, especially the feeble-minded. Delinquent or unruly males and promiscuous female defectives were targeted for segregation. While the regulation of the sexuality of mentally defective young women was a key reason for their committal, their continued segregation was dependent on other factors, such as poverty, moral worth, respectability, and employability. 15 The feebleminded apparently lacked will-power, which `precipitated feeble-minded men into lives of crime, [and] the same quality rendered feeble-minded women unstable, irresponsible and vulnerable to seduction'. 16 Contemporary scientific research contended that mental deficiency was hereditary and that feeble-minded women were responsible for passing on the condition as they lacked the sexual control of `normal' women; which resulted in a large number of illegitimate and mentally deficient children. Within the wider context of contemporary ideas about the hereditary nature of mental deficiency, Australian historians have shown that the control of feeble-minded women and the classification practices of medical authorities were of concern in New South Wales in the early-twentieth century. 17

Trent, p. 29. Warwick Brunton, `Out of the Shadows: Some Historical Underpinnings of Mental Health Policy', in Past Judgement: Social Policy in New Zealand History, edited by Bronwyn Dalley and Margaret Tennant (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2004), p. 83. 15 Jan Walmsley, `Women and the Mental Deficiency Act of 1913: citizenship, sexuality and regulation', British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28, (2000), pp. 65-69. 16 Jackson, 2000, p. 145. 17 Rosemary Berreen, `Illegitimacy and "Feeble-mindedness" in early twentieth century New South Wales', in Forging Identities, edited by Jane Long, Jan Gothard and Helen Brash (Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press, 1997), p. 205.
14

13

5

Delinquent or criminal young men were just as likely as defective women to be segregated. Some British mental deficiency campaigners thought there was a greater occurrence of feeble-mindedness among males; often identified by alcoholism or criminal tendencies. 18 British historian Mathew Thomson's analysis of evidence presented to the British Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded (1908) suggests `that recent historiography has gone too far in representing the problem of mental deficiency as an issue which was almost exclusively, one of controlling the reproduction of feeble-minded women'. 19 Thomson points out that Mary Dendy, a British mental deficiency campaigner, `argued that there were three boys to every two girls, that boys were "quite as dangerous", [and] that mental defect was just as likely to be passed down the paternal line of the family'. 20 In Britain, prison wardens had responsibility for the classification, segregation, and surveillance of prisoners from the mid-nineteenth century. 21 Their observations were usually the basis for an examination of an alleged defective. Historian Janet Saunders suggests that the inability of the feeble-minded prisoner to conform to prison discipline was often `sufficient to allow a certificate of insanity and transfer to an asylum'. 22 This seemed to be the case for some patients discussed in Chapter Four. In New Zealand, prisoners were transferred to the control of the Mental Hospitals Department if they were found to be mental defectives. As in Britain, New Zealand prison wardens' observations and evidence were often the basis for these transfers. The introduction of the `indeterminate sentence' in 1909 as part of reforms in the Prisons Department coincided with the changes in the Mental Hospitals system. 23 Indeterminate sentences were also used in Britain, the United

Jackson, 2000, pp. 145-6. Thomson, p. 28. 20 Thomson, p. 28. 21 Stephen Watson, `Malingerers, the "weakminded" criminal and the moral imbecile', in Legal Medicine in History, edited by Michael Clark and Catherine Crawford (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), p. 223. 22 Janet Saunders, `Quarantining the weak-minded: psychiatric definitions of degeneracy in the late-Victorian asylum', in The Anatomy of Madness, Vol. III, edited by W.F. Bynum, Roy Porter and Michael Shepherd (London: Routledge, 1988), p. 279. 23 John Pratt, Punishment in a Perfect Society: The New Zealand Penal System, 1840-1939 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1992), p. 184.
19

18

6

States, and Australia. 24 The length of these sentences was determined by a prisoner's rehabilitation in prison and whether they were considered fit for release. The indeterminate sentence was recommended for prisoners that were mental or moral defectives, as well as juveniles. 25 The introduction indefinite segregation for defectives and some criminals was welcomed by legislators, medical and prison authorities, as an effective mode of control. The similarities between these methods also reinforced the connection between both groups. The links between mental deficiency and crime had been established in the earlynineteenth century in Britain, and strengthened as defectives were characterised as a menace. Between the 1880s and the introduction of the English Mental Defectives Act in 1913, debate over the mental defectives shifted focus from prisons and the habitually criminal imbecile to workhouses and `transient weakminded inmates, feeble-minded women in particular'. 26 The image of feebleminded women moving in and out of workhouses and leaving illegitimate children behind was more compelling than one of `depredatory male offenders, [and] habitual inmates of prisons'. 27 Mental defectives and their supposed `uncontrollable' sexuality were major concerns for authorities as well. These concerns were clear for female defectives, and in the case of some males, where homosexuality and crossdressing appeared to be crucial reasons for committal. Certainly, Ruth Ford asserts that committal proceedings were instituted to regulate behaviour and control deviant bodies which threatened the dominant masculinist and heterosexual social order. 28 In some cases male and female mental defectives were transferred to Tokanui from other institutions because of their `uncontrolled' sexuality.
Sean McConville, `The Victorian Prison: England, 1865-1965', in The Oxford History of the Prison, edited by Norval Morris and David J. Rothman (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 158. 25 Mark Finnane, Punishment in Australian Society (Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1997), p. 77. 26 Saunders, p. 289. 27 Saunders, p. 289. 28 Ruth Ford, `Sexuality and "madness": regulating women's gender "deviance" through the asylum, the Orange Asylum in the 1930s', in Madness in Australia, edited by Catharine Coleborne and Dolly MacKinnon (St Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 2003), p. 115.
24

7

Social control theory became more dominant from the 1970s while older `progressive' views of institutions as places of confinement, control and education were discarded in favour of a perspective where these institutions were seen as places to `confine deviant and oppressed populations [which] was the result of prevailing cultural attitudes of aversions and fear'. 29 For social control theorists, the asylum was seen as a place of `repression and incarceration' for the control of unfit or dangerous populations. 30 However, critics of social control have noted that it was `not simply an imposition from the top down'. 31 By `top down' critics meant legal and medical authorities. In asylum histories, the approach has been modified as the underlying issues such as the state, gender, race and class were addressed. 32 Such approaches have been questioned by historians such as David Wright, who have emphasised the importance of family agency in the diagnosis and committal of mental defectives. 33 Chapters Two, Three and Four of this thesis will argue that the desire for increased control of defectives was a key factor in their committal and that for female and child patients especially, families were instrumental in Tokanui's diagnosis and classification. While there has been much emphasis on the intersection between gender and mental deficiency, class has not been explored to the same extent. Mark Jackson has been critical of historians' inattention to the role of class in the formation of Edwardian policies for mental defectives, and its interaction with gender. 34 He asserts that the segregation of the feeble-minded in colonies should be viewed as `overtly political enterprises designed to subdue and control what were regarded as the sexual and criminal propensities of the working class'. 35 Jackson goes on to suggest that middle-class reformers in the early-twentieth

Mary Ann Jimenez, `Social Control', in Encyclopedia of Social History, edited by Peter Stearns (New York: Garland Publishing, 1994), p. 681. 30 Constance M. McGovern, `Asylums', in Stearns, p. 71. 31 Jimenez, p. 683. 32 McGovern, p. 71. 33 Wright, 2001, p. 6. 34 Jackson, `"A Menace to the Good of Society": Class, Fertility, and the Feeble-Minded in Edwardian England', in Sex and Seclusion, Class and Custody: Perspectives on Gender and Class in the History of British and Irish Psychiatry, edited by Jonathan Andrews and Anne Digby (Amsterdam & New York: Rodopi, 2004), p. 273. 35 Jackson, 2000, p. 131.

29

8

century were driven by concerns about class relations, and that fears over the uncontrolled sexuality of feeble-minded women were `framed primarily by a kaleidoscope of anxieties about the threat of contamination by the lower classes'. 36 Although class is a worthwhile category of analysis for histories of mental deficiency, as Jackson has argued, it is not explored in this thesis, due to the scarcity of information on class in the patient cases used here. As Chapter One highlights, New Zealand largely followed trends in Britain, Europe and the United States in its responses to mental deficiency and its associated social problems during the early-twentieth century. 37 The Mental Deficiency Act (1911) re-classified idiocy, as mental deficiency was termed for much of the nineteenth century, shifting it from a form of lunacy to a separate condition altogether. Idiots were accepted into New Zealand asylums during this period, but no official recognition of idiocy's distinct nature was made in New Zealand or overseas until the early twentieth century. Of critical relevance to this study, New Zealand histories of the asylum have only featured mental deficiency in the margins, with some brief references to idiot or imbecile patients. New Zealand mental hospitals such as the Seacliff, Porirua and Auckland Asylums have been the subject of a number of studies since the 1980s. Psychiatric practices and patients have been the focus of these histories, with particular focus on the role of gender in committal. 38 Mental health policy in New Zealand from 1840 until the mid-twentieth century has also been analysed by historians. It has been suggested that there were periods of `quiet incremental change' and policy and building booms from 1871 to 1876, 1907 to

Jackson, 2000, p. 147. New Zealand historians have argued this in recent years, for example, Warwick Brunton, `"A Choice of Difficulties": National Mental Health Policy in New Zealand, 1840-1947', PhD thesis, University of Otago, 2001; Metcalfe and Robertson, 1989. 38 Barbara Brookes and Jane Thomson, eds, `Unfortunate Folk': Essays on Mental Health Treatment, 1863-1992 (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2001); Wendy Hunter Williams, Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The story of Porirua Hospital (Porirua: Porirua Hospital, 1987); Barbara Brookes, `Women and Madness: A Case Study of the Seacliff Asylum, 1890-1920', in Women in History 2, edited by Barbara Brookes, Charlotte MacDonald and Margaret Tennant (Wellington: Bridget Williams, 1992), pp. 129-148; Bronwyn Labrum, `Looking beyond the Asylum: Gender and the Process of Committal in Auckland, 1870-1910', New Zealand Journal of History, 26, (1992) pp. 125-144.
37

36

9

1911 and 1925 to 1928. 39 There have been few New Zealand studies that have specifically examined mental deficiency during the twentieth century. However, Sandy Bardsley and Stephen Robertson's essays are two excellent examples. 40 Robertson considers what steps were taken by governments from 1900 to 1930 in New Zealand to `solve' the mental deficiency `problem'. Robertson describes this as a process of `reconceptualisation, concern, investigation, debate, legislation and application'. 41 This comprehensive study uses a range of official sources, such as Appendices to the Journals of the House of Representatives (AJHRs) as well as evidence presented to the Committee of Inquiry into Mental Defectives and Sexual Offenders (1924). Although this thesis uses official sources as well, the analysis of Tokanui makes this research unique. Bardsley's essay focuses on a South Island educational institution, the Otekaieke Special School for Boys, from 1908 to 1950, and considers its place in the education system, its social function, and life within the school. The introduction of special education in New Zealand during the earlytwentieth century has also been evaluated by other historians. 42 The changes to special schools and classes and the methods of teaching are the focus of these studies. While these histories have not considered medical institutionalisation, the links between the Education and Mental Hospitals Departments during the first half of the twentieth century have been well documented. 43 Both Departments developed policies simultaneously, as a result of contemporary understandings of the abilities of different classes of defective. In New Zealand, mental testing, the major innovation for classification of mental deficiency, was developed mainly by educators. 44
Brunton, 2004, pp. 75-90. Robertson, 1989; and Sandy Bardsley, `The functions of an institution: the Otekaieke Special School for Boys, 1908-1950', BA (Hons) long essay, University of Otago, 1991. 41 Robertson, 1989, p. 5. 42 David Mitchell, `Special Education in New Zealand: A History Perspective', in Exceptional Children in New Zealand, edited by David Mitchell and Nirbhay Singh (Palmerston North: The Dunmore Press, 1987), pp. 26-38. 43 Bardsley, 1991, and Robertson, 1989. 44 New Zealand Official Yearbook (NZYOB), 1925, pp. 823-829 ; David McKenzie, `Little and Lightly: The New Zealand Department of Education and mental testing 1920-1930', in Mental Testing in New Zealand, edited by Mark Olssen (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 1988), pp. 76-89.
40 39

10

New Zealand histories of mental hospitals for the intellectually disabled have tended to focus on the major events that affected the running of the institution rather than providing an analysis of the hospital's operation and responses to legislation and policy. In the last twenty years, histories of Kingseat, Templeton Farm Colony, later renamed the Kimberley Centre, and Lake Alice have been published. 45 Usually these histories were brief and nostalgic, written to mark an anniversary, or jubilee celebrations, and have been based largely on the memories of staff rather than patients. The Tokanui publications, Tokanui 50th Jubilee, 1912-1962 and A History of Tokanui Hospital, 1912-1997, also marked significant points in the hospital's history and give detailed, descriptive accounts of the major events in the history of the institution. 46 For the period 1912 to 1935 these histories focus on the developments of the hospital, problems with water supply, building of new villas and some social events for the patients. Patients are mentioned only briefly, for example, a description of the annual patients' picnic. 47 However, two recent articles have considered different approaches for histories of Tokanui, suggesting possibilities for writing about Tokanui from the 1950s to its closure in 1998; and using the recent Tokanui oral history project as a way of understanding the different meanings given to the hospital by interviewees. 48 Although discussed briefly, intellectually disabled patients are not the focus of these articles. Rather, they suggest alternative ways for writing about

Kingseat Hospital, 50 years, 1932-1982 (Papakura: Kingseat Jubilee Editorial Committee, 1981); Brian Shephard, ed, Fifty Years of Templeton Hospital and Training School, 1929-1979 (Christchurch: Templeton Hospital, 1979); Anne Hunt, The Lost Years: From Levin Mental Deficiency Colony to Kimberley Centre (Christchurch: Anne Hunt, 2003); Bob Baird, ed, Lake Alice 40 years (Wanganui: Community Health Services, Manawatu-Wanganui Area Health Board, 1990). 46 Tokanui 50th Jubilee, 1912-1962 (Tokanui: 1962); Roger McLaren, ed, A History of Tokanui Hospital Te Awamutu, 1912-1997 (Te Awamutu: Tokanui Hospital, 1997). 47 McLaren, p. 5. 48 Catharine Coleborne, `Preserving the Institutional Past and Histories of Psychiatry: Writing about Tokanui Hospital, New Zealand, 1950s - 1990s', Health and History, 5, 2, (2003), pp. 104122; Coleborne, `"Like a family where you fight and you roar": Inside the "personal and social" worlds of Tokanui Mental Hospital, New Zealand through an oral history project', Oral History in New Zealand, 16, (2004), pp.17-27. The oral history project between Te Awamutu Museum and the University of Waikato, begun in 2004, culminated with a museum exhibition, Footprints on the Land, in late 2006. Most interviews were with former staff members who were employed at Tokanui from the 1950s until its closure in 1998.

45

11

Tokanui. However, this thesis uses a more conventional patient focussed approach. The `invisibility' of disability history in New Zealand has been recently observed. 49 However, the number of histories of disability has increased since the 1990s. 50 It has been argued that New Zealand hi