Utilising the human dimensions of wildlife management approach to initiate an understanding of the ways in which New Zealanders value wildlife in Aotearoa, New Zealand. By Sarah Cowie BSocSc (Hons) Department of Geography Being a thesis submitted to the University of Waikato in the fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Masters of Social Sciences

2006

ii

Declaration
I certify that the thesis entitled: Utilising the human dimensions of wildlife management approach to initiate an understanding of the ways in which New Zealanders value wildlife in Aotearoa, New Zealand. Submitted for the degree of:

Masters of Social Sciences

is the result of my own research, except where otherwise acknowledged, and that this thesis, either in whole or in part, has not been submitted for an award or higher degree to any other university or institution.

Sarah Cowie Date:

iii

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank everyone who has helped me to complete this thesis especially my patient and supportive supervisor, Dr. Colin McLeay. Thank you to those people who completed the questionnaire and who passed it on to others to complete on my behalf. I also appreciate the help from association secretaries in allowing me to contact potential respondents through their list-serves. I would also like to thank Dr. Kelly Miller (Deakin University) and Professor Stephen Kellert (Yale University) who allowed me to utilise their previous work and questionnaires as a basis for this study. Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends who believed in me and have remained supportive and encouraging throughout the process.

iv

Abstract
This study was instigated by the lack of human dimensions research undertaken in New Zealand, and seeks to investigate the knowledge and values New Zealanders hold about New Zealand wildlife within three distinct groups of the New Zealand public. These groups were the Royal Forest and Bird Society of New Zealand Inc, the New Zealand Ecological Society (Inc.), and the New Zealand Deerstalkers Association. A questionnaire administered via Association list-serv's was utilised and a total of 52 questionnaires were completed by members of the three stakeholder groups. These were then analysed to investigate the values and knowledge New Zealanders hold toward wildlife in New Zealand. The findings of this study suggest that New Zealander's hold strong utilitarian and negativistic values toward wildlife while the humanistic, moralistic, and naturalistic values were expressed by the majority of respondents. This result could be due to the high level of respondents who were from the New Zealand Deerstalkers Association. Conversely, whiled the data suggests that New Zealander's hold the ecologistic/scientific value only weakly, overall they have a high level of factual knowledge about wildlife. Because of this, it may be suggested that wildlife managers should generate education programmes that specifically address the negativistic value by making them imaginative and interesting. Demographic factors were found to be influential in the ways in which New Zealander's value wildlife and the knowledge they hold although these were not as significant as indicated by studies undertaken in other countries. The lowest levels of knowledge were shown by respondents who were over 60 years of age; and higher income levels corresponded with the negativistic value being held more highly.

v

Several areas of this study showed transgressions from other studies undertaken overseas. Unlike other studies, which suggested that females hold the naturalistic value more strongly than males, this study showed that both males and females held the naturalistic value only weakly. This indicates that findings from studies conducted overseas may not be transferable to the New Zealand situation and therefore, for New Zealand managers to effectively incorporate human dimensions information in decision-making processes, human dimensions research must be undertaken in the New Zealand context. Furthermore, wildlife managers should not make assumptions based on other studies and communities as these can lead to ineffective communication and implementation of wildlife management policies and education programmes.

vi

Table of Contents

Page Candidate Declaration Acknowledgements Abstract Table of Contents List of Figures List of Tables Chapter 1 Introduction 1.1 Human Dimensions of Wildlife Management 1.2 Study Aims and Objectives 1.3 Thesis Approach Chapter 2 Context 2.1 Introduction 2.2 Early Wildlife and Wildlife Management in New Zealand 2.3 Growing Awareness of Impacts to Native Biota 2.4 The Emergence of Conservation Pressure Groups 2.5 The Wildlife Division 2.6 The Rise of Conservation 2.7 New Directions 2.8 Conclusion Chapter 3 Theory 3.1 Introduction 3.2 The History of the Human Dimensions of Wildlife Management Approach 3.3 Values and Values Theory 3.3.1 Values 3.3.2 Attitudes 3.3.3 Norms, Behaviours and Control Factors 3.4 Typologies and their Development 3.4.1 King's Wildlife Typologies 3.4.2 Giles' Benefits ii iii iv vi ix ix 1 1 2 3 5 5 5 11 13 18 22 27 30 32 32 36 38 39 42 43 44 46 47

vii 3.4.3 Kellert's Typology of Attitudes and Typology of Basic Values 3.4.4 Miller and McGee's Values Framework 3.5 New Zealand Studies 3.6 Conclusion Chapter 4 Methodology 4.1 Introduction 4.2 Quantitative Research 4.3 Value Orientations Research 4.4 The Questionnaire 4.5 Survey Administration Methods 4.6 Participants 4.7 Questionnaire Distribution 4.8 Response Rates 4.9 Reliability of Data 4.10 Conclusion Chapter 5 Analysis and Discussion 5.1 Introduction 5.2 Outline for Chapter 5 5.3 Demographic Influences 5.3.1 Geographic Location 5.3.1.1 Values of Wildlife 5.3.1.2 Knowledge of Wildlife 5.3.2 Gender 5.3.2.1 Values of Wildlife 5.3.2.2 Knowledge of Wildlife 5.3.3 Age 5.3.3.1 Values of Wildlife 5.3.3.2 Knowledge of Wildlife 5.3.4 Education 5.3.4.1 Values of Wildlife 5.3.4.2 Knowledge of Wildlife 5.3.5 Income 5.3.5.1 Values of Wildlife 5.3.5.2 Knowledge of Wildlife 5.4 Familial Influences 5.5 Implications for Wildlife Management 5.6 Conclusions Chapter 6 Conclusions and Future Directions 6.1 Introduction

48 51 52 53 54 54 54 57 58 59 66 68 70 70 71 73 73 73 76 76 78 79 80 81 82 82 83 84 84 85 86 87 87 88 88 89 90 91 91

viii 6.2 Research Limitations 6.3 The Values and Knowledge Held by New Zealanders in Regard to Wildlife 6.4 Future Directions 6.5 Closing Comments Appendices Appendix 1 Appendix 2 Appendix 3 Appendix 4 Appendix 5 Appendix 6 References Questionnaire Ethical Approval Questionnaire Amendments Information Sheet Consent Form Information Letter for Forest and Bird 92 94 96 97 98 99 112 114 124 126 128 131

ix

List of Figures

Figure 2.1 Land administered by DoC. Figure 3.1 A cognitive hierarchy showing the transition of an individual from values to behaviour.

29 42

List of Tables
Table 3.1 Values typologies and their development by consecutive researchers. Table 4.1 Typical correlations between value types. 46 71

1

Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1 Human Dimensions of Wildlife Management
Since the early twentieth century wildlife managers have recognised the importance and influence of human values and behaviours in regard to wildlife, yet the field of human dimensions of wildlife management is relatively new. Thus, in the United States of America (United States), where the modern study of human dimensions originated and is most widely adopted, human dimensions of wildlife management was not applied to wildlife and wildlife habitat management until the late 1960's, while recognition of this approach by wildlife managers and wildlife agencies was even more recent (Conover, 2002; Decker, Brown & Siemer, 2001a; Enck & Decker, 1997; Manfredo, Vaske, & Sikorowski, 1996; Manfredo, Vaske & Teal, 2003). Human dimensions of wildlife management in the United States emerged from growing public concern over the way human populations transformed former wilderness areas and wildlife habitats into farmland, encroached on native habitats through increased accessibility and recreational opportunities, and facilitated the fragmentation of wildlife habitats making them too small to support viable wildlife populations. These transformations and encroachments led to increased human/wildlife interactions (Conover 2002; Decker, Brown & Siemer, 2001a; Koval & Mertig, 2004). While many of the same problems of farmland conversion and habitat fragmentation as experienced in the United States exist in New Zealand, very little human dimensions research has been carried out in New Zealand. Research into greater understanding of stakeholders' values and attitudes would be of benefit to New Zealand wildlife managers wanting to provide management plans that

2 adequately consider the diverse range of stakeholders with an interest in New Zealand's wildlife and natural environment. The high profile of conservation groups in New Zealand, such as New Zealand Forest and Bird (New Zealand Forest and Bird Protection Society, 2004), and the political initiatives of the Green Party of Aoteoroa New Zealand (Green Party of Aoteoroa New Zealand, 2005), suggest that human dimensions of wildlife management has the potential to make a valuable contribution toward existing wildlife management strategies in New Zealand.

1.2 Study Aims and Objectives
The aim of this research is to initiate an understanding of the applicability of human dimensions of wildlife management to the management of introduced and native animal species in New Zealand. In working toward this understanding this research will consider human values, particularly the ways in which New Zealanders value wildlife, and how such values may inform human dimensions-based wildlife management. In working towards forming an understanding of the values New Zealanders hold toward wildlife in New Zealand and how this understanding can be used to inform the human dimensions approach, this research will consider the ways in which New Zealanders, since European influence, have historically behaved toward wildlife and wildlife habitats. This historical perspective provides a foundation for consideration of current behaviour and attitudes, understanding of connections between knowledge of wildlife and values associated with wildlife, and evidence of linkages between demographics and wildlife values. Understanding the philosophical and experiential foundations of society's interest in wildlife can help one appreciate how humanwildlife interactions and human values have shaped wildlife management. Historical insight may be essential to interpreting current situations where segments of society hold different values and the interplay between them create challenges for wildlife managers (Decker, Brown & Siemer, 2001a, p.4).

3

1.3 Thesis Approach
The first chapter of the thesis introduces the reader to the research and a context is provided within which the research was undertaken. Chapter two offers a brief history of New Zealand wildlife and wildlife management. An understanding of New Zealand's historical background both in regard to wildlife management and in regard to New Zealand's colonial history is important when trying to understand contemporary attitudes and values held by New Zealanders in regard to wildlife and its habitat. New Zealand's isolation geographically from other countries, and its relative youth in terms of human settlement, means human-environment and human wildlife interactions have not developed over a long period of time as with countries such as those in Britain and Europe. This understanding allows us to form a fairly accurate picture of the ecological changes that have occurred since settlement, and the accompanying values and attitudes that have influenced the ways in which New Zealand has been developed and exploited (Fraser, 2001; Wodzicki, 1950). Through this understanding it is possible to trace the various influences that have underpinned wildlife valuations. These influences include colonialism, and accompanying utilitarianism and dominionistic values, as well as symbolism, preservationist values, aesthetic, and scientific values. Chapter three outlines the human dimensions of wildlife management approach, the different theories upon which it draws, and its relevance to New Zealand. The foundations of human dimensions encompasses ideas drawn from several behavioural science disciplines, including economics, psychology, and geography (Manfredo, Vaske & Sikorowski, 1996). Within these disciplines human dimensions of wildlife management draws most significantly on cognitive and motivational theories, as developed by psychologists, and economic value theory. In chapter four the research focus is outlined and the methodology of the research is discussed and explained. Chapter five offers an analysis of the research and specifically addresses the study aims and objectives. The values and knowledge of wildlife held by New Zealanders is discussed including the way demographic

4 factors influence the way New Zealanders value wildlife and the knowledge they have. Demographic influences include gender, geographic location, age, education, and income. Chapter six considers the conclusions of the study and the implications these present for wildlife management and potential directions for future research.

5

Chapter 2

Context

2.1 Introduction
This chapter gives a brief overview of the history of wildlife management in New Zealand, from the coming of the Maori to New Zealand, early European settlement and subsequent colonisation, through to present day. By presenting this information it is possible to get an understanding of the historic influences that underpin values and attitudes currently held by New Zealanders.

2.2 Early Wildlife and Wildlife Management in New Zealand
Wildlife management can be considered to have started very early in the settlement history of New Zealand if purposeful introductions of species for the provision of food are taken into account. Floral and faunal introductions of species into New Zealand started as early as the first occupations by the Maori and included the Polynesian rat (Rattus exulans) and dog (King, 1990; King, 2003; McDowall 1 , 1994). First introductions of pig (Sus scrofa), goat (Capra hircus) and sheep (Ovis aries), made with the intention of providing a meat source for subsequent voyages, are attributed to Captain Cook in 1773 and 1777. There is however, some suggestion that Jean de Surville, a French explorer, may have left pigs here in 1769 (Daniel & Baker, 1986). Captain Cook is also considered by historians to be responsible for the introduction of the Ship rat (Rattus rattus) in the 1770's, although the later arrival of whalers and sealers would have boosted numbers

Two authors, R.M. McDowall (1994), and R. Galbreath (1993), are drawn on extensively throughout this chapter, being two of the few writers in regard to wildlife management in New Zealand.

1

6 significantly, with such rat-infested ships supplementing numbers of Ship rats with the Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus) and the mouse (Mus musculus) (Daniel & Baker, 1986; Wodzicki, 1950). Introductions into New Zealand sped up immensely with the coming of British colonials. Colonial New Zealand was seen as a potential "Britain of the South" (Galbreath, 1993, p.1), or "neo-Europe" (King, 2003, p.195), a country to be bent and moulded to the desires of those who settled here and the interests of those who ruled from afar. It was regarded by settlers as a country with inferior native species, desperately in need of game animals and `homeland' plants, a "desolate waste, waiting to be turned into prosperous farms" that would overflow with introduced species (Galbreath, 1993, p.1). In addition to identifying necessary advantages of introducing familiar species to assuage the pangs of homesickness and for sentimental reasons, European settlers also promoted the suitability of New Zealand for game species (Wodzicki, 1950). For example, in 1857 the English settler Charles Hursthouse commented that "New Zealand should swarm with game" (McDowell, 1994, p.6) and suggested that introductions of red and fallow deer, magpies (Gymnorhina tibicen sp.), rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus), and other animals should be undertaken as soon as possible. Similarly, H.W Nesfield, an explorer of the time, believed New Zealand rivers and streams were designed by nature for salmon and trout, while Richard Henry, a bird conservationist, suggested that Mount Te Anau would look more beautiful if ibex, chamois or big-horns were visible (McDowall, 1994). In populating New Zealand with game species, Hursthouse and Nesfield were drawing on the widely held belief that New Zealand was a rural arcadia that had the potential to provide for an egalitarian styled society where `common' settlers would have opportunities and advantages similar to those of the upper classes in Britain. Being able to hunt for game without fear of reprisal was seen by settlers as a way of unifying the colonials without the class barriers that existed in Britain (Galbreath, 1993; McDowall, 1994; Waitangi Tribunal, 2006; Young, 2004).

7 Initially many introductions and importations were made by either individuals or small groups who had sufficient funds. Introductions tended to be haphazard, given little forethought (McDowall, 1994). As there were no statutory constraints or requirements it was perhaps fortunate that in the 1840s and 1850s some introduced species were either one of a species or several of the same sex. Calls for introductions to become "organised and carefully considered" (McDowall, 1994, p.16) led to the institution of laws and regulations, including various animal protection acts, which gave "statutory protection to a list of European game species which had been, or might yet be introduced" (Galbreath, 1993, 2). For example, the Public Domain Act 1860 gave some protection to imported birds by prohibiting shooting or trapping of any bird or animal on a public domain, while the first Protection of Certain Animals Act 1861 "decreed that no Deer of any kind, Hare, Swan, Partridge, English Plover, Rook, Starling, Thrush or Blackbird could be shot for the rest of the decade" (Ministry for the Environment, 2006). The purpose of this legislation was to "encourage the importation of these animals and birds, not native to New Zealand which could contribute to the pleasure and profit of the inhabitants, when they became acclimatized and spread over the country in sufficient numbers" (Wodzicki, 1950, p.6). Later examples of these `protective' Acts were the Bird Protection Act of 1865 and the Salmon and Trout Act of 1867. The Bird Protection Act 1865 prohibited the importation of animals that were considered to be potentially problematic, but also offered limited protection, for the sole purpose of retaining game stocks, to kereru (Hemiphaga novaeseelandiae) and the seven species of duck native to New Zealand (McDowall, 1994). This Act also encouraged the introduction of various passerine bird species which "would contribute greatly to the pleasure of the settlers of New Zealand and help to keep up those associations with the Old Country which it was desirable should be maintained" (Wodzicki, 1950, p.6). The Salmon and Trout Act 1867 protected the salmon and trout species which were about to be introduced, and regulated sporting fish and freshwater fishing (Galbreath, 1993).

8 Beginning in the 1860s, the introduction of new species into New Zealand was also influenced by acclimatisation societies. Acclimatisation societies were established to promote and organise the introduction of desirable plants and animals with a view to augment the limited species already available, and to introduce, acclimatise, and domesticate familiar species from home and `desirable' species from other countries. These `public' organisations were influenced by the establishment of acclimatisation societies in London and Paris. In following the example of the European societies, the New Zealand acclimatisation society aimed to introduce and establish new species in New Zealand. The New Zealand societies were semiprivate bodies of "high social importance in the colony" largely formed by "[a]ctual or potential Premiers, Cabinet Ministers, members of Parliament and of the Legislative Council, Superintendents of Provincial Councils, and eminent scientists" (McDowall, 1994, p.18). While initially patronized by people primarily "interested in the importation and acclimatisation of animals and plants" (McDowall, 1994, p.75), these public organisations soon consisted largely of hunters and anglers 2. While the societies lacked statutory foundations or power they did provide more orderly organisation to the arrival of new species being brought into the country. The Protection of Animals Act 1867 provided encouragement to acclimatisation societies by giving them statutory recognition (Harris, 2002), with the Colonial Secretary overseeing their activities
3

(Galbreath, 1993; McDowall, 1994).

`Overseeing' largely involved clerical administration such as registering acclimatisation societies, gazetting hunting season notices and other matters relating to the Protection of Animals Act 1867. Legal statutes controlling imports of `alien
The positions and interests of those involved in acclimatisation societies in New Zealand ensured there were few, if any, female members, until the mid 1980s when the societies were close to being wound up (McDowall, 1994). This is important because it suggests that while colonials were eager to shrug off the notions of the British class system, they were, as yet, not prepared to allow women to enter male dominated hunting and fishing arenas.
3 2

Until they disbanded in the 1990's, acclimatisation societies remained within the auspices of the Colonial Secretary's Office and, later, its successor, the Department of Internal Affairs. In 1987 their functions were assumed by the Department of Conservation.

9 species' were not introduced until the Protection of Animals Amendment Act 1895; until this time acclimatisation societies were able to import any species they so desired. When provincial governments were abolished in 1876 and a central government was formed in its place, the Agent-General in London became an active importer of species for distribution to acclimatisation societies. Records of these societies were often lost or poorly kept, which means details of early introductions and animal releases are missing. It is suggested by McDowall (1994) that despite the fact that the supposed intention of the acclimatisation societies was to introduce useful and practical species there was a definite bias toward species suitable for hunting and fishing. The avowed goal for the acclimatisation societies was to offer "easy opportunities for all people to pursue these prized quarries with little or no constraint either as regards opportunity for access to hunting and fishing or the cost for doing so" (McDowall, 1994, p.26). As such, acclimatisation societies quickly narrowed their focus to mammals, birds and fish for recreational hunting and fishing (McDowall, 1994). This included diverse deer species, pheasants (Phasianus colchicus), Canada geese (Branta canadensis), brown trout (Salmo trutta), rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), and Atlantic (Salmo salar) and quinnat salmon (Salmo sp.), and further stocks of possum (Trichosurus vulpecula) from Australia (McDowall, 1994). The impact many of these introduced animals and plants were to have on New Zealand were rarely considered. While acclimatisation societies were responsible for the introduction and establishment of large numbers of exotic species they were not wholly responsible for many species that eventually became problematic.

Predator control was introduced in 1866 as a means of protecting newly established introduced species populations. Such control began via a nation-wide bounty placed on harrier hawks (Circus approximans) and kingfishers (Halcyon sancta). Also encouraged was the destruction of eels, both longfinned (Anguilla dieffenbachia) and shortfinned (Anguilla australis), shags (Phalacrocorax sp.), wekas (Gallirallus australis), moreporks (Ninox novaeseelandiae) and, at times, seagulls (Larus sp.)

10 and herons (Egretta sp.) (McDowall, 1994). Soon after 1866 it was recognised by acclimatisation societies that other carnivorous species were also causing problems, and largely introduced species such as feral cats (Felis catus), rats, hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus), and magpies were added to the control manifests. Canada geese and hares (Lepus europaeus) were also included in the `vermin' list due to the threat they posed in regard to the loss of game-bird habitat.

The Protection of Animals Act 1867 distinguished between the categories of `game' and `native game', with imported game being allocated property rights. This `property' was then vested in acclimatisation societies to allow them to legally charge for hunting licences as a way of recouping the high costs of the importation of `game' species. In regulating game hunting and game animals the Protection of Animals Act 1867 gave law-enforcers the power to prohibit destruction of indigenous birds. This provision was, however, rarely if ever used; early attempts at protection of native birds were largely utilitarian and aimed at conserving native game birds such as the kereru and godwit (Limosa lapponica), or encouraging insect eating birds to help control garden and orchard pests (Galbreath, 1993). Furthermore, as these birds were considered native `game' they came under the sections of the Act in relation to hunting regulations. From 1886 the Act was revised and iconic native birds such as the tui (Prosthemadera novaeseelandiae), kiwi (Apteryx sp.) and the huia (Heteralocha acutirostris) became the first species to be given full legislative protection. Despite the idealist egalitarian vision proposed by early immigrants for New Zealand, hunting and angling were still considered sports for gentry and later amendments to the Protection of Animals Act 1867 created a system of game law that largely excluded working people from the hunting of acclimatised game; hunters were required to pay a licence fee of £5, and were not allowed to hunt on a Sunday (the workers only day off) (Harris, 2002).

11

2.3 Growing Awareness of Impacts to Native Biota
By the 1870s, there was increasing public awareness of the impact introduced species were having on native biota. Many settlers saw this as inevitable and, in regard to continued introductions, those responsible still "had little regard for what they were doing" (McDowall, 1994, p.25). Such facts as the steady disappearance of the native forest and the constantly dwindling number of native species led even intelligent people to believe that the destruction of the original New Zealand flora and fauna was inevitable and that it must be replaced by one resembling Europe. People strongly believed that native birds must become extinct and that their habitat, the native bush must disappear and be replaced by European cultural vegetation (Wodzicki, 1950, p.6, emphasis in original). Despite the continued push for acclimatization, some passerine species such as sparrows (Prunella modularis), whose prolific growth was addressed by poisoning under the provisions of the Small Birds Nuisance Act 1882, and rabbits, were beginning to be seen as potentially problematic for farmers (Ministry for the Environment, 2006). The Rabbit Nuisance Act 1876 allowed for the introduction of ferrets (Mustela putorius), stoats (Mustela ermiea) and weasels (Mustela nivalis) as a means of controlling these rabbit pests but this would prove to have "a profound effect on the animal life of the Dominion" (Wodzicki, 1950, p.7). Given the expressed `inevitable' impact of introduced species it is somewhat surprising that by 1888 some acclimatisation society members were expressing concern over introductions of vermin and noxious animals. This concern was the catalyst for the early 1890s movement of acclimatisation societies away from the role of introducing new fish and game species toward the role of management and administration of those species that had already been introduced and established. The acclimatisation of new species continued under the auspices of government agencies.

12

Where once native species were considered inferior to European species, during the 1890s settlers "were beginning to develop an attachment to those of their new country" (Galbreath, 1994, p.3) and there was increased "interest in the native bush, which had previously been regarded as little more than an impediment to progress which should have been cleared away as quickly as possible" (Galbreath, 1994, p.4). Thus, in 1892 the Reverand P.Walsh wrote of his concern over the impact browsing animals were having on native flora (Galbreath, 1993; Harris, 2002; McDowall, 1994).

Reverand Walsh believed that New Zealand bush species, being only found in New Zealand, were not adapted to withstand introduced grazing and browsing species such as deer. With over 40 percent of the population of New Zealand living in urban areas at this time, Walsh expressed an increasingly popular urban sentiment when he wrote that deer may well cause the destruction of "the glory of his country and the birthright of the community at large" (quoted in Galbreath, 1994, p.4). Despite the growing urban population, rural ideologies remained dominant and Walsh's comments, particularly in regard to the threat of deer, were largely ignored.

Although national sentiment about preserving native birds and native bush was growing, the colonialist's imperative to clear the land and acclimatise the things of the old homeland had not lost its force. In 1913 a Royal Commission enunciated the `broad principle that no forest land . . . which is suitable for farm land, shall be permitted to remain under forest'. Some exceptions were allowed for scenic reserves, but this general view, expressed more colloquially as `one blade of grass is worth two trees', was long to remain dominant in new Zealand policy and practice (Galbreath, 1993, p.5).

13 Even early twentieth century commentators such as Dugald Popplewell, Richard Henry and Henry von Haast, who were critical of continued introductions and were worried about the impact on native birds of such animals as the introduced ferret, stoat and weasel, expressed very little concern about the affect of introduced browsing animals on native flora. In fact, many people believed that introduced browsing species were merely replacing the, by then extinct, moa in terms of native flora destruction (Galbreath, 1993).

2.4 The Emergence of Conservation Pressure Groups
Interest in preserving native birds and bush increased in the second decade of the twentieth century with the emergence of conservation pressure groups. The original Forest and Bird Protection Society, which existed for only six years, was formed in 1914. In 1921-22 the Native Bird Protection Society, a conservationist lobby group advocating a "more effective and efficient administration of protection and control of our bird and animal life" (Galbreath, 1993, p.31) and "unity of control of all wild life" (Galbreath, 1993, p.32) was established by Sir Thomas Mackenzie and G.M. Thomson, both of whom were influential politicians and conservationists. They had tried, through Parliament, to transfer some traditional `game' species such as paradise duck (Tadorna vaiegata) and pukeko (Porphyrio porphyrio), to the Act's schedule of `protected' species but had failed and therefore looked outside Parliament for assistance (Galbreath, 1993). In 1921, as a result of lobbying by this group, the Animals Protection Act was revised and renamed the Animals Protection and Game Act 1921-22. This Act extended the `animals absolutely protected' category to include almost every native bird except pests such as kea (Nestor notabilis) and hawks, and `native game' species. `Native game' species became licensed and controlled in the same way as the hunting of acclimatised game species. In 1934 the Native Bird Protection Society took over the New Zealand Forest and Bird Society name; this renaming was not formalised until 1948. The founding of the Native Bird Protection Society brought the American term `wildlife' into widespread use in New Zealand; it was used to describe all mammals and birds

14 "living in a wild state, protected or game, native or introduced" (Galbreath, 1993, p.14). The National Bird Protection Society was actively involve