Collaboration in family violence intervention: A process evaluation of the Hamilton Family Safety Team

A Thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Social Sciences at the University of Waikato Te Whare Wananga O Waikato

by Lisa Gregg 2007

Abstract
The Family Safety Team (FST) is a collaborative intervention developed to address family violence in New Zealand. Interagency collaborations are effective at addressing the social supports for battery, improving the systems and responses of agencies that address battery, and improving cohesion and consistency across agencies. The FST has a particular focus on justice system agencies. The purpose of this research was to evaluate the Hamilton FST. The research was conducted using in-depth interviews with FST members and others directly involved with the project, archival research using police family violence files, observation of FST meetings, and a focus group with battered women. The evaluation was constructed around four aims: to identify any barriers to establishing the FST, to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the Hamilton FST, to determine the adequacy of the FST structure, and to assess the extent to which the FST has improved the ability of agencies to enhance the safety and autonomy of battered women and hold offenders accountable. An overall finding of this evaluation was that people are feeling very positive about the Hamilton FST. The evaluation found that the FST has increased contact and communication between community and government agencies, and there was improvement in each agency's awareness of the policies, processes and protocols of other agencies in the FST. The evaluation found some limitations in the amount of monitoring and measurable outcomes from the FST, but this was understandable considering the infancy of the project and the time taken for members to understand their roles and the function of the FST. However, there were some positive developments in police responsiveness: an improved police attitude towards family violence cases, and an increase in cases coded as family violence. An important finding of this evaluation was that the Hamilton FST is functioning as a genuine collaboration. This seemed to be due to: mutual respect and an equal distribution of power among FST members, trusted working relationships, recognising each member for their area of expertise, and the role of the coordinator. There are, however, some limitations of the FST model that FST members need to acknowledge. ii

Acknowledgments
The evaluation was a collaborative project, and as such many people were involved in forming the content of the report and getting it to its completed form. First of all I would like to thank the people from the Hamilton FST. Thank you for giving up your time to participate in this evaluation. But more importantly, I want to thank you for being so honest and open in your thoughts and reflections on the project. I would also like to thank the women who participated in the focus group, for sharing their experience with the agencies they used, and to the HAIP staff for your help and guidance in the group discussion. I owe great thanks to my supervisors, Dr Neville Robertson and Professor Jane Ritchie. You kept me on track and continually challenged throughout the year. Neville, your input was instrumental in shaping this project, and your knowledge and guidance invaluable. Thanks for making me see how some seemingly impossible challenges were really very achievable. On a more personal level I would like to thank mum, dad, Mel, Ross and Aimee for your encouragement and support. For putting up with me over the year, and for always being there to listen when I needed you. I could not have done this without you all. Your encouragement and support meant more than I can say. Thanks also to those of you who did proof reading and provided technical advice. I also want to thank everyone at the YWCA, with special thanks to Anne. The dedication and passion in the women at the Y is a true inspiration, and I am honoured to work with you all. Last, but certainly not least, I want to thank all my friends for providing some light relief, and for keeping me sane. You always helped to put things into perspective.

iii

Table of Contents
Abstract Acknowledgements Table of contents List of figures ii iii iv vii

Introduction
Thesis outline Understanding Violence against Women
The dynamics of abuse The prevalence of violence against women The state's responsibility to protect women from battery

1
1 3
3 10 12

The Justice Systems response
The justice systems responsiveness to battery Accessing help The police response The Family Court The Criminal Court Concluding comments on the justice system

13
13 16 17 23 26 27

Interagency Collaboration and Coordination
What is interagency collaboration? Features of an interagency collaboration Existing models of interagency collaboration The development of interagency collaboration in New Zealand and Hamilton Hamilton Abuse Intervention Project (HAIP) Services and agencies operating in Hamilton Family Safety Teams

29
29 32 38 41 42 44 49

iv

Evaluation the FST

52

Method
Literature review Participation and observation of FST meetings Archival database Battered women's focus group In-depth interviews with agency participants Ethical statement

54
54 54 55 58 61 63

Findings
Hamilton FST Women's experiences with the justice system
Police response Criminal and Family Court's response

64
64 70
70 72

Barriers encountered in establishing the FST model
Understanding the function of the FST Building relationships and developing trust Summary

74
74 80 83

Assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the FST model
Relationships FST members Lack of justice system involvement Lack of monitoring Lack of resources Summary

84
84 87 90 91 94 95

The extent to which the FST has improved agency responses
Ensuring the safety of women and children Enhancing the autonomy of women Ensuring perpetrators are held accountable for their use of Violence

97
98 103 106

v

Summary

117

The adequacy of the FST structures to deliver a systemic response
The need for management level support Relationship between members and their parent agencies Isolation and autonomy Coordination role Volatility of the FST Summary

119
120 121 124 126 128 131

Conclusion
Establishing the FST in Hamilton Improved police responsiveness Criminal Court Challenges Genuine collaboration The FST model Cautions for the reader and limitations of the research Recommendations for further research Overall achievements of this thesis

133
133 135 140 142 144 148 151 152 153

References

154

Appendices
Appendix A: Invitation to participants Appendix B: Participant's consent form Appendix C: Discussion questions for interviews Appendix D: Discussion topics for focus group Appendix E: Description of FST members' roles Appendix F: Information collected in archival database Appendix G: Letter from police Family Violence Coordinator 164 169 170 174 175 180 181 vi

List of Figures
Figure 1: Power and Control Wheel Figure 2: FST model Figure 3: Hamilton FST structure 5 51 67

Tables
Table 1: Charges Table 116

vii

INTRODUCTION
Violence against women by a male partner is a human rights concern as it has an enormous impact on the mental, emotional and physical well-being of those affected (Heise, Pitanguy, & Germain, 1994). "By sapping women's energy, undermining their confidence, and compromising their health, gender violence deprives society of women's full participation" (Heise, Pitanguy, & Germain, 1994, pix). The way in which violence against women is understood, how it is defined, and understanding the dynamics of abuse; all impact on the way violence against women is addressed and responded to. This thesis acknowledges the structural and social influences behind violence against women. It does not take the perspective that battery is a behavioral or psychological problem of some individuals. To take such a perspective often results in victim blaming and does not address the social structures and institutions that maintain the use of violence against women. In contrast, this thesis supports a feminist approach, which maintains that violence against women is performed in the context of unequal gender roles and hierarchical power relations that deny women the tools necessary for selfdevelopment and empowerment (Tifft, 1993).

Thesis outline
This thesis is an evaluation of the Hamilton Family Safety Team (FST). The evaluation was necessary to determine whether the project was making a difference to those experiencing domestic violence by improving agencies' responsiveness. It was also necessary to identify any areas in the programme structure where improvements could be made, and to help the FST to refine their policies and practices. The aims of the evaluation are included at the end of the introduction. The first section of this thesis is a literature review, which is split into four main components: understanding violence against women, the justice system's response, the use of interagency collaborations, and the development of collaborations in New Zealand. The initial discussion begins by examining the dynamics of violence against women, outlining the dynamics of abuse and emphasising the social and institutional practices that maintain the use of male violence against women. The second component 1

of the literature review reflects on the justice system's responsiveness to battery, with an analysis of the police, Family Court and Criminal Court. This section emphasises the need for justice system agencies to be integrated and to coordinate their responses, so that they compliment each other, rather than contradict. The third section discusses the use of interagency collaborations, outlining how they can be effective, and uses international examples of interagency models from Duluth Minnesota, USA and Cardiff, Wales. In this section I argue that improving individual agency responses will result in further fragmentation of services, and will not stop battery. I argue that because of the complexity of battery, responses and systems need to be combined and coordinated to have an impact. The final section of the literature review addresses the development of interagency collaborations in New Zealand. Included in this section is an outline of the collaboration in Hamilton, the agencies in Hamilton, and the development of the Family Safety Team initiative. The second section of this thesis is a description of the methods used. Methods employed were observation of FST meetings, archival data collection using police family violence reports, a focus group with battered women, and in-depth interviews with FST members and agency representatives. This is followed by the findings of the evaluation. The findings begin with a description of the FST as it is implemented in Hamilton, including the aims of the project. This is followed by a synthesis of the issues battered women face with justice system agencies. The remainder of the findings section is structured by the four aims of the evaluation. I discuss the challenges with establishing the project, the strengths and weaknesses of the FST, how the FST has improved agencies' responses to enhance the safety and autonomy of battered women and to hold offenders accountable, and the adequacy of the structure of the FST. Each aim is concluded in the findings section. The thesis then ends with the conclusion. In this section I reflect on the main themes from the findings, and relate these to current literature on battery. I also discuss some of the problems with the FST model, some recommendations for the Hamilton FST, and priority areas for further research. In this report the terms battery and battered women are used as they describe the victims and all the actions involved in violence against women (when discussing literature or comments by participants that use alternative labels, I refer to the label they employed). Battery and 2

battered women are very powerful and vivid terms, well reflecting the severity of violence against women. They also acknowledge the controlling coercive dynamics involved. Jacobson (1994) refers to battering as the methodical use of violence, threats and intimidation to produce fear in, and control over, women.

Understanding violence against women
The dynamics of abuse This section will not explain the causes of battery. Rather, it will outline a feminist approach to battery, the dynamics involved, the relationship between domestic violence, culture and society, and the relationship with power and control. Theoretical perspectives The theory around the dynamics of battery is not relevant only to academia; rather, the theoretical stance adopted by policy makers and service providers, explicitly or implicitly, shapes the approaches taken to respond to battery in the community. The feminist approach considers violence as a tactic of coercive control to maintain power. The feminist perspective of domestic violence is based on two main concepts: male female relations, and power and control (Yllö, 1993). As Yllö (1993) explains, "Domestic violence cannot be adequately understood unless gender and power are taken into account" (p47). The feminist approach is critical of research suggesting women are as violent as men, arguing that battery involves a range of techniques, including: intimidation, isolation, threats, and physiological and physical abuse (Kurz, 1992); while women's use of violence involves a limited range of acts, and is not usually intended to cause physical injury (Dobash & Dobash, 1992; Dobash & Dobash 2001). A feminist approach regards men as the primary perpetrators and women as their primary victims. This is based on numerous studies, such as the US National Violence Against Women Survey (NVAW), which found that men physically assault their partners at three times the rate that women do (Tjaden & Thoennes, 1998). There is acknowledgement that women do occasionally use violence against men. However, as Dobash and Dobash (2001) explain, it is in "A context in which they have been repeatedly assaulted by the man and are trying to defend themselves and/or stop his violence" (p271-272). Research by Walker (1984) demonstrates that women use violence as a reaction to their partner's

3

violence. Walker (1984) found that when women do not live in an abusive relationship, they are less angry and manipulative, and are unlikely to use violent behavior (Walker, 1984). Furthermore by analysing what causes women use violence against their partners, Saunders (1988) found that self-defence was the most common motive. However, others are sceptical of the feminist argument of women only using violence in selfdefence. Mills (2001) argues that although victim's use of violence in self-defence is justified by law, it can be just as threatening and dangerous as violence by the batterer. Therefore, Mills (2001) continues, women's use of physical violence needs to be examined as one aspect of the dynamic of intimate partner abuse, not dismissed as irrelevant due to the violence being in self-defence. The feminist approach is critical of our social acceptance of an inherently patriarchal system, which enables men to batter. The feminist definition of patriarchy is not based on individual men; rather, it is power based, and is inclusive of a range of social norms, institutions and social structures, which perpetuate male power and dominance (Yllö, 1993). A feminist approach asserts that violence against women, as a tactic of male dominance and control, occurs in the context of a wider social system of male power. Violence is maintained, not only through men's dominant role, but also through women's economic dependence on men, which is an instrumental factor in their inability to leave their violent partners. To overcome the use of violence against women, feminists argue that we need to challenge the: Social attitude and beliefs that undergird male violence and renegotiate the meaning of gender and sexuality and the balance of power between women and men at all levels of society. (Heise, Pitanguy, & Germain, 1994, p1). Power and control Continued battering is intentional and is used for the purpose of maintaining power and control over another person (Tifft, 1993). The power and control analysis emphasises that violence against women is a part of a pattern of behaviours, and not individual or isolated acts of violence (Pence & Paymar, 1993). Pence and Paymar (1993) argue that physical and sexual assaults occur infrequently, but they reinforce other power and control tactics, which include: threats, coercion, intimidation, emotional abuse, isolation, economic abuse, using male privilege, threats involving children and denying the abuse. These tactics make up what is known as the `Power and Control Wheel' (Figure 1),

4

which was developed in Duluth, Minnesota, USA through consultation with battered women. The spokes of the wheel are the tactics men use to manipulate, dominate and control women; while, the rim of the wheel represents the physical and sexual acts of violence. Thus, each of the spokes, the power and control tactics, have a direct link to physical and sexual violence, and this link is what gives each controlling tactic its power.

Figure 1 Power and control: Tactics of men who batter Source: Domestic Abuse Intervention Project, 206 West Fourth St, Duluth, Mn.

5

Batterers do not always need to use physical violence in order to control and dominate women. After physical violence has been used, men have the ability to control their female partners through intimidation and threats of violence, with additional acts of violence used to reinforce their control (Dobash & Dobash, 1998). The power and control model also emphasises the importance of context in domestic violence. A seemingly trivial event, such as name calling, becomes more significant when it is viewed as one event in a web of controlling, intimidating and fear provoking behaviours. The meaning of an act can only be understood in the context within which that act occurred. Individual acts, when viewed in isolation, may seem trivial but, added together, they amount to battery. Feminists argue that the use of battery and controlling tactics on women is legitimised through hierarchical gender roles, and an acceptance of male dominance and female subordination. Physical violence often operates to maintain and reestablish power relations. When men physically batter their partners, this behaviour serves as an enforcer of men's exercise of institutional and personal power. (Tifft, 1993, p13). Agency responses that put power and control central to their understanding of violence against women recognise that such violence is both deeply engendered and centered on domination; it is not simply an escalation of conflict. Social support for violence against women This thesis asserts that men who batter are not doing so as a result of individual psychopathology; rather, they are affected by social and cultural influences and inequalities in the distribution of resources and power that support their use of violence. Tifft (1993) explains that battering is an extension of power and control over someone else, yet to have control is highly valued and entrenched in the structure of our society. Our communities encourage men to have control over resources, money, nature, employees, emotions and children. Thus, Tifft (1993) argues "To control ­ that is, to dominate and assert superiority ­ is central to most men's sense of manhood" (p133). Robertson (1999) reports that supports for battering are prevalent in New Zealand society, stating that New Zealand communities maintain "Powerful cultural supports which legitimate male hegemony and condone violence against women" (p34). Ritchie and Ritchie (1990) provide a similar view arguing that "Violence is embedded in the cultural patterns which we pass on from generation to generation through socialization, education and participation" (p63). A survey on the attitudes New Zealand adults held 6

about the use of force in certain situations found a high level of support for the use of physical force as a social control (Ritchie & Ritchie, 1990). Violence is embedded in male culture, as young men are encouraged to take risks, to be physical, competitive and aggressive (Dobash & Dobash, 1998). Although not all men possess such characteristics, they still possess male power and superiority as it is ratified by those men who do (Dobash & Dobash, 1998). Thus, violence against women is deeply intertwined with gender roles and stereotypes that maintain male physical aggressiveness, and male dominance and superiority over women, as Heise, Pitanguy, and Germain (1994) explain: Violence should not be considered an aberration, but an extension of a continuum of beliefs that grants men the right to control women's behavior. (p2). The subordination of women is maintained by institutional practices, including marriage and the family. Straus (1980b) labels a marriage license "A hitting license" (p40) due to the extensive amount of husband-wife violence that occurs and is condoned by society and by law. The privacy around the family unit allows abuse to occur unknown to anyone outside of this group. Kurtz (1992) notes that, although contemporary laws endeavour to protect family members against abuse, social norms still promote the use of violence in the home as a means of control. Kurtz (1992) argues that, while women are fulfilling the domestic duties and men are the financial providers and making the major decisions in the family, the status and power of the husband is greater than that of the wife. So long as these gender stereotypical roles are maintained, "Marriage still institutionalizes the control of wives by husbands through the structure of husband-wife roles" (Kurtz, 1992, p28). This control is maintained through a woman's economic dependence on her husband. If she is not economically independent it is evermore difficult for her to leave an abusive relationship. Why women stay in abusive relationships There is a complex web of social, personal and material factors involved in a woman's ability or inability to leave her violent partner. Hoff (1990) describes a battered woman's situation as a catch-22, and stated: They are caught between remaining in a violent relationship and venturing into the labyrinth of welfare, homelessness, unemployment, and single parenthood ­ all of which confer low social status. (p47).

7

Research has shown that women who leave an abusive relationship permanently have left temporarily several times before. A study by Dobash and Dobash (1979) reported that 88 % of battered women had left their partner at some time. Of these women, the majority (80%) had left at least two or more times (Dobash & Dobash, 1979). The difficulty in leaving a violent relationship may be due to what Walker (1984) described as learned helplessness, which occurs after repeated experience of the cycle of violence. According to Walker (1984) and Tifft (1993) women stay with their batterers because of the loving phase which brings hope and promise that the batterer will change, and the abuse will not happen again (Walker, 1984). Walker (1984) argued that repeatedly experiencing the cycle of violence results in battered women becoming passive and helpless to the point where they can no longer determine that leaving their abusive partner is in their best interest. Other explanations involve the numerous social and material factors influencing women's ability or inability to leave a violent relationship. Most significant is fear of retaliation. Women are most at risk of battering, and often experience an escalation of violence, when attempting to leave an abusive relationship (Bowker, 1993; Itzin, 2001). Attempts to leave can also result in retaliation against the victim's friends and family (Bowker 1993). Another reason women stay is self-blame. Batterers often blame their victims for their use of violence and this blame can be internalised by battered women, who believe they are responsible for the violence, or that they deserve to be abused (Itzin, 2001). Itzin (2001) also states that women in abusive relationships tend to minimise the nature and extent of the abuse they suffer, and may eventually accept the violent behaviour as normal. Another barrier to leaving is not having anywhere to go. A common characteristic of the batterer is to isolate women from their family and friends, thus limiting where they can go for help. Furthermore, as noted earlier, many women in domestic violence situations are completely, or substantially, dependent on their partners for financial support (Dobash & Dobash, 1979). To understand battery, it is necessary for one to consider the issues of power and control, social supports for battery, and the difficulty of leaving an abusive relationship. But another crucial factor is how violence is understood by the various cultures in the community. 8

Cultural perspectives on violence against women A New Zealand study looking at attitudes towards family violence across cultures (Mori, Pakeha, and Pacific Island cultures) found there are a range of beliefs and attitudes about family violence, and how it is best addressed (McNeill, Dadelszen, Gray, Duituturaga, Good, & Ash, 1988). The study found that Mori participants overwhelmingly believed that Mori are responsible for their own violence and getting the whanau involved was the most appropriate way of dealing with the problem of battery, as in this environment the abuse is everyone's problem (McNeill et al, 1988). To a lesser extent, other agencies mentioned as helpful responses to violence were the police and the courts (McNeill et al, 1988). In contrast with the Mori participants, the Pakeha participants believed violence is the responsibility of the abuser, claiming that everyone needs to be responsible for their own actions (McNeill et al, 1988). About half of the Pakeha participants thought the victim should also take some responsibility for their situation. Very few Pakeha participants commented on the responsibility of the family, friends or neighbours. This is perhaps a symptom of an Anglo American culture that encourages independence, contrasting with the more collective lifestyle prominent in Mori and Pacific Island cultures (Mead, 2003). As with the Mori participants, participants from Pacific Island cultures believed the family, in particular the elders, needed to be the centre of any interventions into family violence (McNeill et al, 1988). Because of the mana the elders hold, there is a greater chance the batterer would take note of such a person, rather than an outsider (McNeill et al, 1988). Community leaders, such as church leaders, need to be involved in developing and implementing solutions to domestic violence at a community or societal level, to advocate for the needs of Pacific people (McNeill et al, 1988). The Pacific respondents commented that the resources and facilities currently available for victims of battery did not meet the needs of Pacific Island people. It is important to know how cultures vary in their perspectives to be able to provide the most effective, and culturally appropriate, responses to violence against women. This particular study by McNeill et al (1988) highlights the differing perspectives of three cultural groups, and emphasises the importance of tailoring agencies and their services to fit the needs of the different

9

cultures in their community to be able to effectively address the problem of domestic violence.

The prevalence of violence against women The prevalence of domestic violence is very difficult to quantify, but it is widely acknowledged in contemporary literature as a significant problem. For example, research performed by Straus, Gelles and Steinmetz (1980), found that "Physical violence occurs between family members more often than it occurs between any other individuals" (p32). However, research on the prevalence and nature of domestic violence provides conflicting results. Some studies controversially conclude that women perform as many acts of violence against their male partners, as men do against women (Fergusson, Horwood, & Ridder, 2005; Straus, 1980; Straus, Gelles, & Steinmetz, 1980). Such conclusions are typically drawn from studies using a Conflict Tactics Scale (CTS). There are numerous and significant limitations of the CTS, which consequently question the appropriateness of this method to measure battery. The most significant problem with the CTS is the simplicity of the analysis that is applied to a complex situation, making it an inadequate measure of the complexities of domestic abuse (Walker, 1984). Further criticisms of the CTS have largely discredited its use as an effective tool in an analysis of battery (DeKeseredy & Schwartz, 1998; Giles, 2005; Kurz, 1992; Yllö, 1993). Research, both in New Zealand and overseas, that does not use a CTS, predominantly concludes that women are, overwhelmingly, the victims of intimate partner violence (Dobash & Dobash, 2001). Yet the prevalence of domestic violence occurring is still difficult to quantify. The 1996 New Zealand Women's Safety Survey (NZWSS) looked at the extent of physical and sexual violence against women, by their current or recent partner (Morris, 1997). They found that 24% of participants with current partners and 73% of participants with recent partners had experienced acts of violence committed by their partners (Morris, 1997). Participants with recent partners identified more serious acts of violence used against them, than those with current partners. Morris (1997) suggests this is an indication of the escalating nature of domestic violence, and reflects the sharp increase in violence that occurs when women leave their partners.

10

One of the more recent studies on the extent of battery was the New Zealand National Survey of Crime Victims (NZNSCV), which was conducted in 2001. The 2001 NZNSCV reported that 26% of women had experienced at least one act of violence by a male partner in their lifetime. Fanslow and Robinson (2004) measured the prevalence of violence against women by a male partner in the Auckland and North Waikato regions. They found that 33% of participants in Auckland, and 39% of participants in the Waikato reported at least one experience of physical or sexual violence by their partner during their lifetime (Fanslow & Robinson, 2004). These results demonstrate a slightly higher occurence of domestic violence than that indicated by the 2001 NZNSCV. However, it is difficult to draw direct comparisons between the surveys. Fanslow and Robinson's (2004) study was restricted to the Auckland and North Waikato regions, rather than reporting from the whole country as in the 2001 NZNSCV. Thus, Fanslow and Robinson's (2004) findings may be influenced by characteristics of the two communities studied, and may not be an accurate representation of the New Zealand population as a whole. Furthermore, the greater rate of violence in Fanslow and Robinson's (2004) survey could be attributed to the inclusion of sexual abuse in their definition of violence, allowing for a wider range of battering tactics to be included than in the NZNSCV, which was restricted to physical violence. The 2001 NZNSCV and the 1996 NZWSS both found differences in women's experience of violence between ethnic groups. The 1996 NZWSS found that Mori women had experienced more violence by their partners, than non-Mori (Morris, 1997). Of the participants with current partners, 44% of Mori participants and 22% of nonMori participants, reported experiencing violence by their partners (Morris, 1997). Of the women who have separated from their partners, 90% of Mori and 70% of nonMori reported acts of violence against them by their ex-partners (Morris, 1997). The 2001 NZNSCV also found that the prevalence of violence was higher among Mori women than for non- Mori; almost half (49%) of Mori women reported they had experienced violence by their partners, compared with 23% of Pacific women and 24% of New Zealand European women. Another study by Ford (1986) recorded the ethnic breakdown of complainants and people complained about from police reports of domestic violence cases in the Hamilton district. Ford (1986) reported that the majority of complainants and people complained about were Caucasian (52.5% and 52.1% 11

respectively). Mori made up 43.6% and 44.2% respectively and Pacific Island people made up 2.1% of both ca