Chapter One ­ Introduction
Rationale and background for the study
This is a research study that looks at teachers' understandings around the concepts of teacher professionalism and teacher leadership in the context of New Zealand primary schools today. It is recognized internationally that the expectation and requirements of teachers has changed markedly over the past decades (Fullan, 2001). The development of the knowledge society throughout the western world, and the impact this has had on schools and schooling has required a rethink of the strategies that had worked during earlier times (Hargreaves, 2003). The reforms in education in New Zealand that began in 1989 and continued through the nineties has put the professionalism of teachers under attack (Codd, 1998). Sullivan (1999) wrote of the need for teachers in New Zealand to claim back their status as professionals. The changes in education through the reforms has been embraced by parents in New Zealand as they seek to have a better education system for their children, and was identified by Ramsay (1993, p.262) when he stated: "it is indisputable though, that the period post-reform has created more interest amongst parents in the education of their children than probably at anytime of our earlier history." The development of New Zealand as a more multi-cultural society has been accelerated in recent years and as a result school communities in New Zealand have become much more diverse. The inclusion of all and the resulting call for a democratic type of schooling as been the drive for this era in schools (Whyte, 2001). Schools are not seen any longer as the main knowledge providers and due to the pace of change we cannot know what knowledge will be needed in the future (Gilbert, 2003). Children today will have a much wider choice of job selection when they leave school, and will have the opportunity to work in fields that have not even been invented yet, so it has become necessary to develop students' ability on how to learn (Gilbert, 2003). As communities have tried to grapple with the situation, schools have also had to come to terms with further reforms imposed upon them by the governments of the day and there has been an emphasis on teachers upskilling their professional knowledge, and maintaining the habit of life-long learning, as is outlined by Codd (1998, p.127), when he referred to the "professional contextualist concept of teaching." This demand for new types of knowledge for teachers

4

and new ways of working in schools in order to sustain the professional development, required for teachers to fulfill their role, has also been identified in North America (Fullan, 2001; Hargreaves, 2003). Hargreaves (2003) believes this is a crisis schools and teaching are facing. He stated that it is paradoxical that teachers are required to be "catalysts for a new professionalism" (p.10), "counterpoints" (p.59) for social justice and democratic education, while at the same time, being "casualties of the reforms introduced by successive governments" (p.73). While Hargreaves (2003) work is on the effects of changes impacting on schools in North America it is also applicable in the New Zealand context as outlined by Fiske and Ladd (2000) and the lesson they give us of their research is a negative one where they identify "governance and management changes alone are not going to solve overburdened schools" (p.4). I have had the privilege of working in many different areas of the primary school system in New Zealand and have experienced the effects of changes on school leadership and professionalism throughout the years. I was a senior teacher in four different schools and part of the senior management team in those schools, before I became principal of Melville Primary School in Hamilton. As a principal, throughout the nineties, I trialled different leadership systems within our school and saw the benefits of including all staff in the decision-making process, and distributing responsibility to staff. After nine years as principal I moved to Hong Kong for two and a half years where I worked in two large local primary schools. My work there involved working directly with the teachers to bring about change which required a focus on their professional and leadership capabilities. Following my return to New Zealand, I have been working for one year as a leadership and management facilitator with Team Solutions, University of Auckland. In this role, I see daily the work of teachers and principals in schools in New Zealand, as they grapple with the complexities of the educational system. The complexities that schools face has seen a changing focus in the work of the teacher. Teacher leadership has been recognised as being a responsibility of the professional role of the teacher (Robertson and Strachan, 2001). Teacher leadership is also an important concept if teachers are able to work with students for the type of learning they want (Gunter, 2005). Duignan (2004a) discusses the need for capable leaders in today's schools who are able to focus on the future and find new ideas and new ways to complement or assist the work they are doing. These capabilities require leaders to be critically reflective and to be focused on their own learning to improve the learning of others, and therefore the 5

development of professional and leadership skills are the focus of teacher development (Gunter, 2001; Lambert, 1998). The reconceptualisation of educational leadership, and the understandings of a capable leader, the development of learning communities which includes the distributing or sharing leadership with teachers in the school environment requires teacher leaders to be aware of, and understand further, the impacts on their professionalism (Murphy, 2005). Much research has been directed towards school improvement and the actions that schools must take to move forward in such challenging times (Fullan, 2003; Gronn, 2003; Hartle & Hobby, 2003; Lingard, Hayes, Mills & Christie, 2003; Murphy, 2005). As a result, school leadership and student achievement are more closely linked and are the main focus for school improvement (Street & Temperley, 2005). But how can we ensure that the improvement is sustainable (Hargreaves & Fink, 2006)? Fullan (2001, p.54) believes that sustainability of school improvement "will depend on the school's internal capacity to maintain and support the developmental work happening, and therefore many people need to be involved." Sustaining improvement requires the development of the leadership capability of everyone, and improvements in learning are more likely to be achieved when leadership is focused on the learning of the students and on the classroom. Therefore those within it have a major role to play (Hargreaves & Fink, 2006; Harris & Muijs, 2003). As a result, it is desirous to have many leaders within the school and at all levels of the school. Consequently, leadership action must be nurtured within schools, so it can be embedded in the day to day work (Fullan, 2001, 2003; Lambert, 1998). Reading research on school improvement raised many questions for me and led me to my research question: "How do teachers view the concepts of teacher professionalism and teacher leadership in relation to their work in schools?" My interest is in understanding if teachers recognize that the development of their professional role has an effect in developing their leadership capabilities and, if they recognise that their developing leadership skills improve their professional role. If teacher leadership is mediated through heightened professionalism, and there is a sense that teacher leadership promotes and can dramatically reshape the status of the teaching profession through improved outcomes for students (Crowther, Kaagan, Ferguson and Hann, 2002), then teaching and learning will take on a new impetus as it continues to improve and educational outcomes for all will be greatly increased.

6

Using qualitative methodology, I have chosen to investigate this question in two schools. I interviewed teachers so they were able to tell their stories about these concepts.

Organisation of the Research Report
This report begins with an outline of the purpose and context of the research study, the research question and the report organization. Chapter Two is a review of the literature around the themes of teacher leadership and teacher professionalism. An argument is built for the need for a new direction in schools in support of these two concepts, and facets of the school culture that assist in the development of these concepts are reviewed. Chapter Three outlines the research methodology, the methods of data collection and analysis, the research process and details of how the research study was carried out. Chapter Four outlines the main findings of the research that emerged from the analysis of the collected data. Chapter Five discusses these findings and considers the implication of them in the context of the literature review outlined in Chapter Two.

7

Chapter Two ­ Literature Review
The main themes of the literature review are those which will inform my study about teacher professionalism and teacher leadership. I have grouped the information gathered through reading of the literature under the following headings: · · · · Teacher professionalism; Teacher leadership; School leadership and culture; and Distributed leadership and professional learning communities.

Teacher professionalism
The professionalism of teachers has been under attack. As difficulties within schools surfaced deprofessionalisation has been a reality during recent decades (Hargreaves, 2003; Ozga, 1995). There has been an eroding away of teachers' professionalism in terms of what it means to be a teaching professional (Hargreaves, 2003; Sullivan, 1999). There is a concern with the capacity of the teaching profession to provide the required school revitalization that is needed, and as a result, teachers' ability to provide new forms of leadership in schools and communities (Coles & Southworth, 2005). Many researchers argue that if teaching is to be recognized as a profession and those working within it as professionals, then a new professionalism needs to be defined and strategies developed so teachers themselves can meet the expectations (Bowman, 2003; Crowther, Kaagan, Ferguson & Hann, 2002; Hodkinson, 1995; Robinson, 2004; Storey & Hutchinson, 2001). Hoyle (1995) tells us that teaching as a profession has changed from knowledge to skill and that now it is about being able to put into practice the knowledge and gaining credibility through this. The attributes that have constituted a profession have been the knowledge and skill of the particular profession, authority to make and deal with decisions, a regulation of the profession's own body and a set of professional norms based on a code of ethics (Story & Hutchinson, 2001). Morley (1999) stated that while in the past professionalism referred to a critical understanding of the issues of the profession, it has now shifted from understanding to performance, and therefore teachers will be seen as professionals through their actions. Robinson (2003) also stated that it is effective practice that makes a difference in school improvement, and therefore the new professionalism of teachers must centre on their practice. 8

I was interested to see if the teachers in this study recognize the role of their classroom or school practice as an indicator of their own professionalism and whether this permeated through a school where there is a strength in this belief. First, it is important to understand the word professional. Gunter (2001, p.146) outlined the understandings surrounding the derivatives of the word professional and stated that professionalism is the "ideology of the service and specialist expertise." Do teachers believe there has been a change in this ideology, and as such do teachers recognize there has been a shift in professionalisation which Gunter (2001, p.146) referred to as the "status of the occupation at stake"? Hargreaves (2003, p.2) suggested that the forces of deprofessionalising teaching have been at work and teachers need to reprofessionalise in order to gain back "their place again among society's most respected intellectuals", in order to prepare today's students for tomorrow's society. The development of professionality is seen as a way to do this, as professionality focuses on the "quality of practice in contexts" (Gunter, 2001, p.146). Hoyle (1995, p.60) commented that teachers develop their professionality and become extended professionals when they have an increased focus towards their students through involving the them in decision-making processes and sharing of the direction of the learning with the students, colleagues and parents. Professionality therefore refers to the knowledge, skills and procedures teachers use in their work and is different from professionalism, which is more about the status elements of teaching (Gunter, 2001). Today's reprofessionalised teachers work in a team and have a whole school focus as they are involved in the planning and direction of the school (Busher & Saran, 1995) and their professionality is questioned in terms of the quality of their practice (Gunter, 2001; Morley, 1999; Robinson, 2003). How do teachers develop professionality and what role do schools have to play in this? This study explores this question. Morley (1999) argued that teacher professional performance is now a responsibility of the organization and as a result teachers are more involved in collegial activities and sharing ideas. Collegiality must go further than just working and sharing together and the focus must be on the core business of improving student learning, therefore Caldwell (2002, p.843) said the new approach must challenge the levels of knowledge and skill and provide for a vision driven profession that is "valuescentered, outcomes oriented, data- driven and team focused." The new professionalism, with quality of practice in mind, must provide for extending teachers to focus on student achievement and how to affect improvement (Hargreaves, 2003). Hall (2001, p.6) 9

commented that extended professionals are those where "the practice is distinguished by a high level of professional collaboration and collegiality." Therefore, through working in groups, sharing practice, collaborating with parents, and being involved in whole-school development planning, new skills are developed and teachers becomes reprofessionalised as their levels of professionality become extended (Hall, 2001). When professionalism is fostered through working in groups, a community of learners develops with many shared meanings (Barth, 2001). The New Zealand Ministry of Education (MOE, 2003) suggested: A professional learning community is one in which teachers update their professional knowledge and skills within the context of an organised school-wide system for improving teaching practices. In addition, teachers' efforts, individually and collectively are focused on the goal of improving student learning and achievement and making the school as a whole become a high performing organization. (p. 3) So, according to the MOE (2003),when the achievement results of students become the focus and thrust of the group, the day-to-day work of teachers is changed and the teachers' professionalisation is affected positively (Harris & Muijs, 2005). The focus on student achievement is seen by many as the main measure of the effectiveness of professional development (Busher & Saran, 1995; Harris & Muijs, 2005). This development should relate to the work teachers do in the day to day life of the school and is integrated into teachers' professional practice. Professional development that improves student learning would therefore take place within a strong group of professionals (Timperley & Parr, 2004). When the school is organized into such a group, or groups, with the focus on student achievement the professionality becomes a focus for all that happens within that group (Harris & Muijs, 2005). In an organization where teachers are sharing and collaborating about the many complex issues they face daily, and where children are at the centre, the professional teacher must ensure that ethical behaviour is uppermost in all they do (Hall, 2001). Hall (2001) discusses the need for professional virtues to be exhibited by the professional teacher. He stated that "integrity, veracity, fidelity, public-spiritedness, humility and honour" (p.8) need to be in place and that the "professional teacher is ethically obliged to practice them towards all their students and their families." (p.8). The role of ethics reflects the complexity of professionality. Gunter (2001) terms this radical professionality and it has ethics as a central theme. J. Robertson (personal communication April, 4, 2004) also stated teachers must be able to connect their practice to the wider picture of social and political issues. Gunter (2001) stated that:

10

Radical professionality assumes teachers are critical intellectuals and that they work with learners towards agreed social learning objectives so the integrity, freedom and potentiality of the individual learner can be protected, sustained and realized. (p. 146) This implies that a teacher's job involves protecting and promoting social justice and democratic freedom. If working for social justice and democratic freedom are part of the teachers' toolkit for the development of their professionalism today (Gunter, 2001; Hargreaves, 2003), what role does a teacher's own values and beliefs play in this? Research by Chincotta (1992) in discussing Burbles and Densmores (1991) view of professionalism as an ideology, suggested that the idea of a profession affects how individuals see themselves and this fact determines their attitudes to the work they do. The idea of a professional attitude or inner drive that affects the actions of the individual is an area that also connects closely to one's values and beliefs. The suggestion of an internal commitment to the work one does, is also discussed in the work of Argyris (1976) when he suggested humans become motivated because the job is intrinsically rewarding. These internal energies need to be activated and in Fullan's words "the job of teaching needs to be intrinsically rewarding so teachers again become passionate for the job and the flow of teachers leaving the profession needs to be stemmed" (2003a, p.23). So it appears that while some organizational issues impact upon one's professionalism, so too do the values and beliefs one holds. Encouraging and nurturing extended professionality in order to reprofessionalise teaching requires teachers to take an active part (Busher and Saran,1995). Hargreaves (2003, p.23) believed that as teachers are the "catalysts" for the development of a "new professionalism" that is demanded by the knowledge society, they have an important and identifiable role in their own development. Hargreaves (2003) believes that all teachers must work at the following factors to influence the reprofessionalisation of teaching. He argued that teachers must build a new professionalism where they: · · · · · · · · Promote deep cognitive learning; Learn to teach in new ways; Commit to continuous professional learning; Work and learn in collegial teams; Treat parents as partners in learning; Develop a collective intelligence and refer to it; Build a capacity for change and risk; and Foster trust in processes. (Hargreaves, 2003, p. 24)

11

However, there are some tensions surrounding the development of a new professionalism for teachers as the forces of deprofessionalising and reprofessionalising are powerful and are working alongside each other (Hargreaves, 2003). Teachers have been encouraged to take on the new responsibilities as a means of enhancing their professionalism, but they are at the same time, losing the capacity to exercise professional judgment (Gunter, 2001; Hargreaves, 2003; Murphy, 2005). The claims made that reprofessionalisation is happening because of the new work of the school leaders (those in formal positions of management and leadership), and the whole-school involvement in policy making, is not taking the issue of the new paradigm of teacher professionalism far enough (Smylie, Conley & Marks, 2002). Gunter (2001, p.139) stated that the real work of those involved in the school is one of "negotiation, conflict and compromise, that is ultimately about power and their place within it." While the focus on the new professionalism is about empowerment, participation and collegiality in order to effect school improvement, Gunter (2001, p.144) believed that in reality teachers have had to continue to do what they have always done, "to be empowered to do what they have been told to do." Therefore, democratic ways of working need to be developed for teachers to be empowered (J. Robertson, personal communication, April 4, 2004 ). Furman and Starratt (2002) add that it would be virtually impossible for schools to promote democratic ideologies if they were not democratic communities themselves. According to Gunter (2001), some of the issues faced are due to the role parents play in schools today that are in some instances hindering the reprofessionalising of teaching as teachers are unsure of the expectations of the parent community. However, involving parents more in the education of their children and sharing in the work of schools is allowing the profession an increased orientation towards their students (Hall, 2001). While most teachers would understand the benefits of working in partnership with the parents there is a tension attached to this that is interpreted by some to be a measuring and standards based system, as parents compare between schools, between classes and between students (Gunter, 2001; Hargreaves, 2003). Gunter (2001, p.140) stated that "We need to exercise professional courage to tell parents and community what we do, how we do it and why we do it well, otherwise education will be muted into a transmission and measuring process." Gunter (2001) suggested the impact of parents as partners in the learning is felt by teachers as both positive and negative forces as they strive to revitalize and reprofessionalise teaching.

12

This in turn affects the development of a new professionalism that Hargreaves, (2003, p. 10) discussed in his work. Hoyle (1995) discussed further gains and losses in the process of establishing a new professionalism centred on the issues of competency and standards, in terms of addressing incompetence. Competency as a teaching professional in New Zealand is partially addressed through the "Interim Professional Performance Standards" as set down by the New Zealand Ministry of Education, (MOE, 1998) and schools in New Zealand are expected to measure teachers professionally against these. Goldring & Greenfield (2002) found in their research in the USA that this causes tensions regarding teachers' professionalism as it is seen as a standardization that works as a deprofessionalising force. There has been a change in focus recently in the use of the "Interim Professional Performance Standards" to enhance teacher development. Instead of just as a measure of performance schools are now encouraged to use them to enhance the professional development of teachers, as professional development and effective appraisal become linked (Piggot- Irvine, 2003). The aim of this is to lift the professional status of teachers. However, the "Interim Professional Performance Standards" alone do not encourage extending professionality, but rather as Hargreaves (2003, p. 207) suggested "We will need to revive and reinvent teaching as a passionate social mission that is about creating an inclusive, ingenious and cosmopolitan knowledge society, and that is about changing teachers' world as much as their work." Hargreaves (2003) believed that in making changes teachers will need to see the big picture of their work and this will therefore have a bearing on changing teachers' perceptions about their role in the lives of so many and have an effect on the work they do, and move away from "soulless standardization" (Harris & Muijs, 2005, p.ix). The growth of networking and partnerships in schooling means there is a shift underway already where leadership is being taken from the formal leaders of the school to the recognition that teacher leadership is a viable and important focus for the future (Harris & Muijs, 2005). Therefore, I looked at the literature surrounding teacher leadership next.

Teacher Leadership
A study of the literature on teacher leadership identified the following three themes: · Leadership; · Educational leadership; and · Teacher leadership.

13

I have included the first two themes as these relate to teacher leadership as they are encompassed within it. Leadership The development of leadership responsibility being shared with all in the school helps to bring about a new professionalism and develop extended professionality (Fullan, 2001; Harris & Muijs, 2005; Hargreaves, 2003). Leadership concerns the exercise of influence, and it involves the key ideas of pursuing a vision, establishing an appropriate culture in support of the task and ensuring that action takes the group towards that pursuit (Davies, 2005). Goldberg (2001, p.757) writing in the corporate arena found five commonalities that effective and successful leaders require: · · · · · A bedrock belief in the potency and usefulness of one's work; Courage to swim upstream, no matter how long it takes; A social conscience and being determined to exercise one's social conscience; Seriousness of purpose which includes perseverance; and Situational mastery.

Goldberg (2001) argued that these five commonalities connect to the values and beliefs a person holds. As part of one's values and beliefs system they would impact on one's professionalism (Begley, 1999). One's values and beliefs surrounding the leadership action and the level of professionalism exhibited would be intertwined (Henderson & Thompson (2003). Leaders who hold strong values and belief systems live out their beliefs through the daily actions of what they do (Henderson & Thompson, 2003). Waters, Marzano and McNulty (2004) believe that effective leadership is about not only knowing what to do, but when, how and why to do it as well. Effective leaders are able to understand and carry out the balancing of pushing for change while protecting the positive aspects of culture, values and norms. They also understand and value people in the organization (Gronn, 2003).The values and beliefs in leadership capability link closely with educational leadership and teacher leadership. I explored them further in specific terms under each of those headings. Educational Leadership The development of leadership in schools today requires a new focus (Fullan, 2003). With the change to self-managing schools in New Zealand it is evident that a new type of educational leader is required, with the ability to develop skills needed to take the school forward (Robertson, 2005). Gunter (2005) stated: 14

Educational leadership is a social practice and is less about the `must' of being a leader and more about the meaning and activity of doing leading and experiencing leadership. It is integral to learning processes and outcomes and it is educative. (p. 6) Many scholars in the field believe that educational leadership is about leading learning (Crowther et al, 2002; Fullan, 2002, 2003; Gunter, 2005; Hargreaves, 2003; Hord, 1997; Murphy, 2005; Robertson, 2005). Educational leadership is very much concerned with relationships and how the learner, be it teacher or student, is connected with others in their own learning and the learning of others (Robertson, 2005). This is what teacher leaders do. The current context of educational leadership demands that people build strong relationships and partnerships in order to support and assist the learning, and that the focus must be on learning (Gunter, 2001; Robertson, 2005). Educational leadership should be inclusive of all. According to Fullan (2003), the main drive of educational leaders today, is to be able to build capacity within the school in order to sustain the direction, and to build commitment to the mission and vision of the school. Also, as the concern for democratic education for social justice is a major part of recent schooling initiatives and catering for diversity has become a priority in education (Murphy, 2002), the role of a teacher's values and beliefs must be critical in encouraging the new thrusts of inclusiveness, collegiality and working collaboratively that are so important in education today, and therefore there is a link here to professionalism. Educational leadership is therefore also about challenging power structures and cultures that may act as a barrier to democratic development, it should be inclusive of all and therefore it should be integrated into teaching and learning (Gunter, 2001; Murphy, 2002). Educational leadership is also critical and requires that school leaders understand the change process and that they see it is as important to find new ways of "doing" and "being" (Robertson, 2005, p.25). While educational leadership has been seen as something connected to those in the role of formal leadership positions in schools these attributes are also part of a teacher's role and so teacher leadership as an ideology is something that is developing in schools in New Zealand today. Teacher Leadership Educational leadership has always been part of being a teacher and professional teachers' function as leaders (Gunter, 2005; Robertson & Strachan, 2001).The very nature of teaching requires effective teachers to make responsible decisions and demonstrate leadership in the day to

15

day work they do (Gunter, 2005). However, Robertson and Strachan (2001) stated that teachers very often do not recognize their part in leadership or their role as a leader. They found that teachers often refer to leadership as a role that principals and senior managers carry out, rather than seeing leadership as an action all are involved in (Robertson & Strachan, 2001). Gunter (2005) says: It ( teacher leadership) may not always have been done well or in the interests of those we are meant to serve, but it is central to how we might begin to engage in dialogue that will enable teachers and teaching to recapture vitality and validity. (p. 7) Therefore, I was interested to talk with teachers about their role as a leader and the leadership activities they are involved in. Murphy (2005) stated that the development of teacher leadership has an effect both on individual educators and teaching as an occupation, by the way it works to strengthen the professional nature of teaching. The responsibility of leadership is at the heart of teaching (Gardner, 1990; Robertson and Strachan, 2001). Great leaders are responsible for what they do (Gardner, 1990). Effective teachers, like great leaders, are willing to accept responsibility for their students because they believe that they can affect student learning (Gardner, 1990). For some time in Canada, teachers have been questioning their role in the improvement of the quality of the educational experience, especially when they feel they have no ownership of the direction, such as during the times of reform imposed upon teachers (Hargreaves, 2003). This too has been the case in New Zealand (Gilbert, 2003). Murphy (2005, p. 52) believed that teacher empowerment will create ownership in the educational experience to allow for the leadership skills to develop in those responsible for the teaching and learning and he suggested that "Teacher leadership is about raising teachers' sense of empowerment, expanding teachers' professional status and supporting local autonomy, so that teachers can realise their professional worth." It appears then that teacher leadership today requires an understanding of how schools raise levels of teacher empowerment which will be a focus of this study. Silva, Gimbert and Nolan (2000, p.780) discussed the emergence of teacher leadership as "three different waves" that schools have embraced. Their "first wave" of teacher leadership that developed was the identifying of leadership roles within the school that focused on the effectiveness and efficiency of the system. Their "second wave" of teacher leadership began as the importance of teachers as instructional leaders was recognized and positions were created to capitalize on the instructional 