CHAPTER 1 Introduction
Young people revel in new techniques, and as they represent the future, it is possible to ignore the plight of the old, and dismiss their complaint as a temporary aberration and one which will die out sooner rather than later...Without a change in attitude about computers on the part of the public and on the part of [computer] professionals we shall be condemning a minority of the population, generally the aged and those who find difficulty in coping on their own, to a second-class existence. (Sherman, 1985, p. 320).

1.1 Introduction to the study
Computers have been described as "the technology that more than any other defines our age" (Bolter, 1984, p. 8-9). They are ubiquitous in many societies, including New Zealand. One indicator of this ubiquity is the statistic that shows that 62% of New Zealand households own a home computer (Statistics New Zealand Household Economic Survey, 2004). Such statistics tell one story--that of the technology's diffusion. However, they say little about what computers mean for people in that society, particularly what they mean for those such as the aged, for whom the technology is new and can be seen as an interruption--an event not yet routinised in the everyday reality of their lives (Berger & Luckmann, 1967).

In this study, I argue that individuals make sense of computers as interruption events through a narrative process. In this process, they draw selectively on a repertoire of available narratives, evaluate and re-story those narratives to make them personally meaningful, and then take action accordingly to use--or not use--the technology. Specifically, the study traces the narrative processes that members of the aged interpretive community engage in as they make sense of computers. By providing a window onto these sensemaking endeavours and explicating the key elements in this process, the study offers a contribution to theory in relation to the ways the ongoing reality of a new technology is constructed and negotiated. The study thus provides insights into and enhances our understanding of older people's relationships with computers. In addition, by identifying the processes through which a technology-

1

related interruption event can be successfully negotiated, the study offers practical assistance to other individuals in similar situations, as well as to those associated with such individuals and those, such as government agencies, attempting to facilitate the take-up of new technologies.

The study offers important insights into aged individuals' relationships with computers; however, the scope of the study is limited to one particular group of older people--retired persons. Consequently, it does not include older workers and does not focus on older people's relationships with computers in the context of organisations or paid employment. The principal reason for this restricted scope is the context within which the study was framed--as part of a larger governmentfunded research project investigating the impact of information and communication technologies (ICTs) on various groups in the community constructed as potentially disadvantaged by the New Zealand Government's proposal to become an information-based society and a knowledge-based economy (Butler, 1996; Doczi, 2000; Knowledge Economy, 1999; Maharey & Swain, 2000). Therefore, the focus of attention in this study is on older people as senior citizens, not on older people as older workers.

1.2 Background to the study
As indicated above, this study was conceived within and developed from a larger research project. Setting the study in relation to this wider project provides important contextual material for understanding the background to the study and my early involvement with it. It also serves as an illustration of the narrative nature of life, a philosophy fundamental to the study and my relationship with it. In particular, the relationship of the current study to the wider research project points to the interconnected and inter-textual way in which stories overlap and are nested within other stories. MacIntyre (1981) described such a situation as finding ourselves subordinate parts in some stories and main characters in others, with each drama enabling and constraining the other. I take up and examine this point throughout the thesis, including in relation to the story as a multi-layered concept. But first, I background the research context from which this study of older people and computers developed.

2

I was employed as a part-time student research assistant on a project funded by the Foundation for Research Science and Technology (FRST) from June 2001 until June 2005. The FRST-ICT project (original contract number UOW X0016) was a government-funded research contract won by a team at the University of Waikato under Professor Ted Zorn. One aspect of the project was to research the socioeconomic impacts of ICTs on a number of groups in the community deemed to be at risk of exclusion from an e-society. In funding such research, the Government was endeavouring to ensure that its agenda to change New Zealand from a commoditybased economy into a knowledge-driven economy would not divide the country into a society of advantaged computer-haves and disadvantaged computer have-nots. Therefore, identifying the contours of what was being described as a digital divide and how it might be addressed in New Zealand was imperative for the achievement of the Government's social and economic agenda.

As a member of the FRST-ICT project team, I was keen to pursue the problem of digitally disadvantaged groups, particularly older people, who were identified as one of a number of groups potentially on the wrong side of the digital divide (Maharey & Swain, 2000). My recent personal experience as an older person returning to university studies after more than 30 years in the workplace prompted my interest in this area. As a returning student in the 1990s, I encountered acres of computer terminals, photocopiers, and online library catalogues--a scene worlds away from my undergraduate days in the 1960s when there was one coin­operated photocopier in the university library and all notes and assignments were done in longhand or on a typewriter. Now, everything was done on computer and a lack of skills in that area was a significant stumbling block to my confidence as a mature student and also to my academic achievement.

With this recent Rip van Winkle experience in mind, I had some empathy for older people, many of whom had retired from the paid workforce before the computer phenomenon `took off'. I enthusiastically volunteered to collect data about older people's (and other groups') experiences of and attitudes to computers. In stage one of this two stage project I recruited participants for focus groups from SeniorNet1
11

Members of SeniorNet clubs were recruited for the first stage of the project. SeniorNet is a voluntary, not-for-profit organisation founded in the United States in the 1980s and introduced to New

3

organisations and asked them to identify the barriers, benefits and negative consequences of computers and the Internet for older people, as well as possible strategies that might alleviate their concerns and improve their access to and use of these technologies. (See Appendix 1 for details of the FRST-ICT research project, including the information sheet provided for participants, guiding interview questions, and demographic questionnaire). At the completion of stage one of the FRST-ICT project, my supervisors and I wrote an article on the preliminary work done with this first group of research participants in which we discussed participants' perceptions, including the gendered nature of their responses to the technology (Richardson, Weaver, & Zorn, 2005).

Stage two of the FRST-ICT project involved data collection with a second, larger group of older people, this time including nonusers. The data collected in the second stage have not been separately analysed outside of this doctoral study, or previously published. Both stages of the FRST-ICT data collection rounds have been incorporated into the dataset for this thesis. However, as I indicate below, the current study has taken a new approach to that data, for a different purpose. In doing so, this study extends and develops work previously published in relation to the FRST-ICT project and in relation to the literature on older people's relationships with computers.

1.3 Approach, purpose, contribution
The new approach adopted in this study came about as I reviewed the empirical material gathered for the FRST-ICT project and I became aware that it contained stories about participants' experiences with computers. Since a focus on stories and meanings represents a significant departure from previous studies conducted into older people's relationships with computers--the majority of these studies having focused on overcoming barriers to computer use--and since identifying stories in focus group material also represents a departure from much of the literature on the focus group method, I decided to explore the ways in which participants constructed
Zealand in 1992. Its purpose is to provide opportunities for older people, over the age of 55 years, to learn how to use personal computers from their age-peers. SeniorNet in New Zealand consists of a conglomeration of more than 100 independent, locally owned and run learning co-operatives operating under the umbrella name of SeniorNet. Club members meet for face-to-face computer training in small groups at local learning centres.

4

and made sense of the computer through stories, as a way of making a contribution to knowledge and to theory.

The particular approach to the narrative adopted in the study recognises stories as collaborative accomplishments (Gubrium & Holstein, 2002) on multiple levels. On one level, participants' stories are their stories, developed within a particular sociocultural context, at a particular point in time and space, and in response to a particular set of guiding interview questions. On a second level, they are cultural stories--negotiated responses to socio-cultural narratives, including those about old age and technology. On a third level, my representation of these stories may be seen as my research story--an empirically sensitive and grounded project, but one that is open to other interpretations and readings (Alvesson & Deetz, 2000; Silverman, 2000). This third level of storying is itself the product of an iterative process of supervisory feedback, writing, and revision, and espouses a particular academic and personal view of the world, filtered through the interpretive understanding of a middle-aged female with a sceptical stance towards the pervasive use of computer technologies. My research story also encompasses a particular kind of ethical orientation, which Schwandt (2000) described as an ethical-moral sense of closeness, caring, and "being-for the Other" (p. 205), imbued with a strong respect for and sense of responsibility towards those with whom I engaged in the research project.

My purpose in this study is awareness-raising and celebration. My specific aim is to identify, understand, and make available for others the narrative processes through which the computer, as an interruption event, has been evaluated and made meaningful by a particular group of older people who shared their experiences with me. The goal is to recognise and celebrate this group's placement at a particular moment in history and to raise awareness of their endeavours to make sense of that moment.

The contribution I offer to knowledge, to theory, and to practice derives from the fundamentally different approach taken to studying older people's relationships with computers. Specifically, I depart from previous research on the topic in four key ways: (a) by adopting a social constructionist approach largely neglected in previous studies that have predominantly employed a realist and pragmatic approach; (b) by 5

paying attention to the construction-work in which older people engaged, particularly the ways in which they storied their relationships with computers, and how those stories relate to the wider socio-cultural context in which they were produced. This inter-play between individual and societal levels is an area overlooked by the majority of prior studies that have attended only to the micro level of the older individual's (non) use of computers; (c) by focusing on the sense older people made of computers rather than on their use or non-use of the technology--the principal area of interest in prior studies; and (d) by attempting to understand how older people understand the computer, rather than attempting to facilitate uptake of that technology. By taking a different approach and focusing on different issues from previous studies, the thesis produces new insights into older people's understandings of and engagement with computers.

In addition to signalling the key ways in which this study differs from previous studies and thereby makes a contribution to that body of knowledge, I also set out in the following section the ways in which key terms have been used in this thesis.

1.4 Clarification of key terms
In this section I clarify usage of four key terms: computers, stories, sensemaking and meaning making, and older people.

Computers. I use this term broadly to include personal/home computers (PCs) and computers encountered in businesses and other organisational contexts. Occasionally its use is extended to include tools and appliances that incorporate microprocessors or embody computer-like characteristics, such as mobile phones. The boundary around this term has been kept intentionally broad so as to encompass the stories of nonusers of personal/home computers, as well as the accounts of users of that technology.

Stories. The term story is a key concept in this study. However, it is a term open to a variety of meanings. In the literature, it is an amorphous, fluid, and contested term lacking a widely-agreed definition (Riessman, 1991, 1993). Le Guin (1989), for example, commented: "Through long practice I know how to tell a story, but I'm not sure I know what a story is" (p. 37). Czarniawska (2004) argued that not all 6

narratives are stories because the latter contain a plot, whereas the former do not. By contrast, Boje (2001) argued that a story is an account which is antenarrative and before plot. Connelly and Clandinin (1990) took another tack, making a distinction on the basis of story as phenomenon, and narrative as method of inquiry.

In this study, I use the term to encompass stories recounted by individuals within a particular socio-cultural-historical context. Of principal interest are the stories that individuals tell about their experiences with computers. I discuss the philosophical/theoretical underpinnings of such stories in chapter two, particularly in relation to their deployment in making sense of interruption events. I operationalise their definition in chapter four, for analytical purposes. I also elaborate on specific understandings of the term as developed from the findings, in chapter five. Here, the following explanation, informed by Somers and Gibson's (1994) framework of narrativity, serves as an introduction to the ways I am using this complex and multilayered concept in this study.

At the first level, there are the stories individuals tell about their experiences. Such accounts represent the sense that individuals make of events in their world. However, such stories are not simply idiosyncratic accounts. Instead, these stories are coproduced and enacted by individuals who author their own local versions of the broader socio-cultural narratives they draw on, consciously and unconsciously, in making sense of their world.

At a second level, there are socio-cultural narratives. Such narratives constitute a corpus of publicly available accounts produced by a wide range of institutions, such as media and governments, and include the taken-for-granted practices to which members of a particular society have been socialised. This vast repertoire of sociocultural narratives constitutes a contested terrain in which stories compete for attention. Some stories dominate and become influential as master narratives. Others lose favour and become synonymous with the past--old stories. Yet others gain ascendancy as new stories and find favour for a period of time. Individuals draw from this changing repertoire of narratives as they negotiate their way in relation to and make sense of the changing social world.

7

At a third level, there are meta-narratives. Meta-narratives constitute the `big stories of our times', such as the story of technology-as-progress. Meta-narratives can also, I contend, be used to identify the storylines or plot patterns that underpin a number of seemingly disparate stories reducing otherwise complex accounts to their basic narrative elements and causal relationships. As such, meta-narratives are relativist projects and provide a means to evaluate some stories in relation to other stories, to see through the layers of surface variability in such accounts, and to identify the commonalities, as well as the differences, across those stories.

In addition to these three levels, I also recognise a fourth level of stories, that of theory (Richardson, 2000). In particular, following Leonardi and Jackson (2004), theories of technology are seen as stories. Of relevance to this study are the following sets of stories about technology: technological determinism, technology as neutral, and social construction of technology.

Sensemaking and meaning making. Following Bruner (1990), I use sensemaking and meaning making as interchangeable terms. Making sense of something, in this study, equates with making it meaningful.

Older people. This term, as used in the study, refers to those persons aged 55 years of age and over. I explain in chapter four that this age limit was based on entry-level age requirements for members of SeniorNet clubs in New Zealand. SeniorNet was the initial source of participants for the study, and the definition of age used with the first group of participants was also used with later groups.

Having explained the background to the thesis, the scope, approach, purpose, and contribution of the current study, as well as the ways in which key terms have been used, the following section sets out the ways in which the story of the thesis unfolds.

8

1.5 Organisation of the thesis-story
The study of older people's relationships with computers presented in this thesisstory unfolds over the succeeding chapters in the following way:

In chapter two, I explain the philosophical/theoretical framework that underpins and shapes the study. Specifically, I outline the social constructionist epistemology and the narrative philosophical perspective that acts as a particular kind of social constructionist lens for framing and focusing the study.

In chapter three, the social constructionist-narrative approach, expounded in the previous chapter, is used to organise an unconventional review of the topic literature. In particular, I use this approach to explore and critique the literature identifying three master narratives about older people's relationships with computers, three underpinning meta-narratives, and the theoretical stories of technology they assume. At the completion of this review, I argue the case for this study's contribution to knowledge through the adoption of a social constructionist-narrative perspective that frames the relationship between the principal protagonists--older people and computers--in a contextualised, complex, and colourful manner--one that contrasts significantly with the pragmatic approach dominant in the literature on older people and computers.

In chapter four, I set out the specific research questions that focus the study and explain the rationale for and the theory underpinning the methods used to collect and analyse the data. I also detail the ways in which the analytical methods have been implemented and reflect on their strengths and limitations.

In chapter five, I present an overview of the findings from the analysis in order to roadmap the way ahead in the following three chapters, where I present and discuss the findings in detail.

In chapters six, seven, and eight, I present and discuss participants' stories about computers, according to participants' categorisations into one of three sub-groups: SeniorNet members--computer users recruited from SeniorNet organisations; Users--individual users of computers, with no affiliation to organisations such as 9

SeniorNet; and Nonusers--individuals who made little or no use of computers. I concur with Wyatt, Thomas and Terranova (2002) that defining people as users of technologies serves to confirm "the technocratic vision of the centrality and normativity of technology" (p. 25). I am uncomfortable using this nomenclature because a narrative perspective appreciates that labels are not neutral (Randall, 2001). However, my principal interest in the study is in participants' relationships with computers, and computer usage and non-usage represent one way to distinguish participants' ways of relating to the computer.

In chapter nine, I review the study's key findings and conclusions and outline the contributions offered to knowledge, theory, and practice. I also identify areas for future research.

In summary, in this chapter I indicated that this study about older people and computers was developed from a government-funded research project on the socioeconomic impacts of ICTs. The purpose of the study is to identify, understand, celebrate, and raise awareness of the particular ways in which some older people constructed and made sense of the computer at a particular point in time and space. The study makes a contribution to theory through the identification of the processes by which a new technology--constructed as an interruption event--is made sense of by individuals in relation to their own lives. Understanding the elements in this process may help aged individuals and others deal with similar events in the future. In the next chapter, I present and discuss the philosophical/theoretical framework that informs and guides the study.

10

CHAPTER 2

Philosophical/Theoretical Framework

All knowledge claims are necessarily embedded within a specific way of engaging the world. (Fay, 1996, p. 216)

In this chapter, I introduce the philosophical/theoretical framework that guides the approach to the study. In section 2.1, I explain the social constructionist epistemology that underpins the study. In section 2.2, I draw on these assumptions to describe the narrative perspective that acts as a particular kind of social constructionist lens for focusing the study. In section 2.3, I set out the particular model of the narrative used in this study.

2.1 Social constructionism
The assumptions that guide my thinking as a researcher are grounded in a social constructionist epistemology. This way of knowing about the world argues that social phenomena do not simply exist out there, but are instead the negotiated products of ongoing construction, interpretation, and sensemaking in which social actors engage with others to produce social reality (Berger & Luckmann, 1967; Burr, 1995; Gergen, 1999; Gubrium & Holstein, 1997, 2000a; Lewis-Beck, Bryman, & Liao, 2004; Potter, 1996; Schwandt, 2000). However, the constructing processes in which social actors engage are not developed by individuals inside their own heads; rather, their constructions and interpretations are drawn from and developed within a social-cultural realm, of which individuals are a part, and in relation to which they learn to take part.

The social constructionist position espoused here draws on a loose collection of theoretical perspectives that underpin, to a greater or lesser degree, a number of approaches in the social sciences (Burr, 1995), including the narrative approach (Czarniawska, 2002). From this perspective, knowledge is seen as historically and

11

culturally specific and sustained through social and cultural processes and practices, and particularly through language (Schwandt, 2000).

Language, from a social constructionist perspective, does not simply reflect reality or act as a simple conduit for the communication of fixed, pre-determined meanings; instead, it constructs reality (Weedon, 1997), providing the conceptual frame within which individuals make meaning and take action. Language, as Berger and Luckmann (1967) put it, marks the coordinates of one's life in society and "fills that life with meaningful objects" (p. 36). In addition to producing the parameters of an individual's life coordinates, language is also a social phenomenon, a shared cultural space in which meanings can be negotiated and communicated through cultural and social convention (Hall, 1997). Although meaning is never fixed in language, it is able to be negotiated and shared with others and underpins practices of socialisation.

Socialisation practices, according to Berger and Luckmann (1967), are "the comprehensive and consistent induction of an individual into the objective world of a society or a sector of it" (p. 150). It is through the practices and processes of interacting and identifying with others that individuals learn to be members of society (Berger & Berger, 1976). Although socialisation, like meaning, is never total and never finished (Berger & Luckmann, 1967), it is through this process that knowledge is learned as objective truth and internalised as subjective reality (Berger & Luckmann, 1967). Through socialisation, particularly the internalisation of rules and roles, individuals learn to participate in the day-to-day life of a society and adopt its norms and conventions.

Acts of socialisation--socially approved and preferred ways of acting in society-- are taken for granted as the normal and ordered reality of everyday life--the way things are--until individuals encounter an interruption event. When such interruptions occur, social actors find themselves in an uncertain environment, a nonroutine situation, where they can no longer take day-to-day reality for granted. In this position, individuals are forced to make conscious sense of what is going on around them. Making sense of the situation enables individuals to render the problematic event unproblematic (Berger & Luckmann, 1967), returning life back to a state of equilibrium and normality. To make sense of and to guide their actions in relation to 12

such events, individuals draw selectively on a matrix of stories of personal experience, as well as from the repository of socio-cultural narratives available to them. Calling on a range of stories and narratives and evaluating their suitability for making sense of the particular situation enables individuals to negotiate and construct responses that are appropriate for them in the context of their lives. Narratives are key elements in this process.

2.2 Narrative philosophy
Narratives are a fundamental aspect of the socially constructed ordering of reality and a primary means by which humans organise and make sense of their experiences (Bruner, 1990; Fisher, 1984; MacIntyre, 1981; Richardson, 1990), including in relation to interruption events. The narrative philosophy espoused here identifies stories as ways of being, ways of knowing, and guides for action (Bruner, 1990; Fisher, 1985; Weick, 1995), and storytellers as author-actor-producers involved in the activity of storying.

2.2.1 Ways of being Stories are ways of being because, from a narrative perspective, individuals are stories (Kenyon & Randall, 2001). Individuals can be seen as assemblages of stories (Gubrium, 2001), memories, and experiences that are drawn on selectively to produce a self (Goffman, 1997), in order to meet the needs of the particular situations encountered (Bruner, 2002). According to Sarbin (1986), people think narratively and structure their experiences in terms of stories. In this process, stories are employed to organise (Bruner, 1990) and impose coherence on what would otherwise be a "flowing soup" (Weick, 1995, p. 128) of lived experiences, by "connecting past actions and episodes into a coherent and unified story" (Bochner & Ellis, 1995, p. 204). Thus, personal experience can be seen as a story in which events that occur in the external world are continually integrated and sorted "into an ongoing `story' about the self" (Giddens, 1991, p. 54). However, these stories are not simply constructed by individuals in a vacuum of idiosyncratic and personal experience; instead, actors embody narratives (Fay, 1996), particular ways of being in the world and those narratives become our positional identities, "the stories we tell ourselves about ourselves" (Hall, 1995, p. 66). They are also the means by which we present and represent ourselves to ourselves and others (Sarbin, 1986).

13

2.2.2 Ways of knowing Stories are also ways of knowing because individuals draw selectively from a sociocultural and historically-specific repertoire of narratives (Somers & Gibson, 1994) in order to construct and organise the meaning of their social world. Drawing on a shared storehouse of knowledge allows members of a society to interact effectively with others (Berger & Luckmann, 1967), to conform to society's prevailing values and practices (Bilton, Bonnett, Jones, Skinner, Stanworth & Webster, 1996), and to make sense of issues and events going on around them (Weick, 1995).

According to Bruner (1991), narratives accrue, creating cultures, histories, traditions, and homespun accounts of happenings, which are then converted into more or less coherent stories about the social world. As ways of knowing, stories are deployed as sensemaking activities (Bochner & Ellis, 1995; Boje, 1989; Boje, 1991; Boje, 2001; Ochs, 1997; Randall, 2001) in a constructive and creative process of relating the apparently independent and disconnected elements of one's existence into a gestalt-- a relationship of parts to a whole (Polkinghorne, 1988). This process is a reflective one conducted, according to Fisher (1984), by individuals selecting from among the set of socio-cultural narratives available to them, and using tests of narrative rationality--principally the extent to which a story is coherent and rings true with the stories known to be true for them in their lives--to test and negotiate the appropriateness of the selected narratives. Stories are always embedded in other stories, and the value and meaning of any one particular story is "always a matter of how it stands with or against other stories" (Fisher, 1985, p. 358). Therefore, according to Fisher (1984), it is important for individuals to choose their stories carefully in order to live a good life.

2.2.3 Guides for action Finally, stories are guides for action because they provide a moral frame of reference for acting in the world (Fisher, 1984; MacIntyre, 1981), and a horizon from which to evaluate what to endorse or oppose (Taylor, 1989). Such frames enable new stories (possible new ways of knowing and acting), selected from the socio-cultural repertoire of narratives, to be evaluated in terms of old stories (existing ways of knowing) that are known to be true in terms of an actor's life story (ways of being).

14

If, in relation to an interruption event, a new narrative is selected from the repertoire of available stories, and found, by evaluation and negotiation, to be an appropriate fit with the stories of self also selected, it may be seen as meaningful and therefore as an appropriate guide for action (Clarke & Cochrane, 1998). However, if a new story is evaluated and found not to be an appropriate fit with the stories of self also selected, then the new narrative may be resisted and the old stories may continue to guide action accordingly.

Through this reflective, evaluative, sensemaking process, social actors can be seen to draw on and personalise (Bruner, 1990; 2002) versions of a cultured story (Finnegan, 1997), as they fit themselves into the kaleidoscope of socially and culturally embedded narratives (Fay, 1996). In doing so, they attempt to make sense of interruption events and create templates for future action (Weick, 1995). Through this process, individuals use stories to help them manage their uncertain futures (Ochs, 1997).

2.2.4 Author-actor-producers The philosophy of the narrative articulated here also points to stories as activities in which individuals engage as act