Childhood Obesity Prevention: A Parent Administered Behavioural Intervention to Increase Child Physical Activity

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Social Sciences in Psychology
at

The University of Waikato
by Joelene Howarth

Te Whare Wananga o Waikato University of Waikato New Zealand

2006

ii

ABSTRACT
Obesity is a complex and increasingly prevalent health disorder that is associated with a wide range of medical, social, and psychological difficulties. People are more likely to be obese if they consume an energy dense diet but do not engage in physical activity. Research has indicated that interventions, when implemented during childhood, have long-term outcomes that are superior to interventions implemented in adulthood. This research piloted a behaviourally based intervention programme, with parents as the agents of change, to promote a lifestyle change for inactive children. The programme focussed on increasing physical play (lifestyle activity) and on decreasing sedentary behaviour (an obesity promoting behaviour) during children's after school leisure time. The intervention was investigated using three case studies. Although no conclusive evidence was gained regarding the effectiveness of the pilot programme there was some evidence that children participating reduced their amount of sedentary behaviour and increased the amount of time they spent in physical play. There was also evidence that parents were able to administer the programme and that they found it useful. The results from the present study suggest that the development and application of parent administered behavioural programmes, in the form of packaged interventions to prevent child obesity, warrant further investigation both in terms of the benefits and costeffectiveness it could offer parents and practitioners alike.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
To begin with I would like to extend my thanks to Trust Waikato Student Community Grants for scholarship funds to support this research. And to my participants, they were all incredibly busy woman and I appreciate the time gave to be part of this project, and without them I would not have had a thesis.

I would also like to thank Stephanie McLennan from Sport Waikato and Richard Clarke for their encouragement, advice, and help finding participants. And to my friends and fellow students thank you for your empathy and sharing your difficult times. I would especially like to thank Dr Jo McClintock for her mentoring and steering me toward this interesting and important topic.

To my supervisors Professor Jane Ritchie and Dr Jo Thakker, thank you so much for your support, encouragement and wisdom, you are both woman I admire and feel privileged to have had you as supervisors (and thanks for putting up with me). And to Jane, especially, thank you for being so available and so forgiving when I needed help at unscheduled times and thank you for the understanding and the unconditional support you extended to me throughout this experience.

Finally, thank you to my loving and supportive family I could not have finished this with out you. To my husband, Arduino and my step-daughter Evie, thank you both for standing by me and encouraging me throughout my studies. To my baby sister Sharlene, thank you for covering my shifts at our restaurant, so that I could finish writing this up. And to my mum, Jan and my dad, Bert, thank you for being the best parents in the world.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract Acknowledgements Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices Chapter One: 1.1 1.2 Introduction Child obesity is a growing concern 1.2.1 Prevalence 1.2.2 Issues related to childhood obesity 1.2.3 1.2.4 1.3 Causes and contributors to childhood obesity The necessity and advantages of early intervention A Review of the Literature 1 1 2 3 4 6 7 ii iii iv vii viii ix

The role of physical activity and sedentary behaviour in childhood obesity treatment and prevention 1.3.1 Physical activity 1.3.2 Sedentary behaviour and obesity 1.3.3 Lifestyle activity

7 9 11 12 13 16 19 20

1.4

Intervention 1.4.1 1.4.2 1.4.3 Behavioural change theory and childhood obesity Parents as agents of change Lifestyle change

1.5

Rationale and goals of this research

Chapter Two: 2.1 2.2 Introduction

Research Design and Methodology 22 22

The Intervention programme 2.2.1 Target, non-target and physical activity defined

2.2.2 Intervention design

23

v 2.2.3 Resources and materials 25 26 26 27 28 28 29 29 29 30 31 32 33

2.2.4 Measures 2.3 Programme procedure 2.3.1 Baseline 2.3.2 Reinforcement Menu and Rewards List

2.3.3 Intervention 2.3.4 Follow-up 2.3.5 2.4 Parent/caregiver interview

The Research Procedure 2.4.1 The proposed research procedure 2.4.2 The screening procedure

2.4.3 The actual procedure 2.5 Data analysis

Chapter Three: 3.1 Introduction

Results 34 34 35 35 36 41 42 43 44 47 48 49 50 53 55

3.1.1 Participants 3.2 Case Study One 3.2.1 Suitability 3.2.2 Programme results 3.2.3 Parent Interview results 3.3 Case Study Two 3.3.1 Suitability 3.3.2 Programme results

3.3.3 Parent Interview results 3.4 Case Study Three 3.4.1 Suitability 3.4.2 Programme results

3.4.3 Parent Interview results 3.5 Summary of differences between phases across subjects

vi Chapter Four: 4.1 Introduction 4.2 The programme 4.2.1 Decreasing sedentary behaviour & increasing physical activity 4.2.2 4.3 4.3.1 Parents as the programme administrators The research procedure The difficulties attracting participants 63 67 67 69 Discussion 57 57 59

4.3.2 Parent's perceptions and readiness to change

Chapter Five:

Conclusions and Future Considerations 71 71 72 73 74

5.1 Limitations of this research 5.2 Future research considerations 5.2.1 Refining the programme 5.2.2 Refining the research procedure 5.3 Conclusions

References Appendices

75 81

vii

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 The rewards list and corresponding points for Tom Page 36

2

The rewards list and corresponding points for Hine

44

3

The rewards list and corresponding points for Anna

50

viii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 The number of 15 minute intervals that Tom spent in target, non-target and sedentary activities over three phases. Page 39

2

The daily pedometer recordings for Tom over three phases.

40

3

The number of 15 minute intervals that Hine spent in target, non-target and sedentary activities over three phases.

46

4

The number of 15 minute intervals that Anna spent in target, non-target and sedentary activities over three phases.

52

ix

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A B C D E F G H I J K L M Letter to parents and caregivers An information pack for parents and caregivers A reminder letter Notice for students Information pack for students Physical Activity Questionnaire Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire Interview questions Instructions and recording booklet Wall chart Child activity diary Participant consent form Child Behaviour Check List Page 83 84 87 88 89 92 99 100 101 109 110 114 115

1

CHAPTER ONE A Review of the Literature
1.1 Introduction In this review of the literature I will briefly outline why childhood obesity and overweight is a public health concern and why intervention and prevention should be directed at childhood. Furthermore, I will examine the relationship between sedentary behaviour and the increasing prevalence of child obesity and how reducing sedentary behaviour and increasing physical activity, focussing on lifestyle activity, may be a suitable and achievable protective strategy against childhood and/or adult obesity. It is important to note that because is there still only a small body of New Zealand literature on this topic the majority of the material referred to in this review has come from the United Sates of America and other countries in which this topic is a prevalent health concern.

1.2

Child obesity is a growing concern

Obesity is a complex and increasingly prevalent health disorder that is associated with a wide range of medical, social, and psychological difficulties. Eissa and Gunner (2004) define the standard medical assessment of child obesity as being a Body Mass Index (BMI) greater than, or equal to, the "95th percentile for age and gender. Children with a BMI between the 85th to 95th percentile for age and gender are defined as being at risk of obesity "(p.35). A BMI is calculated by weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg/m2); once a BMI has been calculated for an individual it is interpreted using gender specific percentile charts (Eissa & Gunner, 2004). People are more likely to be obese if they consume an energy dense diet but do not engage in physical activity (Ministry of Health, 2001b). Obesity is recognised as a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, high cholesterol, and sleep problems (Jerum & Melnyk, 2001; Peregrin, 2001; Skybo & Ryan-Wenger, 2002). Individuals who are obese are two to three times more likely to develop coronary heart disease than those who are not obese (Ministry of Health, 2001b).

2 When obesity is present during childhood it is more likely to persist through adolescence and into adulthood (Baranowski et al.,. 2000; Jerum & Melnyk, 2001). Obesity in adulthood with the associated health complications can be fatal. Although the complications in childhood obesity are not usually as severe as those associated with adult obesity, childhood obesity is now becoming increasingly associated with serious health complications such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension, orthopaedic disorders, and sleep disorders (Baranowski et al.,. 2000; Barlow & Dietz, 1998; Wadden, Brownell & Foster, 2002). In the New Zealand Health Strategy obesity reduction has been targeted as one of thirteen priority population health areas to be addressed specifically by District Health Boards (DHB) (Ministry of Health 2001a). The New Zealand Obesity Toolkit acknowledges the importance of increasing levels of physical activity as part of the treatment and prevention of obesity (Ministry of Health 2001a).

1.2.1

Prevalence

Obesity is becoming increasingly prevalent in the western world; it is to the point where many are describing this phenomenon as an epidemic (Ebbeling, Pawlak & Ludwig, 2002; Elrick, Samaras & Demas 2002; Wadden et al., 2002). In the United States of America (USA), estimates of adult overweight and obesity are approximately 50 to 60 percent of the population (Elrick et al., 2002; United States Department of Health and Human Services 2001; Wadden et al., 2002). In the last ten years it has also been estimated that European countries have seen a 10 to 40 percent increase in obesity prevalence (Elrick et al., 2002). In 2003 21 percent of New Zealand adults (aged 15 years and older) and 10 percent of New Zealand children, aged from 5 to 14 years old, were classified as obese (Ministry of Social Development 2006). It was also found that obesity is the most prevalent in Pacific populations with 48 percent of adult females and 38 percent of adult males in this population being obese. In Mori populations 28 percent of adult females and 29 percent of adult males were found to be obese, while 20 percent of females from European/Other populations and 18 percent of males from European/Other populations were obese.

3 Child obesity and overweight is also increasing at an alarming rate. Estimates of overweight and obesity in youth (aged two to twenty years) in the USA have been reported as being over twenty percent of the population and it is evident that this figure is rising (Campbell, Waters, O'Meara & Summerbell, 2001). Similarly, it is estimated that approximately 25 percent of Australian children are either overweight or obese (Bongiorno, 2002). The New Zealand National Children's Nutrition Survey (2003) revealed, using international cut-offs, that 21.3 percent of New Zealand children aged five to fourteen years are overweight and that 9.8 percent are obese. Among New Zealand children aged 5 to 14 years in 2002, in Pacific populations 31 percent of females and 26 percent of males were obese, in Mori populations 17 percent of females and 16 percent of males were obese, and in European/Other populations 6 percent of females and 5 percent of males were obese (Ministry of Social Development 2006).

1.2.2

Issues related to childhood obesity

As with adults, obesity can negatively impact on both a child's physical and psychological well being (Ebbeling et al., 2002; Vander Wal & Thelen, 2000). Obesity, and the health issues that are associated with it, is conservatively thought to cost public health services in developed countries between two to seven percent of their total health care costs (New Zealand Health Strategy 2001). In the New Zealand Ministry of Health Obesity Toolkit (2001a) it is estimated that obesity cost New Zealand $135 million in 1996 and it is noted that this is a conservative estimate that did not include costs incurred from chronic disease that are due to obesity. The Toolkit also states that more than one thousand New Zealanders die a year from obesity related complications (Ministry of Health 2001a). Ebbeling et al. (2002) grouped potential childhood obesity related health problems in several categories including neurological, cardiovascular, endocrine, musculoskeletal, renal, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and psychosocial One of the most serious medical consequences of child and adolescent obesity is the development of type 2 diabetes. The incidence of Type 2 diabetes or non­insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), previously known as adult onset diabetes, is on the increase in adolescent

4 and child populations (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1996). Although individuals may have a genetic propensity (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1996), increasing their risk of Type 2 diabetes, the development of this disorder in children is "almost entirely attributable to the paediatric obesity epidemic" (Ebbeling, et al., p.473). Further explanation and discussion concerning these medical conditions is beyond the scope of this review. The psychosocial consequences of overweight and obesity in childhood can be just as crippling as the physical complications. These consequences can include negative self image and low self efficacy (Ebbeling et al, 2002; French, Story & Perry 1995; Maffeis 1999; Vander Wal & Thelen 2000). Obese and overweight children often experience social discrimination such as teasing and peer rejection, which serves to reinforce negative self appraisal. Ebbeling, et al., (2002) also note that previous research has found that "obese children are stereotyped as unhealthy, academically unsuccessful, socially inept, unhygienic, and lazy" (p. 747). Such experiences can increase the risk of developing more serious mental health difficulties such as depression, anxiety and high risk or suicidal behaviour (Ebbeling et al., 2002).

1.2.3

Causes and contributors to childhood obesity

It is largely agreed by experts in the field that no one factor is responsible for the rising epidemic of childhood obesity and obesity, in general. However researchers and health experts alike hypothesise that several factors are likely to interact and contribute to the development of obesity. These factors are often said to include genetics, physiology, poor diet, inactivity, and familial and general lifestyle factors (Arluk, Branch, Swain & Dowling 2003; Baranowski et al., 2000; Ebbeling et al., 2002; Gable & Lutz 2000; Maffeis 1999, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1996, Wadden et al., 2002; Wake, Hesketh & Waters 2003). Specific obesity genes have yet to be identified; however, researchers believe that some people may have a genetic predisposition to developing obesity in given conditions such as in the case of excess energy intake and the lack of energy expenditure (Baranowski et al., 2000, Wadden et al., 2002).

5 As part of an Australian study, parents' perceptions of the barriers to a healthy diet and physical activity for their children were examined (Hesketh, Waters, Green, Salmon, & Williams, 2005). Parents' responses included environmental barriers such as unsafe roads, pollution, neighbours complaining about noisy children, increasing distances between home and school, and a lack of playground equipment. Other themes in parental responses were reported as including a lack of money, distractions in the home such as televisions and computers, decreased physical activity time at school, peer pressure and a lack of parental time. Parents were also reported to be concerned with the contradiction between knowing what a healthy lifestyle includes and the messages received from advertising and media encouraging unhealthy alternatives (Hesketh et al., 2005). This influx of contradictory messages regarding food consumption and the ever increasing portion size, coupled with the `time and energy saving' technology designed to promote limited human effort, has been referred to as the `toxic environment' (Baranowski et al., 2000; Wadden et al., 2002). Referring specifically to the food component, Wadden et al. (2002) note that the western world is increasingly experiencing "unprecedented exposure to energy-dense, heavily advertised, inexpensive and highly accessible foods" (p. 513). They also explain that phenomenon has been compounded even further for children in the USA with a continual de-emphasis of physical activity such as the decline in physical education in schools. Although the literature notes a lack of scientific evidence surrounding the exact relationship, many experts in the field postulate that high levels of sedentary behaviour coupled with low levels of physical activity, are highly related to the western world's obesity epidemic (Arluk et al., 2003; Ebbeling et al., 2002; Epstein, Paluch, Gordy & Dorn, 2000; Faith et al., 2001; Robinson, 1999). Moreover, a decline in physical activity and increase in sedentary behaviour is a phenomenon that is highly correlated with many other serious health concerns such as coronary heart disease, and high blood pressure (Brunton et al., 2003; Epstein et al., 2000; Robinson, 1999; Secretary of Health and Human Services & Secretary of Education, 2000). Therefore, children who engage in high levels of sedentary behaviour and low levels

6 of physical activity may be at greater risk of developing obesity and other related health concerns (Arluk et al., 2003; Ebbeling et al., 2002).

1.2.4

The necessity and advantages of early intervention

The literature suggests that obesity, in the absence of a medical origin, is considered a preventable disorder. The literature also highlights many sound arguments as to why obesity treatment and prevention should be targeted in childhood. Children who are obese or overweight are at greater risk of being obese adults (Baranowski et al., 2000). Furthermore, it has been found that children who become more overweight as they get older increase their risk of becoming morbidly obese adults (Maffeis 1999; Steinbeck, 2001). As well as the physical morbidity that develops as a result of obesity, childhood onset also increases the risk of more severe psychosocial dysfunction (Steinbeck, 2001). An advantage of targeting obesity in children is that they have height and growth potential (Barlow & Dietz, 2002; Steinbeck, 2001). This potential creates opportunity to target weight maintenance as opposed to weight loss. If an overweight or obese child is able to maintain their weight (to a certain point) while growing taller, their BMI will consequently decrease (Barlow & Dietz 2002; Barlow, Trowbridge, Klish & Dietz, 2002). In addition to growth, children have a greater potential to learn new patterns of behaviour than adults and perhaps even adolescents (Steinbeck 2001). Behavioural programmes have been more successful for children than for adolescents and this may be the result of children having less established obesity promoting habits (Wadden et al., 2002). It is also likely that these results are partly due to the influence that parents have over their children's behaviour. It is also thought that healthy habits established in childhood increase the likelihood of healthy outcomes in adulthood (Baranowski et al., 2000). Baranowski et al. also note that child nutrition and physical activity interventions to reduce and prevent obesity also provide children with many other health and developmental benefits.

7 1.3 The role of physical activity and sedentary behaviour in childhood obesity

treatment and prevention Regular physical activity is an important aspect of a child's physical and mental health and well-being (Baranowski et al., 2000; Brunton et al., 2003; Dilorenzo, Stucky-Ropp, Vander Wal & Gotham 1998; Sallis et al., 1999). Moreover, decreasing sedentary behaviour and increasing physical activity are important parts of the equation when considering methods to prevent and treat childhood obesity (Baranowski et al., 2000; Brunton et al., 2003; Steinbeck 2001; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996). Some authors suggest that a vicious cycle exists; when a child is overweight or obese, they become less active, leading to even less energy expenditure, further compounding their weight issues (McWhorter, Wallman & Alpert, 2003). Unfortunately, today's lifestyle involves a reduction in general lifestyle activity (decreasing energy expenditure) and larger portions of high energy foods (increasing energy intake) (Ebbeling, et al., 2002).

1.3.1

Physical activity

The benefits of regularly participating in physical activity, for both adults and children, are numerous. Physical activity is believed to benefit many areas of human functioning and development including physical, cognitive, emotional and psychological health/performance (Baranowski et al., 2000; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996). When children and adolescents participate regularly in physical activity this has been found to contribute to the development of healthy bones, joints and to building lean muscle (Secretary of Health and Human Services & Secretary of Education, 2000). Furthermore, being physically active has been shown to reduce the risk of mortality from serious diseases and health disorders such as coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease and colon cancer in adulthood (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996). Regular physical activity has also been found to reduce the risk of developing Type 2 diabetes (non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus) and obesity (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services).

8 The amount of physical activity that an individual engages in affects the energy intake and expenditure equation. If a person consumes more energy than they use, the result will be a positive energy balance (Ebbeling, et al., 2002; Epstein et al., 2002). Bodyweight is regulated by numerous physiological mechanisms that maintain balance between energy intake and energy expenditure. These regulatory systems are extraordinarily precise under normal conditions--e.g., a positive energy balance of only 500 kJ (120 kcal) per day (about one serving of sugar-sweetened soft drink) would produce a 50-kg increase in body mass over 10 years (Ebbeling, et al., 2002, p. 474). For adults, increased physical activity has been found to be the best predictor of weight loss maintenance (Wadden et al., 2002). In the report to the President of the United States from the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Education (2000), it is recommended that the least amount of physical activity primary-school aged children should accumulate, from a variety of activities, most days of the week, should be at least 30 to 60 minutes. But it is recommended that children accumulate more than one hour, even up to several hours, of physical activity per day. Enjoyment is thought to be the major component for children choosing to be physically active and positive social influences such as peers and parents/caregivers can greatly influence this perceived level of enjoyment (McWhorter et al., 2003). Associated with enjoyment is the child's ability to complete the activity; children are more likely to participate if they believe the desired outcome is attainable (Anderssen & Wold 1992; McWhorter et al., 2003). Therefore, making physical activity a positive and fun experience for children is necessary to gain participation, particularly if the child habitually avoids activity.

9 1.3.2 Sedentary behaviour and obesity In the report to the President from the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Education (2000) it is stated that "children should not have extended periods of inactivity" (p.9). However, research shows children and adults alike are spending an ever increasing amount of time in inactive or sedentary pursuits. The American Academy of Pediatrics has recommended limitation of television to 1 or 2 hours per day. Such limitation of television, video games, and computer games will compel children to choose other pastimes, most of which will generate more physical activity and may lead to improved weight (Barlow & Dietz 1998, p.37). A 1999 American survey found that young people aged from two to eighteen years spent an average amount of four hours per day engaged in sedentary recreation (Secretary of Health and Human Services & Secretary of Education 2000). In an Australian study involving 2849 participants, it was found, using parents' reports, that 41 percent of children spent 11 to 20 hours per week watching television and/or video gaming; 28 percent spent 21 to 30 hours; and 17 percent spent 30 hours or more in these pursuits per week (Wake et al., 2003). The New Zealand 2002 National Children's Nutrition Survey found that 33 percent of children aged 5 to 14 years watched 4 to 8 hours of television on the weekend and 22 percent watched 10 to 20 hours during the week (Ministry of Health 2003). The survey results also showed that only 39 percent of children aged 5 to 14 years were found to be very active for at least four days after school (before the evening meal) each week, and that 20 percent reported no activity (Ministry of Health 2003). It was also found that only 52 percent of children were very active on at least four occasions on the weekends, while 12.5 percent reported no activity (Ministry of Health 2003). A Christchurch longitudinal study found that overweight and obesity were increasing in children aged 10 to 14 years, and that fitness levels were declining (Dawson, Hamlin & Ross, 2001). In their study involving 101 children aged nine to twelve from American Naval families, Arluk et al., (2003) reported a strong positive correlation between the

10 obesity status of the child's mother and the amount of hours that the child spent in sedentary pursuits. Similar results were observed in an Australian study; however, the proportion of variance in children's Body Mass Indexes accounted for by having an overweight or obese parent was much greater than the variance accounted for by hours spent watching television (Wake et al., 2003). Wake et al. (2003) discussed the relationship between adult BMI and television habits and mentioned that children who watched numerous hours of television were likely to have come from environments where the adults also watched numerous hours of television. In a longitudinal birth cohort study Hancox, Milne & Poulton (2004) assessed approximately 1000 children born in Dunedin, New Zealand, between 1972 and 1973 at regular intervals, until 2003. During this study participants were assessed at ages five, seven, nine, eleven, thirteen and fifteen years, for the amount time they spent watching television. They found that on average 61 percent of the children sampled spent more then two hours watching television per week day. The assessment was carried out using parental reports for ages five to eleven and self report was used for ages thirteen and fifteen (the authors note that they had no way of assessing the accuracy of these reports) (Hancox et al., 2004). It was reported that their results showed "that television viewing during childhood and adolescence is associated with overweight, poor cardiorespiratory fitness, raised serum cholesterol, and cigarette smoking in early adulthood" (p.260).Their findings also suggested that television viewing habits established in childhood are likely continue into early adulthood. Another disadvantage of leading a sedentary lifestyle is that many of these pursuits, particularly television watching, promote energy consumption and often the foods eaten during sedentary pursuits are energy dense and are of lower nutritional value (Epstein et al., 2002; Gable & Lutz, 2000; Steinbeck, 2001). Epstein et al. (2002) concluded that normal weight children are at greater risk of developing obesity if they increase sedentary pursuits such as television watching. Their study, involving thirteen eight to twelve year olds, demonstrated that when targeted sedentary behaviours (such as television viewing) were increased, more energy dense food was

11 consumed and that this was coupled with less energy expenditure. It was reported that the statistically significant increase in energy balance (a positive energy balance of 350 calories per day) observed in this study could cause children to increase their body weight by 0.32 kilograms per week (Epstein et al., 2002). Various environmental, technological and social changes have been labelled as responsible for our populations becoming less active (Ebbeling et al., 2002). Parents are now more concerned for their children's safety outside in their neighbourhood (Hesketh et al., 2005). Historically, children may have been encouraged to walk or cycle around their neighbourhood with their friends or to school; however, today, there are many urban areas where parents feel that it is unsafe for their children to be without adult supervision. Parents' concerns include `stranger danger' and busy dangerous roads. As this concern for child safety has risen, television has also come to replace outdoor activities and busy parents find television an effective babysitter (Steinbeck, 2001). Furthermore, the technological age has given rise to socialising without physically being with friends or leaving home; children can now socialise and play with their friends using the internet and text messaging.

1.3.3

Lifestyle activity ... has been defined as the daily accumulation of at least 30 minutes of selfselected activities, which includes all leisure, occupational, or household activities that are at least moderate to vigorous in their intensity and could be planned or unplanned activities that are part of everyday life (Dunn, Andersen & Jakicic 1998, p. 399).

Life style physical activity (sometimes termed incidental activity)

Lifestyle strategies have been found to effectively increase and maintain physical activity levels for previously sedentary adults and children (Dunn et al., 1998). In their review of lifestyle interventions, Dunn et al., (1998) explained that such interventions focus on increasing moderate amounts and intensities of physical activity within the individual's environment and that these activities are selected by the individual, rather than prescribed. Advantages of a lifestyle intervention include that the actual approach is customised to the individual's lifestyle, activities can be

12 both planned or unplanned, and that short periods of activity can be accumulated as opposed to completing a prescribed continuous exercise period (Dunn et al.,1998; Wadden et al., 2002). Further benefits of a life style approach to increasing physical activity are that it may seem more achievable than strict exercise routines to those who currently live sedentary lives; the individual is given the opportunity to determine the activity they will engage in; people do not have to change their lives dramatically to increase their lifestyle activity; lifestyle activity may be more easily maintained than planned exercise routines; and the life style approach has been successfully adapted for various populations including children (Dunn et al., 1998; Wadden et al., 2002).

1.4

Interventions

Various modes of treatment and preventative interventions for child obesity have been developed and tested. These have included medical interventions; school based educational and behavioural interventions; individual and group educational and behavioural interventions; parent-administered educational and behavioural interventions; and multidisciplinary approaches. Wing (2003) argues that family based behavioural interv