The Creative Process: The Effects of Domain Specific Knowledge and Creative Thinking Techniques on Creativity

A Thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy at the University of Waikato by A. Mark Kilgour B.M.S. (Waikato) M.M.S. (distinction) (Waikato)

University of Waikato 2006

Abstract
As we move further into the 21st century there are few processes that are more important for us to understand than the creative process. The aim of this thesis is to assist in deepening that understanding. To achieve this a review of the literature is first undertaken. Combining the many different streams of research from the literature results in the development of a fourstage model of the creative thinking process. The four stages are problem definition, idea generation, internal evaluation, and idea expression. While a large range of factors influence the various stages in this model, two factors are identified for further analysis as their effect on creativity is unclear. These two factors are domain-specific knowledge and creative thinking techniques. The first of these factors relates to the first stage of the creative thinking process (problem definition), specifically the extent to which informational cues prime domain specific knowledge that then sets the starting point for the creative combination process. The second factor relates to stage two of the model (idea generation), and the proposition by some researchers and practitioners that creative output can be significantly improved through the use of techniques. While the semantics of these techniques differ, fundamentally all techniques encourage the use of divergent thinking by providing remote associative cues as the basis for idea generation. These creative thinking techniques appear to result in the opening of unusual memory categories to be used in the creative combination process.

These two potential influences on the creative outcomes of individuals: 1) domain specific knowledge, and 2) creative thinking techniques, form the basis for an experimental design. Qualitative and quantitative research is undertaken at two of the world's leading advertising agencies, and with two student samples, to identify how creative thinking techniques and domain-specific knowledge, when primed, influence creative outcomes. In order to measure these effects a creative thinking measurement instrument is developed. Results found that both domain-specific knowledge and creative thinking techniques are key influences on creative outcomes. More importantly, results also found interaction effects that significantly extend our current understanding of the effects of both primed domain-specific knowledge and creativity techniques on different sample populations. Importantly, it is found that there is no `one size fits all' for the use of creative thinking techniques, and to be effectively applied, creative thinking techniques must be developed based upon the respondent's current domain and technique expertise. Moreover, the influence of existing domain-specific knowledge on individual creativity is also dependent upon how that information is primed and the respondent's knowledge of cognitive thinking strategies.

ii

Table of Contents:

Page(s)

Acknowledgements List of Figures List of Tables List of Graphs List of Appendices

iv v vi-viii ix-xi xii

Chapter One: Chapter Two: Chapter Three:

Creativity Research and Issues Creativity Definition and Measurement Big C versus little c Creative Findings: Domain-specific Knowledge Combination Effects on the Eminence of Creative Contributions

2-19 20-51

51-84

Chapter Four:

DSK Effects on Problem Identification and Setting Of the Search Model or Anchor Points 85-109

Chapter Five:

DSK Effects on Idea Generation, Internal Evaluation and Refinement, and Idea Expression 110-130 131-162 163-175 176-198 199-210

Chapter Six: Chapter Seven: Chapter Eight: Chapter Nine: Chapter Ten:

Exploratory Qualitative Research Pre-Test of the Experimental Research Instrument Methodology Experimental Coding and Measures Results from a Study on Creativity in Agency Settings

211-237 238-263 264-285 286-303

Chapter Eleven: Chapter Twelve: Chapter Thirteen:

Discussion of Primary Effects Discussion of the Other Main Effects Final Discussion and Limitations

Appendices References

304-388 389-415

iii

Acknowledgements:

Over the years I have had many people support me in the long process of completing this doctorate. While there are too many to mention them all here, I would like to thank primarily my supervisors. First, Scott Koslow, who has provided me with both research assistance and support, but most importantly `the sounding board of reason' as my thoughts made their slow journey from birth to fully fledged ideas; and second, Caroline Costley, who has ensured that those ideas have some semblance of coherence and cohesion.

Other people who have been invaluable in the process are the many advertising agency personnel who helped in the research; in particular, Milano Reyna in New York and Paul Catmur in Auckland New Zealand, as well as all of the hundreds of creatives, account people, and students who volunteered their time to assist my understanding of the creative process. I must thank my partner Chen and mother Anne, who were roped in to assist in the mammoth task of proofreading; and my colleague, and sometimes tormentor, Mary Fitzpatrick. To these and the many others I hope the ideas that come from this work help us all to be more creative, tolerant, and happy individuals. That would be a fitting tribute to you all.

iv

List of Figures:

Page(s)

Figure 2.1 / 4.1 / 8.1: The Four Stage Model of Creativity

35, 91,184

Figure 3.1: The Creativity Frontier

56

Figure 3.2: The Domain Continuum

58

Figure 3.3: Domain Knowledge Boundaries

60

Figure 3.4 / 4.2: Big C Eminent Creative Ideas versus little c Minor Creative Ideas ­ Societal Level Model 64, 101

Figure 4.3: Category Connections Model Figure 5.1: Domain Combination Model Figure 5.2: Model of the Creative Combination Process

104 112 113

Figure 5.3: Societal Level Big C Creativity and the U Shaped Influence of Specialist Domain Specific Knowledge 118

Figure 5.4: Societal Level Big C Creativity without Creative Thinking Techniques/Environmental Influences 123

Figure 5.5: Societal Level Big C Creativity with Creative Thinking Techniques/Environmental Influences 123

v

List of Tables: Table 7.1: Pre-test Experimental Design Matrix Table 7.2: Rotated Factor Analysis - Oblimin Rotation Table 8.1: Sample Population Characteristics Table 8.2: Experimental Design Matrix Table 9.1: Cell Treatment Numbers Table 10.1: Self Assessment Factor Analysis: Eigenvalues of the Correlation Matrix

Page(s) 165 172 187 193 201

213

Table 10.2: Rotated Factor Analysis - Oblimin Rotation

213

Table 10.3: Level of Agreement between the Coders

214

Table 10.4: Independent Assessment Factor Analysis: Eigenvalues of the Correlation Matrix Table 10.5: Rotated Factor Pattern - Oblimin Rotation

215

215

Table 10.6: Correlations between the Two Measures Table 10.7: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques on Self-Assessed and Independently Assessed Originality, Appropriateness, and Creativity Table 10.8: Assessments of Originality and Creativity by Area for the Technique Versus No Technique Treatments Table 10.9: Self-Assessed versus Independent Assessments of Originality for All Sample Population for the Different Associative Word Level

216

218

220

221 vi

Table 10.10: Perceived Average Level of Association of the Three Forced Divergent Technique Associative Words by Area; and, The Average Perceived Level of Association across All Samples (Closeness) Table 10.11: Perceived Average Level of Association of each of the Three Associative Words by Area Table 10.12: The Effect of the Level of the Associative Word on Independently Assessed Originality, Appropriateness, and Creativity 224 223 222

Table 10.13: Independently Assessed Originality

225

Table 10.14: Independently Assessed Appropriateness

225

Table 10.15: Independently Assessed Creativity

226

Table 10.16: The Effect of Order on Independently Assessed Originality, Appropriateness, and Creativity 227

Table 10.17: The Effect of Past Campaign Information on Independently Assessed Originality, Appropriateness, and Creativity 227

Table 10.18: The Effect of Area and Country on Independently Assessed Originality, Appropriateness, and Creativity 228

Table 10.19: The Effect of Country by Area on Independently Assessed Creativity 229

Table 10.20: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques and Information on a Past Campaign on Independently Assessed Originality 229

vii

Table 10.21: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques by Area on Independently Assessed Originality 230

Table 10.22: The Effect of Information on a Past Campaign by Area on Independently Assessed Appropriateness 231

Table 10.23: The Effect of Country by Area on Independently Assessed Appropriateness 231

Table 10.24: The Effect of Past Campaign by Area on Independently Assessed Creativity 232

Table 10.25: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques and Past Campaign by Area on Independently Assessed Creativity 233

Table 10.26: The Effect of Order by Treatment on Independently Assessed Originality and Creativity for All Samples and the Samples without the Foreign Students 234

Table 10.27: The Effect of Past Campaign by the Associative Word Level on Independently Assessed Originality for All Samples and the Samples without the Foreign Students 235

Table 10.28: The Effect of the Different Associative Word Level for the Different Sample Groups by Past Campaign on Independently Assessed Creativity 236-237

viii

List of Graphs:

Page(s)

Graph 11.1: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques on Self-Assessed and Independent Assessments of Originality 240

Graph 11.2: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques on Self-Assessed and Independent Assessments of Appropriateness 241

Graph 11.3: The Effect of Divergent Thinking Techniques on Self-Assessed and Independent Assessments of Creativity 242

Graph 11.4: Assessments of Originality by Sample Group for the Technique and No Technique Treatments 243

Graph 11.5: Assessments of Creativity by Sample Group for the Technique and No Technique Treatments 245

Graph 11.6: The Effect of Technique by Sample Group on Assessed Originality

249

Graph 11.7: Assessments of Originality by Sample Group for the Different Levels of Associative Word 251

Graph 11.8: Assessments of the Account People's and Domestic Student's Originality for the Different Levels of Word Association 252

Graph 11.9: Assessments of the Foreign Student's and Creatives' Originality for the Different Levels of Associative Word 253

Graph 11.10: The Average Perceived Level of Association for the Three Words used, across All Samples 254

Graph 11.11: Perceived Average Level of Association of the Three Associative Words by Sample Group 255 ix

Graph 11.12: Perceived Average Level of Association of each of the Three Associative Words by Sample Group 256

Graph 11.13: The Effect of the Level of Associative Word on Judged Originality, Appropriateness and Creativity Scores for All Samples except the Foreign Students 258

Graph 11.14: The Effect of Past Campaign Information on Judged Originality

259

Graph 11.15: The Effect of Past Campaign Information for Each Sample Group on Assessed Appropriateness 260

Graph 11.16: The Effect of Past Campaign Information by Area on Assessed Creativity 261

Graph 12.1: The Order Effect

266

Graph 12.2: The Effect of Order for each of the Different Associative Words on Assessed Originality for all of the Groups Except the Foreign Students 267

Graph 12.3: The Effect of Order for each of the Different Associative Words on Assessed Creativity for all of the Groups Except the Foreign Students 268

Graph 12.4: The Effect of the Sample Group on Originaity, Appropriateness, and Creativity 270

Graph 12.5: The Effect of Country Information on Originality

271

Graph 12.6: The Effect of Country by Area on Assessed Creativity

272

Graph 12.7: The Effect of Technique and Past Campaign Information on Assessed Originality 273 x

Graph 12.8: The Effect of Past Campaign Information and Divergent Thinking Techniques on Assessed Creativity 274

Graph 12.9: The Effect of Past Campaign Information and Divergent Thinking Techniques on Account People's Assessed Creativity 275

Graph 12.10: The Effect of Past Campaign Information and Divergent Thinking Techniques on Creative's Assessed Creativity 276

Graph 12.11: The Effect of Past Campaign Information and Divergent Thinking Techniques on Domestic Student's Assessed Creativity 277

Graph 12.12: The Effect of Past Campaign Information and Divergent Thinking Techniques on Foreign Student's Assessed Creativity 278

Graph 12.13: The Effect of Past Campaign Information by the Level of Associative Word on Account People's Assessed Creativity 280

Graph 12.14: The Effect of Past Campaign Information by the Level of Associative Word on Creative's Assessed Creativity 281

Graph 12.15: The Effect of Past Campaign Information by Level of Associative Word on Domestic Student's Assessed Creativity 282

Graph 12.16: The Effect of Past Campaign Information by the Level of Associative Word on Foreign Student's Assessed Creativity 283

xi

List of Appendices:

Page(s)

Appendix 1: Depth Interview Responses Appendix 2: Pre-Test Response Booklet Appendix 3: Pre-Test Information Sheet for Participants Appendix 4: Pre-Test Instruction Sheet Appendix 5: Waikato Management School Application for Ethical Approval Appendix 6: Pre-Test Interview Guide & Schedule Appendix 7: Pre-Test Self Assessment Rating Form Appendix 8: List of Associative Words Appendix 9: Experimental Response Booklets Appendix 10: Agency Personnel Self Assessment Rating and Demographics Form Appendix 11: Student Self Assessment Rating and Demographics Appendix 12: Coder's Guide Appendix 13: Coding Form Appendix 14: Data Output from the Experiment

304-329 330-346 347-351 352

353-354 355 356-357 358 359-366

367-368 369-370 371 372-375 376-387

xii

Table of Contents: Chapter One - Creativity Research and Issues

Pg 1.0 The Complexity of Creative Thinking Research 1.1 The Importance of Studying Creative Thinking 1.1.1 Standardized Education Versus Nurturing Creative Thinking 1.1.2 1.2 Creativity in Advertising 4 5 5 6 6 7 8 10 10 11 2 3

Literature Review 1.2.1 Difficulties in Divergent Thinking Measures 1.2.2 Measuring Creativity through Products/Ideas 1.2.2.1 Subjective Evaluation 1.2.3 Creativity ­ A Common Process? 1.2.3.1 Creativity: A Confluence of Factors 1.2.4 Domain-specific Knowledge and Creative Thinking 1.2.4.1 The Domain Specific Knowledge Dilemma 1.2.4.2 Domain Specific Knowledge Effects on the Stages in the Creative Thinking Process 1.2.5 The Creative Thinking Process 1.2.5.1 Creativity and Divergent Thinking 1.2.6 1.2.7 1.2.8 Creative Thinking Techniques Environmental Influences on Creative Thinking Individual Differences in Creative Thinking

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 18

1.3 1.4

Conclusion Chapter Content

1

1.0

The Complexity of Creative Thinking Research

Research into creativity is not new. Creative thinking has been of interest to scholars for centuries, and while the modern era of creative thinking is acknowledged to have commenced in the 1950's, more anecdotal recorded research has been identified from the 19th Century (Becker, 1995). In a review of the 19th century literature, Becker identified five key questions that scholars were addressing at the time: 1. "How is creativity defined? 2. Who has creativity? 3. What are the characteristics of creative people? 4. Who should benefit from creativity? 5. Can creativity be increased through conscious effort" (Becker, 1995, p.219). It is a testament to the complexity of the field that a century later these same issues are continuing to be addressed (Becker, 1995). What makes creative research complex is the wide range of individual and environmental factors that influence the creative process. "After decades of theory development and empirical research, researchers still know surprisingly little about how the creative process works" (Woodman, Sawyer & Griffin, 1993, p.316) Despite the long history of research, it has only been in recent years that the importance of the area has started to gain increased significance and attention. The rapid pace of environmental change, and the need to develop a society that is open to that change, has necessitated the need for sound research into the field. In our turbulent global environment, this need to understand the creative process is intensifying. In an increasingly diverse world, the importance of understanding how to nurture individuals to express their opinions, and be open and tolerant to new ideas and their expression, is increasing. "Because he is confident, he is also tolerant where there should be tolerance. A world of tolerant people would be peaceful and co-operative people. Thus creativity is the key to education in its fullest sense and to the solution of mankind's most serious problems" (Guilford, 1968, p.147). As stated by Guilford this understanding has particular importance in relation to education systems and in organizational development. However, many people would also agree with the proposition that, "Not Enough Attention is being given to Nurturing Creativity" Lee Yuan Tseh, Nobel Prize Winner. 2

1.1

The Importance of Studying Creative Thinking

Academics, business leaders, and politicians around the globe are acknowledging the need for a more creative workforce. Facing rapid change from multiple global sources of competition, organizations, and even entire economies, are realizing the importance of innovation and adaptability. The increased rate of change, due to global competitive pressures, means that environments are dynamic, and the development of creative individuals is essential. "What needs to be addressed is how to achieve a good balance between content knowledge and creative thinking skills in our curriculum" Teo Chee Hean Singapore Education Minister 2000.

Central to the development of creative individuals are our educational systems. As we move into the new millennium we must change our emphasis from previous techniques and systems that focus on teaching how to solve the problems of the past. The limitation in our educational systems in developing creative individuals has been acknowledged since the 19th Century. Bagehot 1873 - "Rather than educational institutions being on the cutting edge, Bagehot saw them as, "...asylums of the ideas and the tastes of the last age," which "out of their dignified windows pooh-pooh new things" (Becker, 1995, p.226).

More recently, one of the pioneer creativity researchers of the modern age, Guilford, stated the need for creativity to be nurtured in educational institutions. "We frequently hear the charge that under present-day mass-education methods, the development of creative personality is seriously discouraged. The child is under pressure to conform for the sake of economy and for the sake of satisfying prescribed standards. We are told by the philosophers who have given thought to the problem that the unfolding of a creative personality is a highly individual matter which stresses uniqueness and shuns conformity. Actually the unfolding of the individual along the lines of his own inclinations is generally frowned upon. We are told, also, that the emphasis upon the memorizing of facts sets the wrong kind of goal for the student." (Guilford, 1968, p.84)

3

1.1.1

Standardized Education Versus Nurturing Creative Thinking

Despite these early assertions by Guilford (1968), many educational systems are becoming more, not less, standardized (Furedi, 2006; Goldberg, 2004; Hargreaves & Goodson, 2006; Hughes, 2004; Platt, 2004). Education is rapidly becoming a vast global business. The need to develop standardized tests to ensure conformity of achievement is promoting education systems that are further stressing memorization and rote learning methods. This results in a paradoxical problem. In a world requiring high levels of creative thought, education systems are encouraging processes that result in a less creative graduate. Much of this problem is due to our lack of understanding of the creative thinking process.

"We have little actual knowledge of what specific steps should be taken in order to teach students how to think" (Guilford, 1968, p.84). In the drive for economies of scale and simple testing methods in the education business, educational institutions may in fact be limiting one of the key skills for organizational and economic success: creativity. There is a crucial, and immediate, need for a better understanding of how to nurture creative thinking. However, despite its importance, research into the creative process has remained a relatively minor area of research (Feist & Runco, 1993; Sternberg & Lubart, 1996).

Despite this need for creativity research, it is not a simple process. Creative thinking is a process that is still poorly understood and generates considerable debate. "One of the few points of agreement in the relevant literature is that creativity is multifaceted" (Runco & Charles, 1992, p.537). The problem is there is still not an accepted model of the creative thinking process, let alone a widely accepted creativity measure. A variety of methods are used to test creativity currently, but debate on what constitutes creative thinking and its measurement are still major issues. Without consensus in these areas it is difficult to properly define the creative thinking process, and subsequently how it can be nurtured.

4

1.1.2

Creativity in Advertising

One area in which progress has been made has been through research into advertising creativity. While creative thinking is of importance to industry, education and society in general, advertising creativity research has attracted notable attention given the importance of creativity to the industry. One of the reasons that creativity is of such interest to advertising researchers is that advertising ideas must meet the widely accepted criteria for creativity - original and appropriate to the target market.

Moreover, the advertising industry is highly dynamic, with new media and constantly changing consumer and product characteristics. Finally, the industry is unique in respect that it employs a significant percentage of its workforce purely as creative idea generators. Hence, advertising creativity research has the potential to greatly assist in our understanding of the creative process.

1.2

Literature Review

To understand the research problems in the area of creative thinking, it is important to review past and present research. Modern research on creative thinking has developed over the last five decades with considerable change in the emphasis of the research throughout that time.

Much of the early work was based upon the assumption that creative thinking was an inherent talent that needed to be recognized so that creative individuals could be nurtured to assist society. "Historically, the study of creativity began with the concept of genius" (Sternberg & Lubart, 1996, p.680). Creative thinking was initially thought of as a talent possessed by exceptional people, and researchers looked at ways that talent could be identified, and future leaders nurtured.

Subsequently, early seminal work on creative thinking, by researchers such as Guilford and Torrance, focused on measurements to identify creative individuals. As early as the 1950's Guilford studied creativity in people using paper and pencil tests (Sternberg & Lubart, 1996). One of the significant early developments was a test 5

devised by Torrance in the middle of last century, the Torrance test of creative thinking. This test measured four factors he considered constituted the creative thinking process: Fluency ­ total number of relevant responses Flexibility ­ number of difference categories of relevant responses Elaboration ­ amount of detail in the responses Originality ­ the statistical rarity of the responses

1.2.1

Difficulties with Divergent Thinking Measures

However, tests of divergent thinking abilities have been widely criticized for lack of predictive validity (Baer, 1994; Crockenberg 1972; Weisberg, 1993). While some support for divergent thinking tests has been found (Plucker, 1999), there is a growing consensus that methodological issues are still apparent and multiple measures of creativity are needed. Indeed, recent researchers have questioned the usefulness of some of these earlier measures: "Fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration fail to capture the concept of creativity (Amabile, 1983)" (as cited in Sternberg & Lubart, 1996, p.681), and Baer (1994) criticizes the use of such tests on the basis that creativity is task-specific. The reason for the problems with the early measures is in part a reflection of the complexity of the creative process. A range of personality, environmental, inherent, and cognitive factors are all posited to influence the creative thinking process. Therefore, only looking at general cognitive processes does not result in the identification of individuals who will become creative leaders in society.

Subsequently, some researchers have focused on studying creative thinking by first identifying it through results, or finished products/ideas, and then analyzing the personality and environmental factors that led to those results (Amabile, 1996; Ghiselin, 1963; Harmon, 1963; Mumford & Gustafson, 1988). In a study of creativity measures in 1981, Hocevar concluded that "... a simple and straightforward inventory of creative achievement and activities appears to be more defensible than the more commonly used methods" (Hocevar, 1981, p. 459).

6

1.2.2

Measuring Creativity through Products/Ideas

Some of those authors who have tried to circumvent the problem of a lack of adequate tests to capture the creative thinking process, look at the end product of the creative thinking process as the measure; "The idea that creativity should be defined in terms of novel, socially valued products, instead of in terms of processes, has received increasingly wide support over the years (Amabile, 1996; Ghiselin, 1963; Harmon, 1963)." (Mumford & Gustafson, 1988, p.28). These researchers have made significant progress in understanding personality and environmental influences on creativity. However, this output based measure creates its own evaluation problems.

Defining creativity based upon a judgment of `novel' and `socially valued' products, rather than some measure that captures its key process elements, still presents difficulties in terms of subjective judgment. The measure identifies the two widely accepted criteria of creativity ­ originality/novel and appropriateness/socially valued (Rothenberg & Houseman, 1976; Mumford & Gustafion, 1988; Runco & Charles, 1992; Mumford & Simonton, 1997) however, judging these two criteria is an issue.

1.2.2.1 Subjective Evaluation

If the product must be `socially valued' or appropriate, then the questions must be asked: Valued by whom? How many people need to value it before it is creative? What is a creative product? Is it a piece of art or something `useful'? What about a photograph, a landscape painting, a theatrical play? Both originality and appropriateness measures depend upon the background of the judges assessing the end product or idea. Lack of knowledge, or exposure, to an idea by a judge will mean that judge will rate that idea higher on originality than the judge that has knowledge of that same idea.

Different judges from different parts of society are likely to have different views on what is valued. Indeed, Ford (1996) proposed a definition of creativity that is domainspecific, based on the premise that ideas cannot be evaluated independently of the domain. For researchers to be able to find agreement on `socially valued products'

7

then only certain highly visible products (e.g., the computer, the cell phone) would qualify. "A practical criterion of creativity is difficult to establish because creative acts of an unquestioned order of excellence are extremely rare." (Guilford, 1968, p.79).

Researchers following the `novel, socially valued' definition have focused on a few rare outputs, and the people that have generated them. One stream of research in this area is the historiometric study of creative thinking. Researchers in this area have identified widely accepted creative individuals throughout history and analyzed them for common traits (Gruber, 1968; Simonton, 1984). However, despite the fact that most people would not refute the creativity of great inventions, such as the computer or the telephone, this output based measure does not account for the fact that many groundbreaking ideas were not either, widely recognized, or accepted, at their time of invention. As stated by Runco (1995) "Instances of unrecognized or overlooked creative work are easy to find" (Runco, 1995 p.379).

Creative ideas are by their nature `original' and hence may not be viewed as appropriate to people who are using existing, no longer appropriate, criteria to evaluate those ideas. The problem with the novel, socially valued product criterion is it would not have recognized highly creative people, such as Van Gogh, until long after they had gained acceptance. Indeed, many highly creative people have not been recognized for their creative talents until long after their departure. "Vincent van Gogh ­ whose notoriously poor self-presentation alienated his contemporaries, instilled negative performance expectations, and helped delay acceptance of his work until well after his death (Wallace, 1969)", (as cited in Kasof, 1995, p.347).

While these measurement issues are not confined to output measures of creativity, the limitation of this approach to our understanding of what makes a creative individual, is compounded by a number of factors: the small number of inventions that fit this consensus measure of creativity, the time lag between the invention and subsequent analysis, the potential for attribution biases, and the fact that many ideas might, due to environmental factors, never make it to fruition. This means this approach is limited

8

in its ability to recognize creative people and understand the creative thinking process itself. Without this understanding of the process it is difficult to determine how to improve and encourage it in individuals. 1.2.3 Creativity ­ A Common Process?

While research based upon output measures has provided a number of important insights, it only analyzes successful ideas and hence may not be a true reflection of an individual's creativity. "In some ways, by only studying implemented ideas, the researcher is sampling on the dependent variable and is overly restricting what constitutes creative ideas." (Schoenfeldt & Jansen, 1997, p.74). One reason the output measure might not be a good measure of an individuals' creative thinking ability is idea expression. Due to social and self confidence issues, there may be a significant difference between the number of creative ideas had by an individual, and the number of ideas expressed by that individual.

A related expression issue is that an idea must be viewed by society as original for it to be creative. If an individual, without assistance, were to develop a time machine one month after someone else had developed a similar machine, that second person would not be viewed as being as creative. An individual might develop ideas that are original at an individual level, but because these ideas are not new (original) to society, they will not be viewed as creative. Indeed our education systems largely encourage the rote memorization of ideas developed by others, rather than individual idea generation and development. For creativity to be encouraged it also requires an acknowledgement of individual-level creative thinking processes.

Moreover, the socially valued, novel product-based measure of creativity encourages memorization and rote learning which may in itself restrict a person's ability to think creatively. For an individual's creativity to be acknowledged by society, that person will have to produce ideas that are seen as entirely new to the field in which they are researching. This would require extensive domain-specific knowledge in an area in order to ensure those ideas were new to society. It would not encourage ideas to be expressed that are new