Introduction
Fiji has remained unique among the islands of the South Pacific in its cultural mixture. In pre-colonial times, it was neither overwhelmingly Polynesian, nor exclusively Melanesian1. With the arrival of Europeans and Chinese from the early 19th century and the indentured Indians from 1879 onwards it became even more diverse. When it became independent in 1970 this cultural diversity was promoted as an asset by its first Prime Minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, who called it `the richness in diversity' of the new nation. He, moreover, tried to use it for building harmonious relations between the various communities, while developing a unique Fiji identity. Unfortunately, most other leaders did not share his vision and still clung to their narrow communal loyalties. Moreover, they also blocked his attempts to bring about gradual integration by openly attacking some of these policies while covertly working against some others. Thus diversity remained a source of conflict. My thesis is that Ratu Mara's efforts at building harmonious relationships between the various ethnic groups and developing a unique national identity failed because the Indian leaders of the opposition became narrow in their outlook and failed to look at issues from a national perspective rather than a communal one. The result was that over the years the predominantly Indian National Federation Party (NFP), which was in opposition throughout the period looked at, degenerated from the `thoughtful' opposition that it was in the 1960s and early 1970s to a `confrontational' one (terms to be defined shortly). Over the years the NFP became a predominantly ethnic party not only in composition but also in its policies. This led to the failure of the Westminster system of government and opposition that Fiji had adopted at independence as the NFP which was initially effective as a `thoughtful' opposition slowly became reduced to a nominal one.

1 Marshall Sahlins (1985) places Fiji in Polynesia but the standard Polynesian/Melanesian distribution is still widely accepted.

Opposition and the Westminster System Scholars list an institutionalized opposition as a feature of the `Westminster model' of government, stressing its existence "as an executive in waiting" (Rhodes and Weller, 2005, p.8, emphasis in original). In this system of government and opposition, `Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition', as it is respectfully referred to, enjoys a pride of place as the `alternative government' or the `government in waiting'. Loyal Opposition is the concept that one can be opposed to the actions of the government or ruling party of the day without being opposed to the constitution or the political system. The Leader of the Opposition is invariably seen as the alternative Prime Minister and heads a rival alternative government known as the shadow cabinet. The opposition is therefore expected to present itself as a viable alternative government by having policies which are different from those of the government. It also has the important job of keeping the government on its toes by carefully studying its actions and attacking them wherever they are not considered to be in the best interests of the country. An effective leader of the opposition is one who would make the government accountable to the parliament and the public. Opposition can be of two kinds ­ `confrontational' or `thoughtful' (Goldsmith, 1993). A `confrontational' opposition opposes all government policies for the sake of opposing whereas a `thoughtful' opposition is "characterised by consensus around the good and criticism of the bad; it justifies support where that is necessary or desirable, opposition where it is not" (Goldsmith, 1993). For the emergence of a `thoughtful' opposition certain conditions are necessary. It could also depend on the strength or weakness of the opposition parties at a given point. It, moreover, depends on the personalities of the leaders. The Fiji example shows that the fear of imminent ethnic conflict and the strong desire by the leaders to avoid it could produce a `thoughtful' opposition. Even under such extreme circumstances where there is the definite possibility of ethnic conflict, the

2

opposition may not change because in the final analysis it depends on the qualities of the leaders and how keen they are on avoiding conflict. While the opposition under A. D. Patel in 1968 became `thoughtful' when ethnic tensions threatened the continuation of peaceful coexistence, Patel's successors went back to the `confrontational' style leading to conflicts. This shows the importance of having leaders of a certain type for the success of democracy, Westminster type or otherwise, in a Pacific country (especially a multiethnic one like Fiji). Scholars who have studied ethnically divided societies such as Arend Lijphart (1977) and Donald Horowitz (1991) have pointed out the importance of sound leadership for having stable democratic government in such countries. C. J. Lynch believes that in the Pacific because of the "lack of political sophistication in the `western' sense" (1982, p.149)2 the Westminster system needs to be adapted emphasising the consensus method of decision making which involves consultation, discussion and compromise. This calls for a `thoughtful' opposition rather than a `confrontational' one. Goldsmith points out that the problem with thoughtful opposition is that it does not fit the reality of the party system in any society (Goldsmith, 1993). It seems to become more akin to consociationalism (see Chapter 2, p.?) than to the Westminster system. In Fiji, when the Westminster system started in 1966, the Opposition under A. D. Patel was adversarial but Patel's confrontation was with the colonial rulers who he thought were leading the Fijian chiefs from the back. He called the Alliance Party the `white colonialist Alliance'. Patel thought the Fijians were just being led by the European vested interests rather than having any strong opinions of their own. This may have been a patronizing view regarding the Fijian people but Patel sincerely believed that the Fijians were being manipulated by the European vested interests. There was some truth behind this belief (see Chapter 1, p.9 ?) though Patel was perhaps mistaken in his understanding of the Fijian people and their
This, however, is a patronizing judgement of politicians in the Pacific but it is relevant because in the island nations, for most of the common people, democracy was a concept that they were not familiar with and (therefore?) not interested in.
2

3

relationship with their chiefs. Patel believed that the Fijian commoners were being exploited by their chiefs and they (the common people) wanted an end to colonialism as well as the rule by the chiefs. This was not so because the Fijian people wanted colonialism and the chiefly rule to continue for fear that otherwise the country might be overrun by the immigrant Indians. Patel's attitude to the Fijian chiefs and the Fijian people as a whole changed after the by-elections of 1968 (more on this in Chapter 1, p.14?). After that the opposition became a `thoughtful' opposition, co-operating with the Fijian chieflyled Alliance government on policies which the NFP considered to be for the benefit of the country. The NFP leaders also started openly showing respect to Fijian culture and traditions. An example was the motion to restore the chiefly island of Bau as a national monument because of its historical significance (see Chapter 1, pp.14-15?). Ratu Mara and Patel, who were at loggerheads during most of their political career seemed to have been very similar in their outlooks and attitudes. They both were against colonialism and exploitation, especially by the European vested interests. The main difference was that Ratu Mara, like most Fijians, remained a loyal subject of the British crown, making a distinction between the British monarchy and white colonialism while Patel could not see any such difference. The reason for this difference in their perception of colonialism and the British crown was that Patel was born and brought up in India during the freedom struggle under Mahatma Gandhi whereas Ratu Mara was born in a chiefly family in Fiji which was ceded to Queen Victoria by the Fijian chiefs with a promise to look after Fijian interests. The British did safeguard Fijian interests to some extent (see Chapter 1, p.15?) so their loyalty to the crown was not completely misplaced. Sometimes the aim of the government and the opposition may be the same but the difference may be in the methods they have for achieving it. This was the position of Fiji in the 1960s. The government and the opposition wanted to integrate the

4

people of different communities as citizens of the nation with a common loyalty. Patel believed this could be done only through a common roll electoral system, but the Fijian leaders and some Indian leaders (for example, those who belonged to the Indian Alliance) disagreed. They believed integration could be brought about through education, by everyone attending the same schools and learning each other's language. They also believed in a gradual change in the electoral system by introducing limited common roll through the `cross-voting' system (see Chapter 2, pp.6-7 ?) and then extending it further if it were found to work in the best interests of the country. Koya and the Fijians After Patel's death in 1969 Siddiq Koya, who became the Leader of the Opposition, seemed to have continued as a `thoughtful' leader as he was willing to bend over backwards to accommodate Fijian demands. This was something that everyone found difficult to understand as he had been most aggressive until then and was not particularly sensitive to Fijian feelings. Fijian leaders did not consider him a friend of the Fijians until then. In fact, he was considered anti- Fijian. Two Fijian members in the Legislative Council, Semesa Sikivou and Joshua Rabukawaqa, both found Koya's attitude to the Fijians arrogant and impudent. They also found him insincere. While pretending to champion the common Fijian people (who he thought were not well represented by the Fijian leaders, who were mainly the chiefs) Koya talked against them to his Indian followers. Rabukawaqa claimed that he (Koya) told the Indian cane farmers not to engage Fijians on their farms because they might learn cane farming and displace the Indians. Rabukawaqa warned: "... this is the type of representative we should watch out for" (LC Debates, 24 May 1966, p.92). Both Sikivou and Rabukawaqa also noted that the majority of the Indian people did not have a similar attitude to that of Koya towards the Fijians. Many of them

5

were tolerant and supported the Fijian belief that change should come gradually but Koya interjected that they were behind the time. Rabukawaqa believed that Koya was trying to put a wedge between the Fijian chiefs and the common people while Sikivou remarked that their watch word should be "evolution rather than revolution". The Fijian leaders also believed that the change must come from within themselves and they did not want it thrust down their throats by someone they knew who had "no interest whatsoever in the welfare of our race" (LC Debates, 25 May, 1966, p.108). At the time of independence though Koya seemed to have been leading a `thoughtful' opposition, as Patel had done in his last year or so, there was a major difference between the two leaders. Patel looked at each issue carefully and then decided whether to support the government or attack it. Koya in his early years (up to the 1972 general elections) showed restraint and did not attack any government policies in Parliament though later he attacked the same policies outside mainly at election times. In doing that he did not consider what was best for the country as a whole in the long run as his only concern seemed to have been what would bring him more Indian votes. The best examples were his education policies (see Chapter 3). Thus the Opposition started becoming less and less thoughtful from 1972 onwards until by 1977 it became completely confrontational (see Chapters 3 and 5). Though later in 1977 Koya was replaced by Jai Ram Reddy as the Leader of the Opposition, the NFP continued to be confrontational, while concentrating only on issues that affected the Indian population (see Chapter 6). In doing that Reddy also overlooked the importance of maintaining the ethnic balance until the country became integrated. Fiji's "relative ethnic peace" after independence was attributed to the maintenance of the balance between its major ethnic communities (see also Chapter 2). In order to maintain the balance and the resultant ethnic peace "Indians and

6

Europeans [were] expected to restrain their use of economic power to seize political control" (Premdas, 1986, p.134). When the difference between the two major parties became reduced to ethnicity rather than political ideology there was the threat of the loss of the ethnic balance that had prevailed for a decade after independence. This also affected the effective functioning of the Westminster system as the Opposition National Federation Party slowly turned into an ethnic Indian party not only in composition but also in policies. This finally led to the failure of the Westminster model of government in Fiji because the ethnic balance that held the nation together was lost. The 1997 Constitution and the Opposition To support this hypothesis I look at the period from 1966, when the Westminster system (of government and opposition) was first introduced, to 1987 when the democratically elected government of Doctor Timoci Bavadra was overthrown in a military coup a month after it was elected to rule the country. This also marked the temporary end of democracy in Fiji with the country not having an elected government for the next five years. From 1987 to 1992 there was only an interim government appointed by the President while a new constitution was being prepared to replace the 1970 constitution which was abrogated in 1987. Democracy was partially restored in 1992 with an elected government under a new constitution. The 1990 constitution, however, was openly racist, blatantly discriminating against one half of the country's population. Bowing to international pressures the Fiji government agreed to revise the 1990 constitution and the 1997 constitution was the result. Democracy was fully restored in the country after the 1999 general elections which saw the emergence of the People's Coalition government under an ethnic Indian, Mahendra Chaudhry. However, the new constitution introduced the multiparty system of government which made the role of the opposition negligible. This was later identified as one of the main weaknesses of the new constitution.

7

This problem with the opposition became apparent soon after the 1999 general elections when the question of appointing members to the Senate arose. The Fiji Senate is a wholly nominated body, with senators being chosen by the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and the Great Council of Chiefs who submit their lists of nominees to the President who then makes the appointments. The Fijian Association Party, led by Adi Kuini Speed, had joined the multiparty government. When Chaudhry was working on his list of nominees for the Senate, Adi Kuini gave him a few names for inclusion. Chaudhry did not include any of those recommended by Adi Kuini. It was explained that though Adi Kuini was in the cabinet, her nominees to the Senate would come from the Leader of the Opposition's quota. When the Leader of the Opposition, Ratu Inoke Kubuabola, gave his list of nominations to the Senate, the President did not appoint all of them as he included some from Adi Kuini's list. Incensed, Ratu Inoke threatened to take the President to court. The President also sought legal opinion to clear the issue. It turned out that the President's action was constitutionally correct. Though Adi Kuini would be in the multiparty cabinet, her appointees to the senate would be part of the opposition senators. There seems to have been a deliberate attempt to weaken the concept of opposition in the 1997 constitution. A constitutionally enforced multiparty government later proved unworkable, as Laisenia Qarase had been claiming from the time he was elected to lead the country in 2001. Even Chaudhry seemed to concede its impracticality when after demanding to be part of the government for three years (after the 2001 general elections) he finally agreed to be the Leader of the Opposition3.

Now after the latest elections (May 2006) Prime Minister Qarase has invited Chaudhry to form a multiparty government which Chaudhry has accepted. Its success will depend on the willingness of the leaders to compromise. The Fiji Times has warned in an editorial: "Mahendra Chaudhry will certainly not play second fiddle to anyone and Mr. Qarase will not take lightly any attempts to sabotage his authority" (21 May, 2006). It is for Chaudhry and Qarase to prove that they can rise above their narrow personal preferences for the good of the nation.

3

8

Sir Vijay Singh, a former Speaker and cabinet minister in the Alliance government in the 1970s, however, pointed out that this multiparty government was not the recommendation of the Reeves Commission which was responsible for the 1997 constitution. Reeves had rejected the proposal for an enforced union of the main political parties into a government. Singh blamed "the political leaders and their loyal supporters of 1997" who "rejected Reeves' realistic and principled advice and unanimously introduced the provision that has bedeviled us since" (Fiji Times, 19 January, 2005). Singh seemed to be referring to Sitiveni Rabuka and Jai Ram Reddy (and their supporters) who were the leaders in 1997. A scholar has noted that "the provision for a multi-party government was adopted in a context of extraordinary personal co-operation between former coup leader Rabuka and the leader of the Indiandominated National Federation Party, Jai Ram Reddy" (Palmer, 2005, p.212). The multiparty system could work well if there are no policy differences between the major parties. The Rabuka-led SVT and the NFP in the 1990s were ethnic parties fighting for the rights of the communities they represented. So the multiparty government could have worked as it would have been similar to a consociational government (see Chapter 2) which Lijphart (1977) recommends for multiethnic countries. The architects of the 1997 constitution were advised to give priority to improving race relations. Perhaps it was believed that the idea of opposition was not compatible with the aim of avoiding conflict. So the constitution had to be subordinated to that end (of improving race relations) as the possibility of order in Fiji was thought to depend on harmonious relations between indigenous Fijians and Indo-Fijians (Larmour, 2001, p.8). That could have been the reason for trying to deliberately weaken the opposition. So from 1987 to the present there has been no effective opposition in Fiji because the constitutional provision for a multiparty cabinet weakened "the likelihood of a strong opposition that could form a credible alternative government"(Palmer, 2005, p.214). This study, therefore, concentrates

9

on the period from 1966 to 1987 (though it refers to the period from 1987 to the present wherever it is relevant) when the opposition was an important part of government and looks at the slow change that came over the NFP turning it from a `thoughtful' opposition to a `confrontational' one. Westminster in the Pacific According to Peter Larmour, a distinguishing feature of the Westminster system is the selection of ministers from the legislature (2001, p.2). While Fiji did not have any difficulty in adhering to this principle, it had some of the other problems listed by Larmour. These included the fact that: (1) the rule of law is often challenged by the claims of custom, or personal and clan ties because the separation of powers is often difficult; (2) property rights are often unprotected against the claims of traditional owners; and (3) some human rights do not have much popular support. These problems highlight the difficulty of having any kind of democratic government in the South Pacific, let alone the Westminster model. Lynch argues that the Westminster system can be made to work in the Pacific by adapting it and developing government systems that are based on local practices and traditions (Lynch, 1982, p.149). This seems to have happened in Fiji as the Native Administration4 developed by the colonial government continues today as the Fijian Administration under the Fijian Affairs Act. The Fijian Administration, which includes the Great Council of Chiefs (GCC) and provincial councils, wields significant political power. "Its continuing influence represents a blending of Western democratic principles with `traditional' authority structures" (Palmer, 2005, p.207).

4 During the colonial period there was `indirect rule' for the indigenous Fijians as they continued to live in the villages under their chiefs.

10

One problem Lynch anticipates arising out of the conflict between traditions and the Westminster system is the role of the Speaker who might have to deal with a minister of a higher traditional standing. Tomasi Vakatora who was the Speaker of Fiji in the 1980s illustrates this problem from his own experience. He describes how the House was debating a motion one morning and because the debate was so "intense" he had ruled that some matters raised should not be brought up again. Prime Minister Ratu Mara who came in the afternoon and did not know about the ruling wanted to go back to the earlier debate but the Speaker stopped him. "I had to summon a lot of courage to do that. He was my party leader, and he was my Chief", Vakatora confessed (Vakatora, 1997, p.7). The Westminster system could work in Fiji for seventeen years because in this and other cases Ratu Mara accepted the ruling and therefore the traditions of the Westminster system. This, however, was not the case with the Leader of the Opposition, Jai Ram Reddy, who refused to accept Vakatora's ruling5 by walking out and boycotting parliament and eventually resigning. This again shows the importance of leadership and how the system can only work if leaders accept the rules and play by them. One scholar, Yash Ghai, has emphasized "the desirability of an effective leader of the opposition to meet the objective of honest government accountable to the parliament and the public" (Palmer, 2005, p.211).Unfortunately Fiji lacked such a leader after Patel's death in 1969. A major change Lynch recommends while accepting the general principles of the Westminster system is to be centred on the notion of consensus which involves an active avoidance of polarization. This could be done by reaching a generally agreed solution through consultation, discussion and compromise. This technique (which Lynch describes as part of the `Pacific Way'6) is markedly different from
This was on 15 December, 1983 when Reddy refused to stand while objecting to a ruling made by Vakatora and an angry clash followed (see V Lal, 1990, p.165). 6 The Pacific Way is an ideology Ratu Mara introduced in the early 1970s to promote regional solidarity. Ron Crocombe who seemed to have helped Mara define this ideology has himself admitted that it was an ideal and not a reality, giving the example of the `hard work' that Mara stressed as part of the Pacific Way (Crocombe, 1976 p.24).
5

11

the `confrontational' technique that is common to the Westminster system and resembles the consociational system, as mentioned earlier. While Lynch believes that the opposition is not essential in the Pacific situation, Michael Goldsmith, who draws the distinction between the two kinds of opposition, seems to think that the distinction is important. The system of government and opposition may work in a small Pacific country if the opposition is `thoughtful'. The `thoughtful' opposition looks at every issue from the point of view of how it would benefit the people and the country. If it feels it is for the good of the country, it supports the government, and opposes only those policies which it does not regard as in the best interests of the nation. Its prime consideration in making its decisions would be what it sees as good for the country. (It is an ideal type but the Fiji opposition under Patel seems to have come close to the ideal.) `Confrontational' opposition, on the other hand, opposes all government policies for the sake of opposing. Its principle is `we oppose what you propose'. Having a `thoughtful' opposition seems to be all the more important in a multiethnic country like Fiji where there is the tendency to look at every issue from an ethnic perspective, leading to ethnic polarisation. This is where Stephanie Lawson's interpretation of democracy becomes problematic, especially if political parties are mainly ethnic based. Lawson asserts that foremost among the widely accepted principles and practices of democracy is the idea that any political opposition may, through the constitutional process adopted by the state, succeed legitimately to government (1991, p.vi). While she is right in stressing the importance of the opposition in a democracy, her conclusion that there was no democracy in Fiji from 1970 to 1987 because there was no alternation of government seems far fetched7.
In India, for example, there was no change of government for over two decades after independence. The Congress Party under Nehru was in power for 17 years from the time of independence in 1947 until Nehru's death in 1964. Even after that the Congress continued to be in power. Moreover, a little over a year after Nehru's death, his daughter Indira Gandhi became the Prime Minister.
7

12

Palmer who also sees the 1987 (and 2000) coups as "a rejection of the idea of a loyal opposition" (2005, p.208), however, fails to note the reason for this rejection which was the degeneration of the NFP into an ethnic party. Under such circumstances, as Palmer herself noted, "victory by one political party is perceived as the victory of one ethnic group over another" (2005, p.216). According to Lawson and Michael Howard (1991), the eastern chiefs who were in power after independence (meaning Ratu Mara and Ratu Penaia Ganilau) wanted to stay on, establishing themselves as an `oligarchy' which these scholars see as the reason for not having a change of government from 1970 to 1987. But K.C. Ramrakha, who used to be the opposition whip in Fiji until 1977 has a different view of the chiefs. In 1987 he talked of "the Chiefs who have yielded so much power, and had made Fiji what it is today" (Fiji Sun, 13 April, 1987, quoted in V.Lal, 1990, p.186). Though this was written before the military coups of 1987 there seems to be some truth in the statement. Ratu Sukuna who was the leading chief until the 1950s "resisted the extension of voting to indigenous Fijians" (Palmer, 2005, p.208). Ratu Mara, who was the most nationally important among the four paramount chiefs (`The Big Four' as they were popularly known) who succeeded Ratu Sukuna, was prepared to extend the franchise to all ethnic Fijians and finally they were given the right to vote for the first time in 1963. This showed that Ratu Mara and his fellow chiefs were prepared to share power not only with the immigrant Indians but also with the Fijian commoners rather than just preserving the rights of the chiefs. But they wanted a gradual change as more and more Fijians received higher education and accepted democracy as the best form of government. Paradoxically, at the time of independence in 1970, the Fijian commoners did not seem to have wanted democracy with equal rights as they wanted the country to be given back to the chiefs who had ceded it to Queen Victoria in 1874 (see Chapter 1, pp.16-17 ?).

13

The main reason for not having a change of government from 1970 to 1987 was that the opposition NFP failed to get enough votes (especially non-Indian votes) to get elected. This was because the opposition did not provide the electorate with choices and alternatives except the choice of which ethnic group should dominate in government. Lawson admits that democracy can be legitimately adapted to suit particular circumstances but insists that "there are limits to its elasticity" (1996, p.30). The fact in Fiji was that the NFP opposition in the 1980s did not promote views contrary to the philosophies, policies and actions of the government of the day which, according to Lawson, is what an opposition is expected to do (1991, p.16) as it became reduced to an ethnic party, concentrating only on issues that were of concern to the Indian community. In the 1960s though the two major political parties in Fiji, the Alliance and the NFP, were predominantly ethnic based, they had policies which were broad based with general relevance to the country rather than meant for any particular section. These policies were for improving the social and economic welfare of the nation as a whole and not meant to benefit only one particular community. The NFP supported the workers and their fight for justice while the Alliance believed in a slow change without suddenly upsetting the privileges of the vested interests. A leading scholar on Fiji politics and history, Brij Lal, has noted how the NFP became reduced to a shadow of the Alliance from the late 1970s and how ideologically the Alliance government no longer had any opposition (Lal, 1986, pp.94-95). From 1972 onwards the NFP opposition started concentrating only on issues that were of interest to the Indian community. Education and sugar (and everything associated with the sugar industry such as land, marketing of sugar etc.) became the two areas that the NFP concentrated on and they looked at these only from the point of view of how the policies would benefit the Indians and not what was best for the country (see Chapters 3 and 5). So the NFP could not compete for office presenting itself as an alternative government because it had become reduced to an ethnic party.

14

In doing that, the party changed from a `thoughtful' opposition to a `confrontational' one. Unlike Patel who changed from a `confrontational' leader to a `thoughtful' one, his successors, Koya and Reddy, initially gave the impression that they were `thoughtful' leaders but later proved to be `confrontational' (see Chapters 5 and 6). This is where leadership played an important role in the failure of the Westminster system in Fiji. I. F. Helu (1994) is one Pacific scholar who sees leadership as very important if democracy is to succeed in the island nations. He suggests that leaders of the Pacific should follow Socrates, who believed the main aim of leaders should be community service, rather than going for personal power as the Sophists did. Helu believes that this could perhaps be achieved by making people who become national leaders give up some of their traditional privileges. Being a `thoughtful' opposition also calls for following the Socratic tradition because the welfare of the nation would be the main priority of such an opposition. This thesis argues that the change of the Fiji opposition from a `thoughtful' one at the time of independence to a `confrontational' one after independence adversely affected the efforts of the government to develop a unique Fiji identity with a common loyalty to the country. The failure of the opposition leadership to support government efforts in this crucial matter resulted in the country not becoming integrated. Fiji therefore failed to become a nation because it lacked the important prerequisites for achieving this ­ a "shared national identity" (Palmer, 2005, p.223) and a common loyalty. Therefore it continued to be a plural society, and `multiracial' harmony remained an elusive dream.

15

CHAPTER 1 Fiji: the Historical Background Most scholars agree that the first settlers to the islands of Fiji arrived more than 3000 years ago from South East Asia through Vanuatu. These pioneers were Austronesian people who also brought with them some physical and cultural features of the "pre-Austronesian peoples of western Melanesia with whom Austronesian populations had long been in contact" (Norton, 1990, p.18). Successive waves of migrants followed these original settlers, and the people who reached Fiji about 2500 years ago, that is, about a thousand years after it was first inhabited, ventured past these islands and went furthe