ARE YOU LISTENING? THE `VOICE' OF WAITAHA: A FORGOTTEN PEOPLE WHAKARONGO MAI KOUTOU? KO TE `REO' O WAITAHA: HE IWI WHAKAREREA

A Thesis Submitted in partial fulfilment Of the requirements for the Degree Of Master of Arts At the University of Waikato By Alistair Reese

2006

Dedication He hnore, he korria ki te Atua, He maungrongo ki te whenua He whakaaro pai ki ng tngata katoa. He pou tu He awatea te ra He mutunga pukana I te Awatea E Whiti ana!

In the first instance, it is necessary to acknowledge the people of Waitaha and the suffering that they have incurred, in part because of the presence of my people in this land. Ng mihi nui ki a koutou. He ngkau pouri mo ng ahuatanga o te taenga mai o taku iwi ki t koutou rohe, a, mo ng mahi tkino o ng tau i muri. Noo koutou te mana I am deeply indebted to the people of Waitaha/Manoeka who gave me their time and their encouragement. N reira, kei te tino manawareka te ngakau ki a koutou.

ii

Abstract This thesis is a study of Waitaha, a Bay of Plenty iwi that has been marginalized through the loss of most of its land, much of its language, tikanga, and mana. The purpose of the work is to communicate, through the `voice' and the history of the people, a chronicle, of their alienation to a Pkeh audience that remains in large part ignorant and distant from their plight. The thesis is motivated by an academic responsibility to the Treaty of Waitangi and the lack of understanding to the present needs of Mori as evidenced for example, by the support for the January 2004 Orewa speech, by the leader of the National Party, Don Brash. It is predicated upon the understanding that this response, which minimalises the impact of colonization upon Mori, is constructed by many, through a convenience of distance. It is motivated also on the understanding that most Pkeh who now inhabit the rohe of Waitaha, are completely ignorant of the identity of tangata whenua. It is hoped that the presentation of the Waitaha story, will provoke a greater empathy from Pkeh, and thereby facilitate an environment, whereby grievances can be addressed in an environment of greater understanding. The thesis is a qualitative based research exercise, carried out in consultation with kaumtua and other Waitaha members, and attempts to acknowledge and integrate current kaupapa Mori epistemologies with traditional Western academic methodology. The study uses interviews, Waitangi Tribunal evidence, and other historical references to construct a narrative that conveys something of the `voice' of Waitaha. Specifically, it outlines a chronology of Waitaha settlement, followed by a description of their encounter with Pkeh, the consequent alienation of the majority of their lands by the Crown, and concludes, with a glimpse into the current circumstance of Manoeka, the papakainga of Waitaha.

iii

CONTENTS

Dedication Abstract Contents Abbreviations Chapter One: Introduction Chapter Two: Acknowledgements and Process Chapter Three: Method and Methodology Chapter Four: Pkeh Position Chapter Five: Te Takap o Waitaha a Hei Chapter Six: Waitaha's Land Interests Prior to 1840 Chapter Seven: Sir George Grey, Kingitanga and Mana Motuhake Chapter Eight: Hakaraia and `Mana Motuhake' Chapter Nine: Raupatu/Confiscation ­ Consequences of `Rebellion' Chapter Ten: Crown Legislation ­ Land Alienation by Stealth

ii iii iv vi 1 5 10 26 31 48 54 59 64 73

iv

Chapter Eleven: `Te Kai mo Waikato' - Alienation of the Te Puke Block Chapter Twelve: The Alienation Continues Chapter Thirteen: The `Return' of the Tauranga Land Chapter Fourteen: Crown Response to Sales Chapter Fifteen: Waitaha in the Twentieth Century Chapter Sixteen: Te Puke Township and District Chapter Seventeen: Appeal and `Disillusionment' Chapter Eighteen: Why so much land? Chapter Nineteen: Waitaha Today Chapter Twenty: Conclusion Bibliography: Appendices:

80 89 99 104 107 111 116 123 127 141 143 150

v

Abbreviations AJHR DB KRDB MLC MMB NA Appendices to the Journals of the House of Representatives Document Bank Kathryn Rose Document Bank Mori Land Court Maketu Minute Book National Archives

NZPD New Zealand Parliamentary Debates RDB RMB TMB Raupatu Document Bank Rotorua Minute Book Tauranga Minute Book

vi

Chapter One: Introduction The genesis of this study, began nearly thirty years ago at Parihaka Pa in the rohe of Taranaki. I had just returned from an extended journey overseas, and friends had taken me from my temporary home in Auckland to visit the home of Te Whiti o Rongmai and Tohu Kaakahi. On arrival, our group of disparate pkeh were greeted by several kuia, known affectionately as the "aunties". Here I was, a twentysomething year old, who had never been to a marae before, and didn't even know how to hongi properly. Imagine the looks as I sought to `rub' noses! However that Parihaka visit could be described as numinous or even something approaching an epiphany. The visit was an entrance into a world that I didn't even know existed ­ the aroha extended by these `aunties', on what was, at the time a semi ­abandoned marae, confronted my mono-cultural worldview and removed a veil that had created a myopic dissonance with regard to the realities of this land. The journey of discovery has continued since, a journey that has not been characterized by a straight line but with the various vicissitudes of life more like a mountain trail with its many ups and downs. However, one thing has become apparent, like most epiphanies, mine has not met with universal understanding amongst my family and peers. Like Archimedes, I had wanted to shout `Eureka' to my various friends with regard to the wonder of te ao Mori, but was greeted by various reactions, on a continuum which ranged from hostility, ambivalence, and some, who expressed an enthusiasm to share the experience. What became clear however, was that my dislocation from the Mori world, and consequently with a significant portion of the New Zealand landscape was not unique ­ many of my acquaintances shared a similar background. Exposure to things Mori were often restricted to stories of the Mori Battalion efforts in WW II, the haka before the All Black test, visits to Whakarewarewa and the obligatory singing with muffled words of Po Kare Ana, when asked overseas to sing a New Zealand song. This separation between the two worlds , was less of an issue to many non- Mori prior to the 70s, when the perception of race relations in New Zealand were assumed to be fine, and in fact upheld as a model to the world at large. However in the 70s, a paradigm shift occurred, with what has been termed by some as a cultural renaissance

1

among Mori with the rise of groups such as Ng Tama Toa and others. The Land March of 1975, signalled a new development on the political landscape, a development that left many Pkeh New Zealanders bewildered and pondering what had happened to their `quarter acre section ­ pavlova paradise?' The 80s brought the Springbok tour, Bastion Point, and significant legislation regarding the Treaty of Waitangi. The bewilderment of many Pkeh increased with the publication of some of the some of the findings of the Waitangi Tribunal and turned to exasperation with the resultant settlements for Tainui and Ngai Kahu. The National Party, under the leadership of Sir Douglas Graham, responded to the outcry of their constituents with the `fiscal envelope,' which met with a strong rebuttal from various hui through the motu.1 Perhaps however, the mainstream frustration found its voice epitomized in the Orewa speech, by the leader of the National Party, Don Brash. This speech ironically entitled `Nationhood', will be covered later in the paper. My perception is therefore, that despite the gains made for Mori as a result of the Treaty settlements, and consequently for the country as a whole, large sections of the Pkeh community have not embraced the process, and remain either ambivalent or actively hostile. Not only this, but the gap between the two worlds in many instances is increasing and remains at odds with the intentions of the Treaty of Waitangi, an essential document in the process towards a nationhood of political integrity. This dysfunctional relationship is problematic for many reasons, and not the least being because the Treaty of Waitangi envisaged the cooperation between two entities, the Crown and Mori. Within the commitment of the Crown, lies a responsibility to safeguard the positions of tangata whenua, and those who have subsequently settled in Aotearoa/New Zealand. The Crown therefore through the Treaty vicariously represents, not only the interests of Mori, but also Pkeh, who by this means can be seen as co-signatories. There needs, therefore to be a commitment of the three parties (Crown, Mori and tauiwi) to communicate and negotiate within the spirit and ethos of the Treaty. This will not be done satisfactorily in the present situation characterised by separation and suspicion.

1

For example, nearly a thousand Maori from all over the country gathered at Ngti Tuwharetoa, Hirangi Marae, near Turangi on 29 January 1995 under the leadership of Sir Hepi Te Heu Heu to discuss the `fiscal envelope'.

2

There are signs, that this separation is not irreconcilable however. Two disparate voices in recent times have pointed to the embracing by Pkeh of the All Black haka as an identification of significance. Both Colin James, the New Zealand political commentator in his weekly New Zealand Herald column, and Hone Harawira, Mori Party Member of Parliament, in his maiden parliamentary speech have identified the haka as an example of shared identity.2 Harawira went further, and suggested that the Treaty could be embraced in a similar way. Some would suggest that he is drawing a long bow, but surely it is a question of vision ­ the ability to see a particular landscape not as it is but as it could be. We could also add to the example of the haka, the shared outpouring of grief and respect seen recently at Turangawaewae Marae at the tangihanga of Te Arikinui Dame Te Ata i Rangi Kaahu. This event like few others of recent times, demonstrated a sense of kotahitanga that would not have been imagined in years previous. These, however are almost `aberrations' in the context of cross cultural identification by Pkeh, especially if the corporate voice expressed in 2004 at Orewa is a true gauge. This perspective, that wants to minimize the influence of the Treaty, is possibly one that is formed not from an entrenched racial bias, although this tendency is probably innate to all, rather it is possibly more formed through an ignorance that comes from distance. The rugby haka, as a symbol of national unity, is performed in the midst of an activity that unites the two cultures like no other event. Through usage by both cultures, against the backdrop of success by the All Blacks, it is something that has become a part of the New Zealand psyche ­ evidenced especially by those on their OE or sports representatives, who resort to either Te Rauparaha's Ka mate or Po Kare Ana as demonstrations of their identity. There is nothing wrong with this, because these are expressions of the land that are unique to Aotearoa/ New Zealand and are infinitely more powerful as anthems than Waltzing Matilda, especially because of their indigeneity. However, the only thing that does gall is the fact that the performance of these iconic symbols doesn't necessarily translate into identification with their indigenous source upon return home. There is no reason why identification with the Treaty, and all that that means cannot in time evoke similar feelings of
2

November 2005.

3

passion and pride as the haka. The key is surely a willingness to reach beyond the safety of ones own cultural boundary and participate in the language and the ethos of the other. Mori have certainly done this, not always on a voluntary basis, but they are certainly better equipped at this stage than the majority of Pkeh to process the complexities of a Treaty based nationhood. Who knows, the recent references to Te Rauparaha's haka, which speaks of death and rebirth may be prophetic statements about the Treaty itself. They may also provide for some Pkeh an insight or vision, that identification with tangata whenua is not something to be feared but a gift to be treasured. It is this vision of `identification with tangata whenua' that has motivated the present research. Are You Listening? is an effort to communicate primarily to Pkeh, through the microcosm of a Bay of Plenty iwi, Waitaha, a story that hopefully will provoke a response of empathy. It can be seen as both a challenge and a cry ­ a challenge to listen, and a cry to understand something of their story told through their history and their `voice'. Hopefully, from the microcosm of Waitaha, it is imagined that that `those who have ears to hear' will be able to extrapolate beyond, to understand some of the aspirations of other Mori, who seek not only redress for the past but who grapple to define a future based upon a dignity of restored identity as tangata whenua ­ first people of the land. These aspirations require not only a renaissance of Mori vision but an affirmation and cooperation of all peoples. It is this affirmation that would possibly go someway to bringing healing and reconciliation to a country that is still displaying the wounds of past and present division.

4

Chapter Two: Acknowledgments and Process At this stage, it is important to describe the development of this research project. The description of this process, may appear at first somewhat drawn out, but hopefully the significance of its inclusion in the study may become obvious. My previous academic study, included an undergraduate degree in New Zealand Studies undertaken at Waikato University, this included Mori as the support subject, and also involved an immersion component in te reo Mori as a component of Te Tohu Paetahi. Other subjects included studies in the Treaty of Waitangi and tikanga Mori. It was at this time I was immersed for the first time in a milieu that was predominantly Mori, in which perspectives on Aotearoa/New Zealand and the world in general were expressed from a `Mori view'. At this time, it was reinforced to me again, the difference in the two perceptions. Included in this degree was a history research paper entitled `Tauranga and the Mount ­ "Where Sunshine Spends the Winter"'. It dealt with amongst other things, the public relations `creation' that is present day Tauranga and the limited input that tangata whenua have had in creating that modern persona. Following that, I completed an honours degree in history, which included a research dissertation entitled `Te Papa ­ CMS's Naboth's Vineyard'. The thesis of that paper argued that the land acquisition by the Anglican Church Missionary Society, in Tauranga and the consequent gifting of the land by that mission to the Crown, not only betrayed the trust of tangata whenua of Tauranga Moana, but it also betrayed the humanitarian ideals of the mission agency itself. This research was primarily dealing with a Pkeh story as the word limitations and other restraints concerning kaupapa Mori research restricted my ability to present a more in depth perspective that included the Mori voice. The above research experiences led me to the desire, to present something of the Mori voice. The desire was not so much, to facilitate Mori speaking to Mori, but

5

Mori speaking to Pkeh ­ as the role of an interlocutor.3 In the initial stages the idea formed to present the voice of different Mori through the country, but this evolved to consider the kainga of Manoeka, a small rural community on the outskirts of the prosperous Bay of Plenty town of Te Puke in the rohe of Waitaha.4 My present residence is in Paengaroa about eight kilometres from Te Puke, a place I have lived for about twenty-five years. Manoeka was a place that I had visited on several occasions and I had formed relationships with several of its inhabitants from various interactions over the years. One of these was a kuia, Heeni Potene - we had studied together in Te Tohu Paetahi programme at the Tauranga Campus of the University of Waikato. Heeni was the first person I shared the idea of my research with. Born in nearby Te Paamu of Tapuika descent, she had married into Waitaha, and has lived in Manoeka all her married life. Heeni's first response was a measured affirmation to my proposal, and she offered sufficient encouragement for me to continue. As the project has unfolded Heeni has remained steadfastly supportive and has reminded me of the `appropriate' kawa and directed me to the `appropriate' people. He mihi nui ki a koe e Heeni! The next step was to find an academic institution that would support the kaupapa of my research. Initial discussions with the history department at Waikato University, resulted in my being sent to Te Pua Wnanga ki Te Ao ­ The School of Mori and Pacific Development. There, a serendipitous encounter with retiring Senior Lecturer Dr. Ngaere Roberts paved the way for further progress to be made. After hearing of my desire to communicate something of the story of Waitaha to Pkeh, Ngaere gave immediate encouragement but warned of the complexities, both political and cultural of a Pkeh doing what would be considered `research on Mori'. This issue will be expanded further in a section dealing with method and methodology. Suffice to say at this juncture however, that since the time of Elsdon Best in the early 20th century and the late Michael King in the late 20th century, research by Pkeh has become

3

Definition: In politics, an interlocutor describes someone who informally explains the views of a government and also can relay messages back to a government. Unlike a spokesperson, an interlocutor often has no formal position within a government or any formal authority to speak on its behalf, and even when they do, everything an interlocutor says is his own personal opinion and not the official view of anyone. Because an interlocutor does not express an official view, communications between interlocutors are often useful at conveying information and ideas. Often interlocutors will talk with each other before formal negotiations. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interlocutor, 11am; 11 July, 2006. 4 See Appendix: Maps and Photograph.

6

problematic for many Mori for reasons that will be addressed later. However, Ngaere whose initial enthusiasm for the project was crucial, gave me amongst other pieces of invaluable advice a gift, she said at the conclusion of that session, `I even have a title for your thesis, you should call it, "Are You Listening?"' For reasons that will soon become obvious, that title has remained. N reira, he aroha nui ki a koe, e Ngaere. Ngaere also advised me, to return to Manoeka to obtain a fuller mandate from the people. Heeni Potene, was again my first point of reference, after several days she invited me to her home in Manoeka and after a cup of tea said, "We need to go for a walk." We then proceeded down the footpath-less road that divided the houses of Manoeka and visited three kaumatua resident in the village. The first being Macky Watson, the second, Te Ngti Tamihana, and finally Te Moni Te Moni - a long time resident of Manoeka, who eventually became one of my interviewees. The kaupapa of the research was explained to each of these men; each graciously listened and gave what could be described as a permission to proceed. `Yeah, that sounds like a good idea' would possibly best describe the response. Unfortunately, a few weeks later, one of these initial contacts died, Te Ngti Tamihana. N reira, he mihi nui ki a koutou. tira, takoto mai, ko Te Ngti i te taha i o mtua tpuna. I also sought the advice of Whareotiri Rahiri, one of the Waitaha committee members, who together with several other kaumtua, are responsible for formulating the claims before the Waitangi Tribunal. Whareotiri, a kaiako of Te Tohu Matauranga Mori at Te Wnanga o Aotearoa, ki Tauranga , was equally gracious and supportive of my project and has continued to provide information and encouragement throughout. Whare gave me much of the tribal evidence presented to the Waitangi Tribunal thus his contribution, has been indispensable. I am indebted to both my kaiako at the Wnanga, who nurture this place of learning with patience and wisdom, and who seemingly never tire of my relentless questions. Ki a koe Whare, krua ko Pita Borell, he mihi nui.

With these affirmations I returned to Te Pua Wnanga ki te Ao and Tom Roa, to whom I was introduced by Sandy Morrison and Ngaere Roberts. Tom, kindly accepted to become my supervisor and his availability, support, and wisdom have 7

been invaluable to the project. He has certainly been an inspired choice and without whom this thesis would not have even begun. He aroha nui ki a koe e Tame.

`Are You Listening? ­ Final Affirmation'! Sketch by Ruth Mayne.

The final affirmation for the project came in a surprising, but quite significant way. A friend of mine, Ruth Mayne, lives not far from Manoeka. In her role as the art teacher at Te Puke Intermediate School she is able to encourage many of the young Mori pupils from within the school. Ruth exhorts them to be strong in their own identity and to develop their own art skills, within a kaupapa Mori framework. Because of her interest in Manoeka and particularly the young people, I shared with her something of my desire to tell their story, significantly I neglected to tell her the projected title of the project. Ruth then related to me a recent experience she had had at the AGM of the local church she attends in Te Puke. During a certain point in the meeting, her attention was caught by the address of a particular kuia, who stood and began to tell the people of the conditions of her people in Manoeka, after describing the needy situation in the village she said, `Please, I am asking you for some bread for my people...' Struck by the poignancy of the cry and the dignity of the address by the kuia, Ruth quickly began to sketch the woman. At the end of the meeting she went to 8

the kuia whom she knew slightly and showed her the black and white sketch. It showed a Mori lady, with a design pouring out of one of her eyes....Ruth said to the lady, `I don't quite understand everything about this drawing, but I feel it is you and the design represents the cry of your heart for your people. However I don't quite understand why the design is only proceeding from one eye'. The kuia looked at her and said, `Did you not know that I am partially blind? I only have sight in one eye'. However, the significance of the incident to this project really hit home when Ruth explained to me, that after she recovered from the amazement of that `coincidence' she said to the Manoeka kuia, `I really felt what you were saying, and I have called this drawing which has sought to encapsulate your cry, "Are You Listening?"; the exact words suggested to me by Ngaere Roberts in my first meeting with her! Ki a koe e Ruth, he arohanui!

9

Chapter Three: Methodology and Method As stated previously the whole concept of research within the Mori world has become a much debated topic. The issues are far reaching and complex and deserve considerate attention, not the least because the present study is by a Pkeh which, as will be seen might be considered somewhat of an oxymoron or at least incongruous to some Mori academics. In this chapter, I shall endeavour to trace some of the background to the discussion, highlight some of the contributions of various scholars, and finally outline my own position. Sandra Harding has made a useful distinction between methodology and method, `A research methodology is a theory and analysis of how research does or should proceed...' and, `A research method is a technique for (or way of proceeding in) gathering evidence'.5 Thus the first part of this discussion will deal with methodological considerations, that is those considerations which help frame the perspective towards the research, and the second part of the chapter will detail method, which are the means and procedures by the research is actually carried out. According to Judith Binney, who acknowledges Albert Wendt's statement, `We are what we remember; society is what we remember', states, `There have been two remembered histories of NZ since 1840: that of the colonizers, and that of the colonized. Their visions and goals were different, creating memories which have been patterned by varying hopes and experiences'.6 This stark statement, apart from anything else, contextualizes New Zealand history within a political framework and proposes at least implicitly, that what has been remembered and presented about the past at least in this country is far from an objective apolitical experience. Binney reinforces this by stating, ` "The telling of history", whether it be oral or written, is not and never has been neutral. It is always the reflection of the narrators and their perceptions of their world"'.7 Here, Binney is only reflecting the conclusions of many twentieth century historians such as E.H. Carr and others.8 Thus the histories of
5

Sandra Harding in Towards the New Millenium: International Issues and Projects in Indigenous Research, p.19. 6 Judith Binney, `Maori Oral Narratives, Pakeha Written Texts: Two Forms of Telling History' in The Shaping of History, Essays from the NZJH', p.3. 7 ibid, p.14. 8 Note: See Binney's statement, ` the transmitting of Maori perceptions allows the colonizers to see the perspectives of the colonized ­ necessary step so that the dominant culture changes its attitudes about its possession of truth', in The Shaping of History, p.13.

10

Elsdon Best and Percy Smith and later scholars including Sir Peter Buck, who sought to reconstruct pre- contact Mori society, have reflected their cultural conditioning, even as other scholars such as Beaglehole, the Ritchies, Joan Metge, and Patrick Hohepa who studied Mori communities in the field reflected their own perspectives.9 However, despite the `progress' in Western historiographical understanding regarding the misnomer of `objective history' it is, according to Binney, `only recently that Western-trained historians have come to realize that they have been perpetuating colonialist attitudes in their so-called objective histories'.10 The search for a research methodology which reflected indigenous needs and perspectives grew concurrently with the emergence of the indigenous cultural and political renaissance of the 1970s and 1980s. In the `new' political climate of the 80s even such eminent Pkeh historians as the late Michael King were challenged for doing research on Mori. One of the first Pkeh scholars to raise concerns about the then current research methodologies was Evelyn Stokes, `My primary concern was that too many Pkeh researchers were operating within a European-derived worldview, derived from western European educational traditions, and they were failing to comprehend that there were different Mori perceptions of the world, and different values, that might significantly affect the way social policy research could and should be done'.11 Stokes makes a contrast between the European world view and te ao Mori, `The Mori attitude to knowledge is a holistic one. The past is part of the present and there is a continuing theme of stewardship of knowledge and resources, including land, inherited from ancestors, which is expected to be passed on to succeeding generations. In contrast Pkeh researchers want to label and categorise things and provide a specific chronology'.12 Since the mid-eighties, there has risen, particularly within Mori academic circles, a desire to explore new research paradigms within an ethos, consistent with an indigenous cosmology. This exploration has moved from a critique of western historiographical research models to the proposal of paradigms for kaupapa Mori
9

Anne Salmond, Hui, Wellington: Reed, 1975, p.2. Binney, p.4. 11 Evelyn Stokes, Bicultural Methodology and Consultative Processes in Research: A Discussion Paper, Hamilton: University of Waikato, 1998, p.43. 12 ibid, p.43.
10

11

research.13 The criticisms included insights into the relationship between colonization and Western research models. Hirini Moko Mead has indicated that this correlation reaches back into the 19th century. After the land wars of the 1860s Mori tribes lost control over their affairs and the Treaty of Waitangi was put aside. Assimilation and thorough-going domination of the Mori people by settlers became the hallmarks of governments in New Zealand. Education became an important tool of government to put its policies into operation. Knowledge and its dissemination, its collection and publication became Pkeh dominated activity. Research was one of the activities which became a Pkeh monopoly.14 Even history, that styled itself as Mori history or research was seen by some to be heavily influenced by Eurocentric views and philosophies. According to Wheturangi Walsh-Tapiata, `Any attempt to include a Mori perspective occurred by adding Mori ideas to traditional disciplinary frameworks, often resulting in Mori being portrayed negatively'.15 This movement, towards an indigenous research methodology was a phenomenon that was not only happening within New Zealand, but was happening simultaneously in other indigenous contexts. The Canadian publication, Reclaiming Indigenous Voice contained several articles by academics from various indigenous backgrounds. It also included some Mori contributors, one of these, by Graham Hingangaroa Smith argued that indigenous research was, `not an argument against science per se; it is an argument for developing a critical perspective on science in order to expose its colonizing potential. Science is not neutral'.16

13

Note: Linda Smith questions whether Kaupapa Mori research is its own paradigm. While she cites Irwin's support for this concept [K.Irwin, "Maori Research Methods and Practices', in Sites 28, (1994), `Maori' p.27], she states `Kaupapa Mori research is both less and more than a paradigm. It does set out a field of study that enables a process of selection to occur and defines what needs to be studied and what questions ought to be asked. It also has a set of assumptions and taken-for-granted values and knowledge upon which it builds. In this sense, it fits into some of the ways that a paradigm is defined. However, it is more than the sum of its parts. Kaupapa Mori research is a social project. It weaves in and out of Mori cultural beliefs and values', in Reclaiming Indigenous Voice, p.233. 14 Mead, `Tribal Archival Research: The Ngti Awa Experience' in Rachel Selby and Alison J. Laurie's (eds) Mori and Oral History: A Collection, NOHANZ, 2005, p.19. 15 Wheturangi Walsh-Tapiata, `Rangihau mo te iwi ­ ng pakanga me ng hekenga', in Rachel Selby and Alison J. Laurie's (eds) Mori and Oral History: A Collection, NOHANZ, 2005, p.33
16

Graham Hingangaroa Smith, `Protecting and Respecting Indigenous Knowledge' in Marie Battiste's, (ed), Reclaiming Indigenous Voice, Vancouver: UBC Press, 2000, p.212.

12

These statements then, place the discussion about indigenous research methodology in general, and kaupapa Mori research in particular, within the wider dialogue around critical theory. Pihama suggests that, `intrinsic to Kaupapa Mori theory is an analysis of existing power structures and societal inequalities. Kaupapa Mori theory therefore aligns with critical theory in the act of exposing underlying assumptions that serve to conceal the power relations that exist within society and the ways in which dominant groups construct concepts of "common sense" and "facts" to provide ad hoc justification for the maintenance of inequalities and the continued oppression of Mori people'.17 However, Russell Bishop has proposed that critical approaches to research have failed to address the issues of communities such as Mori, and he posits that the development of alternative approaches by Mori are in fact are a departure from traditional critical theory.18 In contrast, Linda Smith proposes that kaupapa Mori research is a `local theoretical positioning that is the modality through which the emancipatory goal of critical theory, in a specific historical, political, and social context, is practiced'. Her position is that, the `localizing of the aims of critical theory' is an outworking of what critical theory offers to oppressed, marginalized, and silenced groups, such as Mori who would consequently, `take greater control over their lives and humanity'.19 What then is kaupapa Mori