Using the Internet to Enhance Teaching at The University of Waikato
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Education at The University of Waikato By Ross Dewstow

The University of Waikato 2006

Abstract
The University of Waikato brought the Internet to New Zealand, was one of the first Universities in New Zealand to graduate students who had completed a bachelor's degree online, and recently won an award for innovative use of video software in an online classroom. The video software was created by a company that had its beginnings within the University. However, the use of the Internet for teaching and learning in the University has reached a plateau in the last few years, as measured by the daily page views of the online platform (Moodie, 2004), the number of courses taught online and staff teaching online remaining fairly constant. This thesis sets out to investigate why the use of online teaching at the University has not increased to a point where a majority of staff are using online teaching to at least supplement their classroom teaching. Previous research into online teaching and learning focused heavily on technology barriers and lack of access to computers and the Internet. It is the position of the researcher that this lack of access is no longer a valid reason for academics not to use online environments for teaching and learning in a tertiary environment. This study hypothesized that enhancing their teaching using online technologies may be related to the culture of different subjects, disciplines and Schools of study. Accordingly three groups of lecturers from different Schools within the University were invited to participate in focus group interviews. Questions asked were related to their approach to teaching in their subject areas, the culture of their Schools and the University, as well as their reflections on teaching online.

Page 2

The study found that there was a strong relationship between the use of online technologies and subject areas as well as the culture that exists within the School of study. The influence of University management on the use of online technologies was also highlighted. But more surprising was the relationship between trained teachers in the University, and their uptake and use of online technologies. To take advantage of the changing student population, with their greater awareness and use of computing and new technologies, the University of Waikato, and indeed many other similar institutions, are now at a technological and educational crossroad. Decisions need to be made by senior management regarding the importance of the Internet and emerging media technologies in shaping the teaching and learning environment of tomorrow's University.

Page 3

Preface
To understand a researcher's biases and viewpoint, it is important to be aware of the parts of the journey that have helped to form them. Knowing the background story will inform the reader about where the researcher is coming from and help situate this research. The story starts at primary and secondary School with mathematics, the subject I had the most success at and hence enjoyed more than other subjects. In my last two years at high School in Auckland, I tutored a number of students in maths and when a teacher suggested that I might apply for secondary teacher's college. As the deadline for submissions was closing in, I jumped at the opportunity as I had realised that teaching was what I wanted to do with my life.

Study, work and travel I studied at Auckland University where I majored in mathematics and gained a Bachelor of Science degree, then followed this up with a Teaching Diploma from the Auckland College of Education. I started my career as a high school mathematics teacher at a rural high school in Taumarunui, in the King Country area of the North Island of New Zealand. I was a keen skier, which was a motivating factor in choosing the school where the ski fields of Mount Ruapehu were literally on my doorstep. After what I thought was two successful years teaching maths in the school, it was time for a change. I applied and was appointed to a one year relieving position back in Auckland at Aorere College in Mangere. I was moving from a rural to an urban high school in a low socio-economic area in South Auckland. I was unsure just what the school would be like but I was ready for a change with new school, students and teaching colleagues. I found myself on the outer in the Page 4

maths Department rather early on so I befriended staff in other Departments. I was interested to hear about their teaching experiences and had my eyes opened to different ways of thinking and teaching which, in turn, made me think about and reflect on my own teaching practice. Reflection has been an important part of teaching for me as I was always striving to improve my teaching from year to year, and then, later in my career, to help others improve their teaching skills. After marrying and then leaving New Zealand to travel, my wife and I spent just over three years around the world, which included over a year teaching in the inner city schools of London. We returned to New Zealand with the desire to try other challenges and gain more marketable skills. Our areas of expertise and experience were rather limiting at this stage in our careers if we wanted to pursue options other than teaching. We realised that gaining more skills would make us available for more employment opportunities in New Zealand and, in fact, anywhere in the world.

The beginnings of computers in New Zealand Computers were starting to arrive on the business and home markets about this time and I was drawn into this area with the many new and different career opportunities that were starting to appear in the job market. I enrolled in and successfully completed a ten week computer programming course in the mid eighties and entered the computer industry as a programmer, then analyst programmer, and eventually into the role of training staff who used computers in their jobs. I started in the industry when computers were becoming more mainstream in businesses with staff beginning to use them as part of their normal job duties. I worked closely with a new breed of people called computer programmers who talked a different language than the people who had to use the programs they created. That has not changed over the years Page 5

and, if anything, their talk is more removed from everyday conversation than ever before. That was where I found my niche, initially, for the next five or so years. I still find myself doing this today, as an intermediary, or translator, between the programmers, often called geeks and the people who use computers, called users. This position suited me as it combined my teaching expertise and computing skills in the corporate world. My job was a highly satisfying one as I talked to the users about their needs and conveyed this information to the programmers in their language. This resulted in suggestions by staff being implemented by programmers in the way that users wanted. The most important part of my job, then and now, is always satisfying the computer users' needs. To do this I had to understand and interpret their needs to the programmers. I was never a highly technical person but I have enough knowledge to convey to the programmers what the users wanted. I am far better at talking to the users of the computers than the technical staff as I am more attuned to what the users are saying. I see myself foremost as a teacher who has been somewhat sidetracked over the years after I became involved with the introduction of computers. I enjoyed using computers as a user of computer programs but was never able to understand the logic of writing with any computer languages, except at a basic level. This did not stop me using sophisticated programs as a user though. It's a lot like music to me. I know what songs I like and can appreciate what has gone into the creation of the songs but I cannot play an instrument or sing as I am not a musician or singer. It does not stop me from listening to and appreciating music and learning how to use a computer to create music CD Roms. I am sometimes thought of as a `techie' or a `technical person' by users and called upon to fix computer problems. Because I can fix Page 6

the rudimentary things that can go wrong with computers I am sometimes labelled incorrectly as being technical and not thought of for my teaching skills. It is something that I have learnt to live with, but also regret at times.

Tertiary Teaching After mastering my challenges in the computer industry, I looked for the next one. I had the opportunity to go back to formal teaching, but in the Tertiary Education sector this time, in a Polytechnic, and my first year saw me teaching students how to use the basic computer applications programmes that were available at the time. I attended an Apple Developer conference in San Jose, California, where I saw for the first time the power of the new media types of video, graphics, sound and animation used in computers in very exciting ways. I decided that this was a direction I wanted to move towards as it was very stimulating and was about mastering software programs rather than doing any computer programming, and that suited my abilities very well. I started teaching myself how to integrate these relatively new media types into interactive applications so I could teach my students how to do this too. I was a pioneer in the area of Multimedia in the polytechnic sector in New Zealand and created courses that were added to the national framework for computing certificates, diplomas, bachelor and masters degrees. I was pleased to be able to inspire students to create great things and as a result saw them get incredible jobs in the multimedia and Internet industries. A move to another polytechnic saw me working and teaching in two different cities, over one hundred kilometres apart. I spent two days a week at the institution doing face to face teaching and the other three days working from home attending to preparation, marking and doing Page 7

the course administration that was required of me. The main difference between the two institutes was a more ingrained research culture in the new polytechnic as they were in the process of applying for University status. The culture change in polytechnics was brought about by offering bachelor and masters degrees and was not looked upon too fondly by staff who had been teaching in the sector for a while. The emphasis had mainly been on teaching and learning but change was coming and lecturers were beginning to research, present papers at conferences and publish articles, something that I already had experience at in my previous job, thanks to my head of Department.

Online Teaching and Learning Due to the location difference between work and home, I saw a need to look into ways of making myself available to students when I was not at work. E-mail was available as a means of communication with students and all students and staff had an e-mail account at the institution. Due to the one to one nature of e-mail, it is an efficient way to send out information to a class of students but doesn't work so well as a communication tool with a class of students as e-mail can soon become difficult to manage and keep track of all the messages. As it was the only way to communicate electronically in those early days, an e-mail received from one student was sometimes replied to the whole class to eliminate repeats. My initial attempts at using computers for online teaching and learning was done as an experiment for a course to degree students I was teaching with two other colleagues called "Internet and Web Design". They were all studying for their bachelor of computing so most had computers at home and through a questionnaire we gave to the students we found that the majority had access to the Internet from outside the institution (Young, McSporran and Dewstow, 1999). So on this premise, I decided to look into using more than e-mail and put my Page 8

newly found web design skills to the test. I put some content with Internet examples and links onto my own Internet site, gave students the URL, the address to the home page of the site, and told them that they had access from home if they wanted. I also emphasised that it was not a compulsory component of the course but that the site was freely available to them to use as a resource. The response was overwhelming, with students coming to class having downloaded and printed out the notes, but more importantly they had not only attempted the exercises provided but were asking for the next week's work. The response at that time from those students would probably not have worked in other curriculum areas as access to computers and the Internet was in its infancy and most of the students I taught had access to the web site from off campus. Also, only a few staff were developing web pages at the time and most of them were based in Information Technology Departments. I should also point out that no other lecturers in the Department of computing made their lecture notes or any class materials available on the web at that stage and part of the reason was because they were living close by and came to work each day, so students had access to them more readily. With Internet access so pervasive now, access is no longer the barrier for students that it once was and does not stop any lecturer from using it to supplement their teaching. I also realised that my early rough attempts at web design didn't faze the students, as they managed to navigate the site and find what they needed. I was also making an attempt to demonstrate to them what I was asking them to do. The International students that were taking the course were quite enthusiastic users of the web site as they could revise the material as often as they wanted, re-reading the text to comprehend my notes and thoughts as well as going through the examples to learn how to do things. There was also no noticeable drop off in attendance as Page 9

the on campus class was not just a repeat of the online material but more a problem solving and trouble shooting session rather than a content delivery session. We were able to focus more on the areas that students were having difficulty with in their attempts at web page design in the face to face sessions. I also found that there were difficulties with some of the more technical problem solving aspects of the course and things could be more easily solved in five minutes with the student than an hour online using e-mail. Also, the course was not about me solving their mistakes with their web page coding and not being there all the time made them try to find their own errors instead of relying on me. I decided to add more to the site over time and added content from other computing subjects that I taught as well. Even though it meant more work initially, there were rewards over time for me in relation to preparation of course materials. Students were able to access material when they needed it. The information was there for the next semester when I taught the classes again, so I just needed to refine the site by checking the exercises, rewording areas that needed clarification and updating the web references. Even though I was teaching in the Computing area with a significant number of staff, other than my immediate colleagues who also taught Internet papers, most were not interested in adding any of their content online. One of my colleagues who taught programming said that her subject couldn't be taught online but I didn't investigate this further to find out reasons why she thought that way. Others were under the impression that the Internet was just a fad that would disappear soon, so there was no need for them to put valuable time into rearranging how they were teaching for a temporary technology. It is certainly interesting to note how time has proved them wrong and a great proportion of computing jobs are now closely aligned with the Internet. There was also stern opposition in the Department to Page 10

do away with office hours, where staff would be in their offices waiting for students to arrive with questions, and replace the process with email. One staff member who heard about what I was doing asked to look at the site and was surprised that there was no password to access the materials. He thought that only students who were attending the class should have access to the class materials, as indeed most online systems now have this degree of security. My web site was available to anyone who knew the address and contained no information that wasn't already available on the web. The difference was that I had sequenced and presented the information on the site for my students as an aid for their learning within the bounds of the course. Even though students had access to the course materials, there was still a need for that human touch to explain the issues that they were having difficulty with. I certainly was not replacing myself, or anyone else, by putting my material on the Internet. Even with the implementation of a campus wide Learning Management System called Blackboard and all the support offered to bring the staff up to speed, my colleagues still kept to teaching the same way and initially refused to have anything to do with online technologies. It was only with the introduction of a Masters degree during my last year at the institution, taught in a flexible timeframe one weekend a month, that staff who were teaching on the program reluctantly started using the technology. That was because there was a requirement to have documents online for the students to access as well as having all class announcements through Blackboard. Few staff used the collaborative discussions that were available for communication purposes with students in the weeks between the face to face contact we had in the weekends, whereas I found it a necessary tool due to my locality. I continued teaching my two courses for a further year while working in my next job and found that the use of online meant I could keep contact Page 11

with students, see where they were up to, motivate them and by posting announcements and having set tasks to complete online, the distance in kilometres was made up for by the communication in kilobytes.

Why weren't my colleagues teaching online? I thought about reasons why my computer literate colleagues with vast experience and knowledge in their specialist computing areas were not keen to try out this online technology. From my very small sample size I reached the following conclusions. It didn't seem to be related to age, as there was a mixture of ages using and not using the technology. It wasn't from lack of support from the management team as there was plenty of encouragement from the head of School and programme director to use online technologies. If this was not the case, I doubt if I would have ventured into the online world myself. It also wasn't through fear of technology, lack of confidence or experience with computers, as my colleagues used computers to a great level of sophistication. I wondered whether for this group it was not the technology or their skills with technology but their reluctance to try something different or to develop their repertoire of teaching skills. They were good teachers of their subject material, that is to say, they delivered the content to students, but perhaps their teaching methods had probably remained the same through the years they had been teaching. It is difficult to try something that is new especially when it is quite different to what you are already doing. I was always keen to try different things if it meant that students' learning was improved and my enjoyment in teaching the subject material remained fresh by using a new way of teaching. I found it difficult to understand why my colleagues couldn't see the benefits of using the Internet for their teaching or even thinking about different techniques they could use in their teaching. Page 12

I believe that this reluctance to try new ways of teaching was not only related to working online but also applied to their normal classroom teaching as well. As an example, the masters program was heavily based on students working in groups to reflect what they would encounter in the industry that they were soon to enter. In my previous institution, we had great success with students working in groups over a number of years and the staff enjoyed working this way as it reflected what was happening in the industry. My new colleagues were always working individually with students and had no concept of students working together on a group assignment. They saw marking as a really problematic area when students were in groups as it is difficult to know what each student's contribution was. There was a lot of debating and strategies worked on with staff, then training before they felt confident enough to cope with this change. It was reasoned to staff that if the majority of student assignments were done by individuals, then this would not adequately prepare them for a team based industry where they were soon to work. Students need to develop skills to enable them to work in diverse teams in the future and it was part of our job to prepare them for this. I began to put more and more of my courses online for the students, but also started to teach short courses during weekends and spending more time at the institution than I wanted to. There were two reasons for me to look for another position. One was the driving, often at night after intensive and long hours looking at a computer screen, but the other was because the institution I was working in had no long term policy or vision for online education. They were playing a waiting game, waiting to see the direction online would go without intervention from management.

Page 13

The University of Waikato and the Innovation Centre for electronic Education At the start of 2000 I came to the Waikato Innovation Centre for electronic Education (WICeD) at The University of Waikato (UOW) to the new position of Learning Designer. I came not only because the position was in the same city as I was living but also because the University had recognised e-learning as one of the UOW's five key strategies driving the University. This was quite a revelation to me in comparison with my previous institution and I wanted to be part of the journey. It was WICeD's brief to support e-learning and further the development of the online strategy throughout the University. E-learning began in 1996 in the School of Education (SOE) with the Bachelor of Teaching degree, also called the Mixed Media Program (MMP). Other staff in the SOE were also teaching online in areas outside the MMP program, and within the wider University an increasing numbers of papers were being offered as e-learning gradually started to spread. The Management School, the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, the School of Maori and Pacific Development, the School of Law and to some small extent, the School of Science and the School of Computing and Maths were all using the online environment for some part of their courses. My involvement over the four years I was at the University was in assisting staff in the use of e-learning in their teaching. This meant either supporting their face-to-face students with some online component, or assisting staff who were teaching students in a totally online capacity where no face-to-face delivery of material, tutorials or office hours are carried out. This is always a challenging task because

Page 14

the needs of staff are so varied amongst the Schools, within Departments and between colleagues. No two lecturers wanted the same thing for their classes but that is what makes the job interesting. I am always challenged to come up with different solutions for teachers. I didn't realise the significance of the physical location of WICeD at the time nor that other staff in WICeD were originally from different parts of Information Technology Services, the computing people. I came to realise that being in the same building as the institutions computer team made it hard to stamp my mark on the institution as the Learning Designer that I wanted to be known as. The job title came from a relatively widely used title called Instructional Designers, a job title referring to people who assembled learning materials in a coherent way, combined with the skills of a teacher involved in Online Teaching and Learning. My main responsibility was to assist staff to design their online courses using the online environment provided at the University, with a focus more on the pedagogical aspects of online teaching than the content of the courses. I was to find out later that there was some controversy about my appointment being attached to WICeD as opposed to either the School of Education or the central Teaching and Learning Development Unit. In hindsight, it would have been better to have been attached to either of these latter areas for the simple reason that I would be thought of more as a teacher than a technologist. This aligns with my journey into online teaching, which was from a teaching rather than a technology route. In my capacity as a learning designer, I noticed that staff throughout the University who have some teaching training or some years of teaching experience outside the University were often keener to take on online teaching than staff who had a lack of teaching experience. This is Page 15

not saying that all teachers embrace teaching online but they seemed to be more attuned to what it is all about from a pedagogical view point. Anecdotally, it seemed that trained teachers often saw it as an extension of what they were already doing and picked up on the ways that online could assist their teaching quite quickly. Their questions were not related to pedagogy but to how they could use the online environment to teach in a way that was similar to the way they were already teaching. There were also those who saw it as a way to free up some of their face-to-face sessions by using a more flexible way of teaching. A couple of colleagues who enjoy teaching online said that it freed them up during the day time to pursue their passions of playing golf and flying aeroplanes. Teaching online meant that they could choose the best time of the day or night to work, just like their students. Classes are held at a time when students are ready to learn and teachers are ready to teach, it's just not always at the same time. I started thinking that there must be reasons why the spread of online usage had not continued from the dramatic rise in the early years or spread throughout other Schools and Departments. I have also talked to other staff development professionals I have met at conferences who are also puzzled by the same issues in their institutions. I have some thoughts on this from talking with staff, but because I generally deal with staff who are either teaching online or are about to, my initial sample group did not represent a cross section of all staff. Most of my initial data was picked up through conversations with staff in a variety of situations. I needed a more rigorous method of data gathering for these ideas to gain any credibility among my colleagues. My aim here is to continue my interest in the adoption of e-learning by adding to the research in the field for the benefit of the University as well as for staff development professionals involved in e-learning implementation and support in other tertiary institutions. The study will hopefully be a useful Page 16

addition to the body of knowledge about the general area, and that may be beneficial to any institution considering the introduction of e-learning or looking at increasing its presence, acceptance or uptake in their institution.

Page 17

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my supervisor Wendy Drewery for her encouragement and help in getting this completed.

Thanks to my partner, Noeline Wright and daughter, Sophie for being there while I have been doing my thesis.

Lastly, thanks for Ectus and TANDBERG for assisting me while I have been studying these past few years.

Page 18

Table of Contents Abstract..................................................................................... 2 Preface ...................................................................................... 4 Study, work and travel 4 The beginnings of computers in New Zealand Tertiary Teaching Online Teaching and Learning Why weren't my colleagues teaching online? The University of Waikato and the Innovation Centre for electronic Education 14 Acknowledgements...................................................................... 18 Table of Contents ........................................................................ 19 Chapter 1: Adoption of E-learning ................................................. 21 E-Learning Uptake at The University of Waikato 21 Definition of e-learning or online teaching and learning used in this thesis 24 `Teaching' and `lecturing' Differences between teachers and lecturers The study 27 27 29 5 7 8 12

Chapter 2: A Discussion and Critique of Current Research................. 32 Barriers to Online Teaching 32 New Technology Issues Objections to online pedagogy Staff development issues Staff training for online teaching Organisational Change New Pedagogies Revising the role of the teacher What is missing? 38 39 41 45 46 48 51 54

Chapter 3: Research Methodology ................................................. 57 Focus Groups 58 Selecting the Participants Participants Managing the group discussion Ethical Considerations Page 19 60 63 66 66

Consent Gathering and Handling information Confidentiality Potential harm to participants Focus group questions Analysis of the data

67 67 68 68 69 69

Chapter 4: The Findings ............................................................... 71 1) Teaching your subject area 72 2) You, your Department and the University 3) Online teaching Summary of the data chapter 80 84 92

Chapter 5: Further reflections on the data ...................................... 94 Quote 1: "Wonder how many of them have been trained to teach?" 95 Quote 2: "What are we supposed to do as academics for the student body?" Quote 3: "A bit of a generalist" Quote 4: "So who are the student body now?" Quote 5: "On the edge of chaos." Quote 6: "We don't have online discussions." 100 102 105 108 111

Chapter 6: Conclusions .............................................................. 122 Chapter 7: Implications.............................................................. 127 Teaching and Learning at the University 128 Commitment for online teaching and learning Online teaching skills of academics Computing skills of staff and students Innovative Environment Postscript 129 130 131 132 133

References ............................................................................... 134 Appendix 1 Introductory Letter 139 Appendix 2 Informed Consent 141 142 144 145 152

Appendix 3 Return of First Draft Appendix 4 Focus Group Questions Appendix 5 Ethics Application Appendix 6 ClassForum Graphs Page 20

Chapter 1: Adoption of E-learning
E-learning is the broad area of research I am interested in. My specific area of interest for the purposes of this thesis is in researching the uptake of e-learning amongst staff in one tertiary education institution, and looking at ways to assist staff who teach online or those who are interested in finding out more. In a previous paper I researched the technology adoption life cycle, "a model which grew out of social research begun in the late 1950s about how communities respond to discontinuous innovations" (Moore, 1999, p.13), looking at the correlation between the adoption of technology and the uptake of elearning at the University (Dewstow, 2003). The conclusion of this research was that the uptake of e-learning in the School of Education closely follows the adoption of technology as proposed by Moore, but this is not so throughout the University. Some Schools/Departments of the University have online teaching staff who can be identified as innovators or early adopters of e-learning, but there has been no adoption of online teaching by the majority of staff in their Schools. They have not crossed the chasm between the early adopters and the majority of users, a gap that needs to be crossed before technology becomes more widely accepted within a community. I am i