i

Mapping the Geographical and Literary Boundaries of Los Angeles: A Real and Imagined City

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of

Master of Arts
at

The University of Waikato
by

Scott Granville 2007

ii

ABSTRACT
In Los Angeles, the influence of Hollywood and the film industry, combined with a non-stop barrage of media images, has blurred the line between the real and imaged. The literature reveals a city exploding with cultural, racial and social differences, making Los Angeles a confusing and alienating place. The literature of Los Angeles reflects the changing face of the city. Los Angeles was always a city with a promising future, economic booms and optimism seemed to suggest that here was a place where the American Dream really could come true. Thousands travelled west in search of sunshine, oranges and a life that formerly, they could only dream of having. Yet, the literature of Los Angeles has highlighted the city's actual history together with a realization of undercurrents of violence, prejudice, depression and shattered dreams. The past, present and future is used to reveal a city that is in stark opposition to the Los Angeles, waves of immigrants came to find. This thesis explores the idea of the dreamer coming west to Los Angeles within the literature and the variety of ways in the travellers' romantic notions of Los Angeles as a city of promise, is betrayed, leaving a desperate people in its wake. The literature shows that beneath the shiny surface of a city founded on sunshine and prosperity, corruption reached all levels of society and the `mean streets' abound. Later, influenced by an overwhelming feeling of powerlessness caused by Post-war nuclear depression, McCarthyism, loss of identity, and living in a city fragmented by racial tension and an ever growing gap between the very rich and the very poor, the literature of Los Angeles reflects not only the fears of that city, but of American society as a whole. The collision of technology, rapid progression and population explosion turned Los Angeles into a disconnected city, where the real and imagined merge in a cityscape that demonstrates a conflicting combination of historical replication, original design and movieset inspiration. Nothing is ever what it appears to be in Los Angeles.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

First and foremost, I would like to thank Dr. Jan Pilditch for her guidance and expertise. Without her help this journey would have been considerably more arduous. I would also like to thank Dr. Mark Houlahan for his words of encouragement and support that have always been greatly appreciated. Also, to the faculty and administration in the Arts and Social Sciences Department, I would like to thank you for the generous Scholarship Award and for all of your support during the course of the last year. Lastly to my family and friends, thank you for your patience and understanding. I cannot begin to express how much they mean to me.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page No. Title Page Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents Introduction Chapter One Chapter Two Chapter Three Conclusion Bibliography i ii iii iv 1 8 35 60 85 90

1

INTRODUCTION

When Cecilia Brady looked out of her window on the descent into Los Angeles in the beginning of The Last Tycoon, she saw "the California moon was out, huge and orange over the Pacific." 1 The moon illuminates the city below, and serves as a beacon to the dreamers and seekers that come to Los Angeles searching for success. The image is deceiving. The moon does not guide people towards paradise: Los Angeles is a violent, confusing, and final resting place. The city of Los Angeles is a contradiction, as much an imagined city as a real one. For as many people who have believed in and chased the dream of success, there are as many who have been destroyed by the illusion of opportunity. Timothy Tangherlini comments:
The object of fierce derision and intense glorification, Los Angeles can be viewed as a constant and ever-changing series of contradictory interpretations of space: for some, it is a city of dreams and for others, a city of despair; it is at once a city of extraordinary wealth and a city of crushing poverty, a city of culture and a city of plastic, a city of WASPs and a city of immigrants. 2

This collision of extremes; economic, cultural and spatial create a city with over-lapping boundaries. It is a city built on an imagined past of harmony and prosperity, hurtling towards a future overflowing with people, each with a separate and conflicting dream.

2 Los Angeles has had a varied history. On July 6, 1769, Father Junipero Serra founded San Diego de Alcaca, the first of the Californian missions, following earlier established missions in New Mexico and Arizona. As George E. Tinker comments in Missionary Conquest, "Serra conducted his evangelist outreach to native people as part of the occupational force of a conquering army and as part of a strategy of conquest." 3 The historical fact of this missionary movement, protected by the Spanish Army, was chiefly responsible for the decimation of the local Native Indian population. This fact was

completely ignored by the advertising propaganda of Southern California of the 1880's. In the advertising of the day, the missionaries and mission buildings were a focal point for a new campaign to bring people west. The buildings, run-down and decrepit, became an architectural symbol within the myth of Los Angeles in which the missionaries were revered as saviours, not repressors. David Fine comments:
The forced enclosure of the mission Indians and their consequent decimation by cultural uprooting and European disease found no place [...] in this mythic reconstruction of history, which centered on the image of the humble, godly, kneeling countenance of the Spanish padre ministering to the needs of the ignorant, helpless aborigines... 4

Growth, not historical accuracy was the order of the day and those promoting growth were known as boosters. The boosters of Southern California, who projected the idea of expanding the Los Angeles area at the turn of the nineteenth century, used opposing visions of progress and nostalgia, future possibilities and historic charm. The alluring combination of a frontier town, still echoing with the recent influence of the Spanish missions, alongside the commercial potential of a town recently connected to the major Pacific railway lines. It was an appealing vision. With the mythical history established, the boosters undertook a major national advertising campaign, hawking consistently warm weather, healthy dry air and agricultural

3 opportunity. These agricultural opportunities had not always existed. Mike Davis, in Ecology of Fear comments:
It was not until the discovery of great artesian basins ­ millions of acre feet of subterranean water ­ during the 1870's, and the subsequent growth of the citrus industry, that it became possible for an Edenic vision of Southern California to bloom uncontested. 5

For many people this was exactly the opportunity they were looking for. The vision of a landscape blanketed in citrus trees and smiled upon by constant sunshine offered an escape from their existing way of life. For the adventurer and the dreamer it was a golden chance to strike out for new territory and stake a claim. Los Angeles was a place for new beginnings. It had commercial and health benefits to compliment the glorified past of a romantic and pastoral setting. These brightly commercialized ideals of financial opportunity and personal happiness, along with accessible trade and transportation routes brought a steady stream of settlers to the city of Los Angeles during the early part of the twentieth century. By the early 1920's, "a population that only thirty years earlier had numbered 100,000 now matched San Francisco's population of 575,000." 6 A growing emphasis on big business and a correlating boom in several industries fed the growth. Oil deposits were found in several locations close to, and within, the growing city limits. The aviation industry, itself once a dream scattered across several eastern states, found a home in Los Angeles due to the ideal climate and unlimited days of sunshine. As Edward Soja and Allen Scott comment:
The Los Angeles aircraft industry also boomed in the interwar years, although it required the impetus of the Second World War before it assumed unquestionable national leadership, and it became the conduit through which the main high-technology industrial base of the regional metropolis would be established in later years. 7

Los Angeles was alive with creative, analytical and entrepreneurial spirit. Nothing appeared insurmountable, there was vibrancy to the city and people became caught

4 up in the idea that Los Angeles did indeed offer everyone the opportunity to succeed. Feeding the dream was another industry that had found a home in Los Angeles; the film industry. While the original dream for Hollywood was not in film but an attempt at a Christian utopia by wealthy Kansas real estate developers during the 1890's, after its failure, the natural beauty of the area made it suitably attractive for the burgeoning film industry to take over. Colin Shindler comments:
What lingered after this first dream died was the sensation that Hollywood still offered a geophysical paradise. In the very first days of the pioneers the air was attractively

temperate, fragrant with orange blossom, jasmine and eucalyptus. Even in 1929 it was still possible to be astonished by the bunches of red berries on the ubiquitous pepper trees which lined the major roads. 8

The original pure-thinking ideals did not last long in Hollywood, but the temperate conditions, abundance of sunshine and proximity to the Pacific Ocean made Los Angeles an attractive location for the film industry. With the addition of sound to the movies of the late 1920's, a new generation began to arrive in Los Angeles. Established writers, promised high salaries and steady work, came to Hollywood to develop and write film scripts. While the money was often generous and the demand for scriptwriters high, many of the writers were disillusioned by their experience. Authors such as James M. Cain, Nathanael West and F. Scott Fitzgerald were among the first to write about events that not only questioned the El Dorado myth of Los Angeles as a golden city but also completely rejected it. Fitzgerald who had come to Hollywood on three separate occasions in the hope of resurrecting his career wrote:
The picture I have just finished is in production and though it bears my name, my producer could not resist the fascination of a pencil and managed to obviate most signs of my personality. Nonetheless I am now considered a success in Hollywood because something

5
which I did not write is going under my name, and something I did write was quietly buried... 9

The contradictory and fickle nature of the film industry, together with the geographical and historical pretences that established Los Angeles as a destination, provided the basis for many of the literary themes that grew out of the city. David Fine comments:
Los Angeles could not serve as setting for the regenerative possibilities of America. The dream, if it had once had potency was behind them. Writing against the myth of El Dorado, they transformed it into its antithesis: that of the dream running out along the California shore 10

The landscape, seen through the eyes of its writers, transformed Los Angeles from a bright, sunny place of opportunity into a dark, at times farcical and at times hysterical, nightmare. The scenery and architecture that gave Los Angeles its identity; the ocean, the road and the buildings became symbols for the impending chaos of a city on the brink of disaster. In the writing of these authors, beginning in the 1930's, the darker side of Los Angeles was exposed, in ways, far removed from the rejuvenating, exotic images that had been implanted by the boosters. When America entered the Second World War in 1941, Los Angeles experienced a massive influx of migrants to service the war effort through the growing aeronautics and munitions industries. A city resigned to, yet thriving on, an unprecedented urban sprawl, brought about through a ban on buildings above fifty metres in height and a maze of crisscrossing freeways, continued to promote the virtues of an imagined paradise, and to ignore the growing disparity in wealth and opportunity. Kazys Varnelis comments:
Los Angeles swiftly evolved its own ideology of urban growth, combining the promises of progressive urbanism with dollar-driven planning. Together with city government officials, whose elections they bankrolled, developers downplayed the center city, promoting instead the idealized image of Los Angeles as a place in which prairie and city life collapsed into each other and the ideals of the garden city could be realized. 11

6 The reality of this idealised portrayal became not the unrestricted, co-existing paradise it promised, but a fragmented, disjointed city run by corrupt city officials. Fuelled by these developments, the paranoid activities of a nuclear wary Cold War Government, and the hypocritical presentation of the Hollywood film industry, literature in Los Angeles turned against the media-driven image of unity and fulfilment. The line between fiction and reality blurred as contradictory notions of architecture tried to reconstruct historical buildings while embracing modern techniques. Los Angeles streets became Hollywood sets, confusing the imagined view with real life. Using the past, present and the future as reference points, the writing exposed the feelings of desperation and isolation experienced by many people as they searched for meaning in a city built on a history of false promises and dreams. This thesis will examine the literature of Los Angeles in the light of the city's development. In Chapter One, the idea of the dreamer coming west to Los Angeles is explored. The romantic notion of Los Angeles as a city of opportunity is dismantled, revealing the desperation of people whose dreams can never be realised or satisfied. Chapter Two discusses the physical expansion of Los Angeles following the Second World War and how the disconnected, sprawling nature of the city reflects on the literature. The effects of the Cold War and nuclear paranoia also begin to reveal a new sense of isolation and confusion within the individual, and the writing begins to challenge society's values. In Chapter Three, the popular image of Los Angeles is challenged, exploring the vastness of a diverse cultural, racial and economic city. The sun-kissed, sandy beaches of Malibu are replaced by a city filled with violence, misinformation and uncertainty.

1 2

F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Last Tycoon (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books Ltd., 1977), p. 25. Timothy T. Tangherlini, `Los Angeles Intersections (Folklore and the City)', Western Folklore, 58.2 (1999), p.99, in JSTOR <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0043373X%28199924%2958%3A2%3C99%3ALAI%28AT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1> [accessed 11 December 2006].

7
George E. Tinker, Missionary Conquest (Minneapolis, MN: Orca Press, 1993), p. 44. David Fine, Imagining Los Angeles (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 2000), p. 30. 5 Mike Davis, Ecology of Fear (New York, NY: Vintage Books), p. 11. 6 David Fine, Imagining Los Angeles, p. 4. 7 Allen J. Scott and Edward W. Soja, The City ­ Los Angeles and Urban Theory at the End of the 20th Century (Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 1996), p. 7. 8 Colin Shindler, Hollywood in Crisis (New York, NY: Routledge Press, 1996), p. 2. 9 Correspondence of F. Scott Fitzgerald, ed. by Matthew J. Bruccoli and Margaret M. Duggan (New York, NY: Random House Inc, 1980), p. 176. 10 Los Angeles in Fiction: A Collection of Essays Revised Edition, ed. by David Fine (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1995), p. 7. 11 Kazys Varnelis, `Los Angeles ­ Cluster City', in Future City, ed. by Stephen Read, Jurgen Rosemann and Job van Eldijk (Oxon, UK: Spon Press, 2005), pp. 174-93.
4 3

8

CHAPTER ONE

Versions of the American Dream are as various as the people who come here in search of fulfilment. Yet every dream, it seems, has a similar sequel, one that spells disillusion. 1

The I-10 highway heading west crosses the San Bernardino county-line, by-passes the towns of Fontana, Pomona and Redlands and cuts through the heart of Chinatown and eventually finds Santa Monica. At this point the highway goes no further west. In front lies the glittering expanse of the Pacific Ocean, behind a city built by over a hundred years of dreamers, seekers and travellers who all came west at one stage in search of opportunity. This road has always appealed to the adventurer, the traveller, the dreamer. There is a sense of freedom associated with travel that arouses the possibility of opportunity. The dream of opportunity has at many times led the traveller to Los Angeles as a destination. It is not an easy city to reach, the highways cross desert or mountain ranges, the coastal roads traverse a collection of peaks overlooking the Pacific. On arrival in the city, the newcomer senses an undeniable truth, that there is nowhere further west to travel, that the final frontier has been reached. The Southern Californian desert, together with the surrounding mountains encases the city of Los Angeles, but it is a city that continues to grow. Mike Davis in City of Quartz

9 comments that the desert is, "being prepared like a virgin bride for its eventual union with the Metropolis: hundreds of square miles of vacant space engridded to accept the future millions" 2 As the known residency of the municipality runs over the 15 million inhabitant mark and inflation "reduces access to new housing to less than 15% of the population," 3 what was once uninhabitable desert land now provides the latest opportunity for the new wave of investors, families and dreamers. The surrounding desert space that once kept people away from Los Angeles now, through the benefits of modern engineering, allows the creation of new sub-divisions. Nevertheless, the Pacific Ocean remains the immovable mass that defines the physical end to the road heading west. If the recreational and health purposes of the ocean appear to be appealing and beneficial, on the outside, the presence of the ocean has often been used by the writers of Los Angeles as a symbol for the death of the American Dream and the end of the road. James M. Cain's The Postman Always Rings Twice marks the beginning of the Los Angeles novel of this type and the novel works to deflate the image of Southern California as the land of opportunity. Using the highway and the roadside Twin Oaks Tavern as central metaphors, the contrasting Californian dreams of mobility and domesticity are dismantled. The use of a violent, adulterous affair leading to murder as the principal storyline only reinforces the emerging belief that Los Angeles as a city was slipping into a dangerous future. The road and the car cease to symbolise mobility, new beginnings and freedom. Rather, these symbols become the focal point for death, destruction and the loss of hope. Even as Frank Chambers, a serial drifter and the narrative voice of the novel, enters the roadside Twin Oaks Tavern for the first time, the highway remains his escape route. "I blew in there in a hurry and began looking down the road." 4 Frank has been living on the road for so long he is always keeping one hand on the door, ready to leave at a moments notice. But when Frank meets Cora for the first time and

10 realizes, "I wanted that woman so bad I couldn't even keep anything in my stomach," 5 he finds his beliefs and way of life compromised. Cora, wife of the proprietor Nick is herself conflicted; with the dream of wanting domestic bliss and her utter contempt for her husband. David Madden comments on Frank and Cora:
Their extreme insecurity accounts in part for their lack of conscience. Frank, the drifter lost in a land of promise, no longer seeks the dream; and he is compelled to act the nightmare when he can no longer elude it. In the background, Frank and Cora pursue separate dreams which mock the shared realization of the immediate wish. 6

Their mutual attraction is immediate; Cora views Frank as the perfect ally in murdering her husband Nick, while Frank's thoughts towards Cora are physical and lustful. He needs to `have her.' Yet the shared physical lust is not powerful enough to overcome their conflicting dreams. The instantaneous gratification they feel for each other cannot mask the reality of what the future holds, an unfulfilled and tragic ending. After a first failed attempt at murdering Nick, Frank turns to the road as an escape. Planning to leave before Nick's return from hospital, Frank says it will be, "just you and me and the road, Cora," romanticising the idea by adding that they would be, "just a couple of gypsies but we'll be together." 7 Cora realizes living on the road is not her dream and will not continue with the plan. Her overpowering drive is her need for security but she also desires the glamour and excitement that brought her to Los Angeles. What Nick lacks in terms of providing a glamorous and exciting life, he more than makes up for in dependability and financial security. Frank too is a creature of habit, he is a serial drifter. He returns to the road to avoid responsibility for his actions. The constant struggle faced by Cora and Frank to realise their dreams is reflected throughout the writing of the Depression era. Americans from across the country were affected by the economic recession and Los Angeles appealed as a city with a future. "They took a look at the tormented land and overburdened cities of their own regions," and

11 directed, "their families across the plains and deserts to the golden valleys of the West Coast." 8 On the surface Los Angeles appeared to be a place that allowed dreams to come true. Once in the city however, many of the dreamers found their hopes washed up against the shores of the Pacific Ocean. Lee Horsley comments:
Cain presents his characters as victims traumatised by national economic disaster but nevertheless driven by myths of limitless opportunity, success and unhampered selfdetermination. They follow the ignis fatuus of the American dream, and when they have (opportunistically) attained their wishes they find that all they have really secured is defeat and entrapment. 9

The freedom Frank, in The Postman Always Rings Twice, offers through life on the road cannot compete with the powerful draw of potential Cora sees in the Twin Oaks Tavern. Cora's earlier dream of Hollywood happiness has been tempered by her new goal, a successful business and home that allow her to escape from financial desperation. While Frank and Cora are separated for a short period of time, there is inevitability, a certainty they will be reunited. Like the writing of earlier authors such as Frank Norris' McTeague and Theodore Dreiser's Sister Carrie, there is an underlying Naturalism that suggests man's actions are determined by sociological conditions and characters lives governed by forces of heredity and environment. June Howard comments:
The desiring, endeavouring self confronts an indifferent impersonal field of force that seems to have nothing to do with, to utterly negate ­ to be the contrary of ­ individual hopes and efforts. 10

The force of nature is often too powerful to fight against and the individual can only submit. The biological and psychological factors that make up Nick and Cora's characters push them to an inevitable end. Frank's acceptance of Nick's invitation to return to the Twin Oaks Tavern makes his reunion with Cora unavoidable and reiterates the effect of everything happening twice in the novel; illicit affairs, murder attempts, escapes, and

12 finally, deaths. Cora, dragged into her old nightmare of a domestic prison, is determined to finish what she had attempted once before with Frank, the plan to murder her husband. Frank agrees saying, "Cora, it's in the cards. We've tried every other way out." 11 The road now transforms from a symbol of limitless opportunity into a dark accessory to murder. On the winding roads surrounding a Malibu beach, Frank and Cora stage the accident that will kill Nick. After listening to his dying echoes reverberate through Glendale Canyon and running the car off the edge of a ravine, Cora and Nick are possessed by an animal-like desperation of passion. "Hell could have opened for me then, and it wouldn't have made any difference. I had to have her, if I hung for it. I had her." 12 They make love beside the destroyed vehicle containing the recently murdered body of Nick, their clothes tattered and bodies bruised. The turbulent, fast-paced nature of the action drags Frank and Cora along, they are merely passengers aboard something much larger than anything they can control, momentarily losing the will to fight against the forces of nature as they succumb to their desires. The road, which earlier offered so much in the dream for mobility and freedom has collapsed into a metaphor for futility. Frank and Cora escape punishment for murdering Nick only for Cora to die in a car accident. Frank is sentenced to death for killing Cora and lives out his final hours with the understanding he has not escaped anything but has been returned by the road to the site of his original wrongdoings. Cain's depiction of Los Angeles in The Postman Always Rings Twice exposes the city's darker side. The emptiness shown in the ending of the novel, with the death of Cora in a car accident and Frank awaiting the death penalty for her murder, marks the beginning of hard-boiled fiction writing in Los Angeles during the 1930's. The peeling away of society's superficial layers reveal a bleaker, more cynical outlook on the city and is associated with the establishment of the detective fiction writing beginning with the popular Black Mask detective serials, the novels of Dashiell Hammett, and later Raymond

13 Chandler. Like James M. Cain's Frank Chambers, in Hammett's The Maltese Falcon and Chandler's The Big Sleep, the protagonists protect themselves by emotionally insulating against society, creating the tough-guy image synonymous with hard-boiled writing. Paul Skenazy comments:
Although invariably delighting in the pleasures of power and manipulation, the detective is finally able to reject temptation. He declines the achievement-orientated, financially

defined power structure of American society, opting instead for his own independent point of view. 13

The hard-boiled protagonists of Hammett and Chandler are a new breed. Determined to maintain their own individualistic code of honour and justice they are city savvy detectives aware of the corruption on all levels of society. They make their living mixing with the criminal element on the new `mean streets' of Los Angeles, which, at the hands of Hollywood has become all of California's and America's cities. Although The Maltese Falcon is set further north in the city of San Francisco, the hard-boiled nature of Hammett's writing resonates with the Los Angeles detective image of one man fighting against the corruption of the world, establishing and reinforcing the principles seen in the writing of Raymond Chandler and other Los Angeles detective writers.. Porter comments:
The underlying dialectic in their novels reveals the ongoing tension between the individual ­ the hard-boiled dick ­ and the environment created by efforts to implement the dream of the Golden West. The dream itself is seldom mentioned in these novels, and there is little reason to mention it, because the world pictured is a measure of the stark hiatus between the dream and the reality. 14

The life picture described by Hammett and the hard-boiled writers who would succeed him is one of ambiguity and tension, of the individual's struggle to live in a world of corruption, deceit and failed dreams. It would become a central idea in the art form of film noir that

14 flourished during and after the Second World War, particularly with John Huston's adaptation of Hammett's The Maltese Falcon (1941). Gary J. Hausladen and Paul F. Starrs comment:
The key characteristic of film noir is ambiguity, especially in the triangular relationship between a male protagonist, a femme fatale, and a crime: ambiguous protagonists, ambiguous femmes, and ambiguous victims. The tie, therefore, between film noir and Los Angeles is ambiguity and the unsettled city; impermanence is much of what classic noir deplores. 15

It also meant, however, that Los Angeles became to the film-going public, every city. The California lived in by both Sam Spade in Hammett's The Maltese Falcon and Phillip Marlowe in Chandler's The Big Sleep is considered the new frontier, a symbol for renewal and prosperity but undermined by corruption. This tension creates a darker side of society, exposing the dreamers who had not fulfilled the expectations they had set for themselves, as they looked to unlawful enterprises as a new route for success. Joseph Porter comments:
The hopes projected for California were, for some, realised. For others, California was measured by the expectations it failed to fulfil and was judged accordingly. California and its wider reflection, the American West, is thus to some degree an expression of the tension between the cherished hopes and the disappointment of reality. 16

Los Angeles had become the city at the end of the American West and failed dreams could no longer be left behind or ignored. Scratching the surface, beneath the golden exterior of sunshine and oranges on the California coast was the desperately realistic struggle for every-day survival. The character of Sam Spade is a re-invented breed of American hero, an individual willing to manipulate society's conventions and norms to maintain his place in the universe. However, there is an ambiguity about Spade that never really separates him from the

15 criminal element he lives among, leaving the interpretation open as to whether or not he works to ensure justice prevails or simply for monetary reward. Lee Horsley comments about Hammett:
He introduced characters who much more nearly conform to the description of the private eye as `half gangster' ­ a man whose innocence has become so tarnished as to be no longer visible, and who is a close relation of the crook-as-investigator protagonists who emerge...in the early thirties. 17

Even Spade's physical appearance suggests something darker, "He looked rather pleasantly like a blond Satan." 18 The ongoing conflict between protagonist and accepted behaviour, coupled with the third person narrative which allows the withholding of important facts, creates the tension that moves the story forward. He uses his knowledge of the law to ensure he stays one step ahead of his competition. Spade acknowledges the corrupt world he lives in, realises the importance of understanding people's intentions and uses this intuition to see through their deception. The value of human life and the uncertainty of an individual's place in the world written about by Dashiell Hammett are encapsulated in the story told by Sam to Brigid O'Shaunessy involving the Flitcraft case he once worked on. Flitcraft is a man who escapes a beam falling on his head by mere seconds and realises the fragile nature of man's time on earth. He disappears, leaving a family and an established life, reappearing years later under a new name with a new life and family. Cynthia Hamilton comments:
The Flitcraft anecdote in The Maltese Falcon perfectly encapsulates the bitter irony of what Hammett sees as the human condition: Flitcraft assumes not only a universe structured on human notions of rationality and justice, but also a correspondence between his perception of the structural rules and the actuality. 19

Hammett and his character Sam Spade, like Flitcraft, realise the precarious nature of any individual's place in the world. The recognition of life's impermanence leads people to

16 make self-centred decisions, often in conflict with their immediate community. There are no fairy-tale endings and life continues to be harsh and unpredictable. Los Angeles would only serve as further proof to this belief as the dreamers who came to the city soon realised there was nowhere left to escape. More problems are certain to arise and the only person left to trust on the `mean streets' becomes yourself. The influence of Dashiell Hammett's writing on 