Keeping Chooks at Home in the Waikato: Exploring Postcolonial, Feminist and Kaupapa Mori Perspectives

N Zavier Burnett A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Social Sciences at te Whare Wnanga o Waikato 2006

Waitara1
This thesis considers the narratives of eight Mori chook keepers from the Waikato rohe, Aotearoa. The Waikato rohe has been selected due to its significant history of Mori horticultural and agricultural practises, including chook keeping. I build on the growing corpus of mtauranga about indigenous studies. Using a postcolonial, feminist and Kaupapa Mori theoretical framework, I undertook five semi-structured interviews and one focus rp with Mori kaumtua. This thesis does not attempt to represent all Mori. There may be considerable difference between whnau, hap and iwi practices. However, the rangahau provides insights into the views of eight individuals and their experiences with chooks. I have also utilised Country Calendar (1970; 1977a; 1977b and 1980) episodes and children's pukapuka such as Nanny Mihi's Garden (Drewery 2002) for the purposes of discourse analysis. By listening to these stories, kaupapa including race, class and ethnicity emerge that affect the participants' everyday lives as chook keepers. The participants view chooks in a variety of ways. First, as a means of food production. By integrating chooks into their communities, the participants are able to provide a nutritious and low-cost kai source for themselves and their whnau. This attempts to at least in part address their poverty problems. Second, as a hybridised Pkeh and Mori kararehe. Third, as hysterical, comical, silly and helpless. I explore these issues within the broader context of colonial, neocolonial and anticolonial practices.

1

For the purposes of this thesis, I write in English using some Mori words. For readers who are not familiar with the Mori terms used, a glossary has been produced (see pages 108-112).

ii

Mihi
Tn koutou katoa! Ko te mahi tuatahi, me mihi, ka tika tku kaihanga. Ko koe te orokohanga, otir, ko koe te whakamutunga. N reira, tn koe e te matua. Ki ng tpuna kua huri ki tua o te rai, e moe, e moe, e moe. Ki te hunga ora, kia ora ttou. Ko wai au? N hea au? Ko Takitimu te maunga. Ko Aparima te awa. Ko Otautau te trangawaewae. E tuku mihi atu ana au ki a koutou, tn ttou katoa! As I come to the end of writing this thesis, I would like to acknowledge my creator and my whnau members (both those still living and those that have already passed on). I acknowledge the rangahau supervisor and the two scholarships that have financially supported this rangahau. I also acknowledge the rangahau participants. Firstly, God, thank you for teaching me this past year and a bit that even though the circumstances of life evolve you remain the same now and for always. Whether in life or death, plenty or famine, good times or bad, sickness or health you remain eternally steadfast. Great is your faithfulness! It is no secret that my whnau is fabulous and needs a special mention. In particular, the thought of my beautiful little irmutu, Olivia Sarah brings a tear to my karu. I am so in love with you and all the rest of your whnau. I thank my whaiipo, Deane Searle. You are a never-ending puna of tautoko, empowerment and aroha. Thank you for your love, care and concern. You are the best in the World! I love you to bits. Thank you to all my friends and whnau members who have donated your time and energy to proof read draft chapters of this thesis. In particular, I gratefully acknowledge: Caril Cowan, Heather Cunningham, Anneliese Espallier, Toby Harper, Jayne Mitchell, Carey-Ann Morrison and John Paterson. Thank you for this practical tautoko. I would like to thank my academic `whnau' at te Whanga Arowhenua, te Whare Wnanga o Waikato. I enjoyed the supervision of Robyn Longhurst for this thesis. Thank you for your professional approach to supervision. After every hui I left feeling encouraged and challenged. You have such a lovely manner. Thank you for all your help. Thank you to Max Oulton for making the map for this thesis. It is beautiful! Thanks to Lynda Johnston and John Campbell for your advice on graduate studies matters. Thank you to Brenda Hall. You are honestly the most friendly and helpful administrator ever! I am also grateful to the other tauira and staff members in the department that have given me tips, suggestions and talked with me about the study. I thank the generous financial tautoko from te Whare Wnanga o Waikato Masters Scholarship. I also appreciate the financial tautoko that I received from the Julia Sandford scholarship. These awards contributed to the funding of this thesis. A special thank you to the rangahau participants. Thank you for warmly welcoming me into your lives, whnau, pmu and kinga. Thank you for sharing krero paki and katakata with me. Thank you for telling me about your chooks, the ways that you care for them and their meaning in your lives. N reira, ki a koutou katoa, tn koutou, tn koutou, tn koutou katoa! iii

Rrangi Mahi
Whrangi Title Page.......................................................................................i Waitara..........................................................................................ii Mihi..............................................................................................iii Rrangi Mahi...................................................................................iv poko Tuatahi: Tmatanga...................................................................1 Rangahau Kaupapa 1 Ptai Matua 2 Ptai piti 2 Horopaki 3 Positionality 6 The Politics of Reo 6 poko Outline 7 poko Tuarua: Literature Review...........................................................10 Postcolonialism 10 Colonialism and Imperialism 11 The Role of Written and Visual Texts 13 Orientalism and `Othering' 15 Hybridity 16 Postcolonial Feminism 17 Kaupapa Mori 20 Critique of Kaupapa Mori 22 Whakarpopototanga 24 poko Tuatoru: Huarahi Mahi...............................................................25 Kaupapa Mori 25 Ethical Considerations 27 Snowballing: Making Contact with Potential Participants 28 Anonymity and Confidentiality 29 Rangahau Participants 30 Being Flexible 30 Feeling Comfortable and Having Fun 32 Being Approachable 33 Recording Techniques 34 Kaupapa Outline 34 Analysis 36 Self-Reflexivity 37 Discourse Analysis 38 Whakarpopototanga 40 poko Tuawh: Case Studies of Mori Chook Keepers.................................42 1) Daniel: Broad Context 43 Type of Chook Keeping 44 General Whakaaro about Life 44 iv

Educational Status and Cultural Identity 2) Aneta: Broad Context Type of Chook Keeping General Whakaaro about Life Educational Status and Cultural Identity 3) Becky: Broad Context Type of Chook Keeping Chooks as a Playmate Kaitiakitanga Cultural Identity Daniel, Aneta and Becky: Whakarpopototanga

47 49 50 51 53 55 55 56 57 58 59

poko Tuarima: "(Post)colonial Identities", Mori Chook Keepers Talk (Post)colonialism, Class and Ethnicity......................................................60 Reasons for Poverty 61 Poverty 66 Kai 72 Representations of Chooks and Their Keepers: Merging the Boundaries of `Self' and `Other' 75 Tikanga Mori and Chooks 79 Whakarpopototanga 84 poko Tuaono: "Silly Old Chook", Gender Issues Surrounding Chooks and their Keepers....................................................................................85 Chooks as Feminised, Hysterical, Comical and Silly 85 `Helpless' 87 Reo and Gender 89 Women's Mahi 91 Gender and Sexuality 92 Whakarpopototanga 94 poko Tuawhitu: Whakarpopototanga.................................................... 95 List of Whakaahua Whakaahua 1: The Participants' Understandings of the Waikato Rohe and Important Geographical Features Relevant to the Rangahau Whakaahua 2: Three Strands of Feminist Geography Whakaahua 3: The Productivity of Different Chook Keeping Production Systems in the Commercial Sector Whakaahua 4: My Chooks in their Aviary [and Zavier] Whakaahua 5: Mori produce delivered to Auckland 1852-1855 Whakaahua 6: The Separation of Nature from Culture and its Implications for Representations of Chooks Whakaahua 7: An Extract from Nanny Mihi's Garden, by Melanie Drewery Whakaahua 8: An Extract from Nanny Mihi's Garden, by Melanie Drewery

4 18 45 51 63 76 78 88

v

List of pitihanga pitihanga 1: Information Sheet pitihanga 2: Consent Form pitihanga 3: Kaupapa Outline for Semi-Structured Interviews and Focus Rp pitihanga 4: Email to Potential Participants pitihanga 5: Information about Mori Participants Involved in this Study pitihanga 6: Information about Pkeh Participants Involved in this Study pitihanga 7: Email to Television New Zealand Glossary of Mori Terms Rrangi Rauemi

99 100 101 104 105 106 107 108 113

vi

poko Tuatahi: Tmatanga
Rangahau Kaupapa In this thesis I explore discourses surrounding chooks 2 in Mori society. I consider low-intensive (see Whakaahua 3, whrangi 45) chook keeping for domestic purposes by Mori in the Waikato rohe, Aotearoa. As a contribution to postcolonial, feminist and Mori geographies, this project provides valuable insights into (post)colonial relations in Aotearoa. I focus the rangahau on the Waikato rohe due to its successful heritage of Mori horticultural and agricultural endeavours, including keeping chooks for domestic and commercial purposes. Due to its rich soils, prior to European contact, the Waikato rohe was more productive than other iwi (see Belich 1996 72). Once Europeans arrived in Aotearoa, Waikato Mori embraced their kararehe including chooks into their society (Stokes 1997a 11). During the early stages of European contact, keeping chooks became an economic enterprise in the Waikato rohe (King 2003 187, Stokes 1997a 11). Mori kept chooks for their hki in domestic settings and also to sell chooks to Pkeh in the Auckland market. Chooks were also kept as a ptake of lowfat white meat. Alongside chook keeping, growing grains for flour production also developed. Waikato Mori adopted these products into their cooking (Greensill 2005). The Waikato iwi are interesting in the way that they rapidly incorporated European kai and kararehe such as chooks into their ways of life (Greensill 2005). In addition, the Waikato is also the home of the Kingitanga movement, established in 1858. Ptatau Te Wherowhero was appointed the first Mori King with the goal of uniting iwi in an attempt to prevent alienation of tribal whenua (to colonial interests). The base of the Kingitanga was Ngruawhia until 1863 when colonial troops moved in. Although this movement has suffered difficulties in maintaining whenua bases (due to whenua sales and confiscations by the New Zealand Government), the Kingitanga remains an important part of the Waikato's identity.

2

I use the word "chook" in this thesis in preference to the word "chicken". This reflects the word choice that the rangahau participants use to describe their chickens (for a discussion of this issue, see whrangi 6-7).

1

In 1921, great granddaughter of Ptatau Te Wherowhero, Princess Te Puea Hrangi and other Kingitanga supporters re-established the seat of the Kingitanga in Ngruawhia. Subsequently, a substantial marae was built there, called Trangawaewae (Public Health Association of NZ 2003). Kirkpatrick (1999 45) suggests that Waikato iwi are among the dominant iwi that have spread throughout the motu. Despite this shift for mahi and other purposes, the Waikato maintains its tranga as the base for the Kingitanga. Furthermore, the Mori cultural renaissance and the Treaty of Waitangi settlements have encouraged Mori living in other rohe to renew their traditional iwi affiliations (Kirkpatrick 1999 45). Ptai Matua I am interested in (post)colonial, feminist and Mori geographies. In this thesis explores domestic chook keeping narratives as a lens through which to understand the impacts of colonialism upon some Mori in the Waikato rohe, Aotearoa. Although chooks are of colonial origin, they were rapidly adapted into Mori society. By incorporating Kaupapa Mori theoretical and methodological approaches to the rangahau, I contribute to a localised (post)colonial reading of domestic chook keeping in Aotearoa. Consequently, the main ptai that the thesis addresses is: how can focusing on chooks be used to explore and clarify understandings of the way in which colonialism has shaped aspects of contemporary Mori life in the Waikato rohe, Aotearoa? Ptai piti In order to address this ptai matua, I interviewed a small number of Mori to explore the following ptai piti: 1) How do these Mori view chooks? 2) Why do they keep chooks? 3) How does te reo me ng tikanga Mori impact upon chook keeping practices? 4) What are the impacts of historical and contemporary versions of colonialism upon my interviewees' abilities to keep chooks for commercial and domestic purposes?

2

The methodology chosen to conduct this rangahau allows me to consider a small number of Mori in-depth. 3 Consequently, this thesis does not offer a representative sample of all Mori views about chook keeping in the Waikato rohe. Horopaki My graduate paper GEOG519-04A Crossing Boundaries at te Whare Wnanga o Waikato included a rangahau project as a component of the assessment. I chose to research "My Backyard, My Chooks and My Flat: A Self-Reflexive Narrative about Human-Animal Interactions in the City". In this project I utilised postcolonial ria to explore human-animal interactions and the hierarchies of power that exist between my chooks, my flatmates and me. I wanted to continue rangahau in this area and consider chook keeping by Mori. Thus I study how some Mori view the environment and how they care for their kararehe, in particular their chooks in the Waikato rohe. For the purposes of this thesis the Waikato is defined as a part of the Tainui waka. Whakaahua 1 (see whrangi 4) depicts the important geographical features that are specific to the participants' connections to the Waikato rohe. It is a different space to what is traditionally called the Waikato and is illustrated in a non-Western manner. This reflects the Waikato whakatauk: Mkau ki runga, Tmaki ki raro Maunga-toatoa ki waenganui. Ko Parewaikato, ko Parehauraki, ko Te Kaokaoroa-o-Ptetere. Mkau above, Tmaki below, Manga-toatoa in the centre. Parewaikato, Parehauraki, the extended arm of Ptetere (McKinnon 1997 plate 19). This representation shows the participants' understanding of the Mori perspective of Aotearoa as a fish whereby Pneke is the head and Cape Reinga is the tail. Consequently, one rangahau participant, Aneta, refers to "heading down" from Te Awamutu to Kirikiriroa and "heading up" from Kmureti to Otorohanga. In addition to the participants' current residences (many in Kirikiriroa), Whakaahua 1 (see whrangi 4) shows their connections with rural whi where they keep chooks or
3

For a discussion of the methodologies employed in this project, see poko Tuatoru: Huarahi Mahi (whrangi 25-41).

3

Whakaahua 1: The Participants' Understandings of the Waikato Rohe and Important Geographical Features Relevant to the Rangahau

Ptake: Max Oulton, Cartographer, te Whanga Arowhenua, te Whare Wnanga o Waikato, 2006. once kept chooks. It also shows other significant landmarks such as Te Aroha and Taupiri maunga as well as Waip and Waikato awa, which are important to Waikato Mori as part of their cultural heritage. In particular, the choice to show Waikato awa and Taupiri maunga reflects the following tribal saying:

4

ko Waikato te awa. Ko Taupiri te maunga. Ko Te Wherowhero te tangata. Waikato is the river. Taupiri is the mountain. Te Wherowhero is the man (Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand 2006a). By referring to Te Wherowhero as their leader and Taupiri as their sacred maunga this pepeha demonstrates the strong connections between Waikato iwi and the Kingitanga movement. All of the Mori kings and other prominent Waikato rangatira are buried on Taupiri maunga (Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand 2006a). The Waikato and Waip awa hold historical importance for Waikato Mori as cultural icons but also as avenues to transport merchandise such as chooks, to markets in Auckland and afar. Stokes (1997b 37-38) highlights the importance of the Waikato awa to Waikato iwi: the river was the sustenance of the Waikato, not only for its food, or its importance as a transport route, but also its spiritual significance in ritual and tradition. The principal settlements of Waikato tribes were on its banks, hence the meaning of the second part of the pepeha: Waikato of the many chiefs, at every bend of the river is a taniwha, an image to denote both the villages on the banks, and the leaders and protective taniwha in the river. The Waikato awa is the longest in the motu and is a source of mauri, mana, identity and pride for Waikato Mori. Several of the participants discussed the importance of these water systems to their chook keeping practices. Hei tauira, Huia and Becky collected wai mori daily from creeks for their chooks to increase their hki production. I illustrate the significance of the Kingitanga movement to Waikato Mori by including Trangawaewae marae, Kmureti township and Pirongia in the definition of the Waikato rohe. These geographical features have been selected in accordance with the second Mori King, Twhiao's saying: ko Arekahnara tku haona kaha. Ko Kemureti tku oko horoi. Ko Ngruawhia tku trangawaewae. Alexandra [present day Pirongia] will ever be a symbol of my strength of character. Cambridge a symbol of my wash bowl of sorrow. And Ngruawhia my footstool (Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand 2006b).

5

As the home of the Native Land Court, Kmureti is referred to as "tku oko horoi" or "a symbol of my wash bowl of sorrow" (Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand 2006b). This reflects King Twhiao's disappointment at the Waikato whenua that was alienated by Mori through these legal processes. This loss of whenua is significant to this rangahau because it may have contributed to the poverty experienced by many of the participants. Positionality I am originally from Otautau in the South Island of Aotearoa, however my immediate family has resided in the Waikato rohe for the past six tau. My whnau have kept chooks for domestic purposes from when I was a young child until the present day. I perceive that my positionality to this rangahau is helpful because it enables me to better understand the participants' experiences. I am in a unique position as a Pkeh Mori to carry out this rangahau because I can relate to the participants, their tikanga and reo. My ethnicity and fluency in te reo Mori and te reo Pkeh enabled participants to speak in Mori, te reo Pkeh and/or a mixture. This helped the participants to feel more confident in their communications. However, I have spent most of my life living in Titirangi, West Auckland, which has a significantly higher socio-economic status to parts of rural Waikato (where many of the participants keep or kept chooks). Consequently I found it difficult to relate to the level of poverty in these parts because I had not been previously exposed to it. However, I think this is useful because it prompted me explore this issue of poverty within the context of colonialism in an attempt to understand poverty. The Politics of Reo The issue of which kupu to use in this thesis when discussing chickens was initially problematic. The information and consent forms (see pitihanga 1 and 2, whrangi 99-100) I gave to potential participants explain the kaupapa as "chicken farming". Upon receiving the information and consent forms, several of the participants expressed concern because they did not fit the criteria to participate. These concerns 6

were based on the principle that they felt that the term "chicken farmer" refers to a person who intensively farms chickens for commercial purposes. Consequently, I asked all participants what kupu they use to describe their chickens and their method of farming them. The predominant response was "chook keeping" or "keeping chooks". The participants felt that this better describes their low-intensive enterprises mainly for domestic purposes. There were a variety of kupu that the participants used to describe their female and male chickens. However, the majority of participants used the word "hens" interchangeably with "chooks" to refer to all male, female and baby chickens. Occasionally, participants described their chooks according to their breed. Hei tauira, Daniel, Joseph and Josh talked about their matua's "Chinese Silky". Becky also spoke about her "Bantam". Notwithstanding the above, the predominant term used was "chooks". Thus, the change from writing "chicken farming" to "chook keeping" and "chickens" to "chooks" in this thesis is deliberate. It reflects the participants' identities and linguistic preferences. I have included many Mori kupu in the thesis, following Te Taura i te reo Mori's (2006) orthographic conventions for writing te reo Mori. Consequently, I have used a universal form of te reo Mori. 4 This means that I do not conform to the dialect most commonly used in the Waikato rohe. I perceive this as helpful because it increases the range of iwi that may read this thesis to gain insights into a postcolonial reading of some Mori chook keepers in the Waikato. poko Outline In this introduction, I explain the kaupapa of this thesis, "Keeping Chooks at Home in the Waikato: Exploring Postcolonial, Feminist and Kaupapa Mori Perspectives". First, I introduce the rangahau focus by providing readers with the rangahau ptai. Second, I explain the horopaki for undertaking this study.

4

I have also employed tohu t wherever necessary. Consequently, I have been careful to be consistent in using tohu t throughout this thesis. However, I have presented all quotations in their original form. In some cases these quotations do not use macrons for kupu such as "Mori" and "Pkeh". This may have been because international publishers did not welcome such conventions.

7

I explore the historical connection between Waikato Mori and chook keeping. I explain the Kingitanga movement's influence upon Waikato iwi. I include Whakaahua 1 (see whrangi 4) to clarify the definition of the Waikato rohe. This whakaahua includes important geographical features that are referred to by participants and me throughout this thesis. Third, I explain my tranga in relation to this rangahau. Fourth, I discuss reo issues that are important to this rangahau. I now introduce the remainder of the poko in this thesis. In poko tuarua I discuss the main bodies of literature that have informed this mahi: postcolonial, feminist and Mori geographies. In this analysis I suggest that a localised approach to postcolonial rangahau is useful. Hence, I weave Kaupapa Mori, a Mori theoretical and methodological approach, into the framework. This influences the methodology choice - semi-structured interviews, focus rp and discourse analysis. These methods are discussed in poko Tuatoru: Huarahi Mahi. In this poko I outline ethical issues, my positionality to the rangahau, data collection and analysis techniques. I also introduce the rangahau participants. There are three substantive poko in this thesis. poko Tuawh: Case Studies of Mori Chook Keepers explores Daniel, Aneta and Becky's experiences keeping chooks. I highlight the differences and similarities between these three narratives. The fifth poko, "(Post)colonial Identities": Mori Chook Keepers Talk (Post)colonialism, Class and Ethnicity investigates intersecting issues of racialised capitalism, colonialism and neocolonialism. The affects of these factors may explain the low socio-economic status that many of the participants occupy. I explore possible reasons for this poverty. I situate the participants in the Waikato rohe where historical and contemporary processes of colonialism have created a colonial underclass, Mori. I also address the ways that some Mori attempt to challenge this poverty by embracing chooks into their lifestyles and value systems. This is read as a means of self-sufficiency and financial independence. poko Tuaono: "Silly Old Chook", Gender Issues Surrounding Chooks and their Keepers discusses themes of gender and sexuality in relation to chooks. In this

8

analysis, representations of chooks as hysterical, comical, silly and helpless emerge. I situate these ideas within a broader horopaki of postcolonial feminist ria. poko Tuawhitu: Whakarpopototanga addresses the ptai of this rangahau. I summarise the key kaupapa that I raise in this rangahau. In this poko I indicate the important contribution to postcolonial geography that this innovative piece of rangahau offers. I conclude by suggesting future rangahau possibilities.

9

poko Tuarua: Literature Review
The main bodies of literature that have influenced the direction of this thesis are: postcolonial, feminist and Kaupapa Mori geographies. First, I discuss postcolonial ria and its connection to this thesis. I draw from international theorists such as Bhabha, Frankenburg and Mani, hooks, 5 Loomba, McClintock, Mohanty and Spivak to consider the impacts of colonialism upon the participants' experiences of chook keeping in postcolonial Aotearoa. Second, I include reference to postcolonial theorists who consider issues of gender and sexuality. Third, I explain the link between postcolonialism and Kaupapa Mori, the Mori perspective that I employ in this thesis. I weave these three perspectives together to create a space wherein discourses of being Mori, colonialism, gender and sexuality can be considered concurrently.

Postcolonialism
In this rangahau I draw from postcolonial ria to read the participants' diverse and contradictory narratives about chook keeping in the Waikato rohe. Postcolonial ria focuses on issues of difference, orientalism and otherness, hybridity and the subaltern 6 or colonial underclass (hooks 1997). This theory is interdisciplinary (Blunt and Wills 2000 167). Important authors in this area include: Edward Said, Homi Bhabha and Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Blunt and Wills 2000 168). Postcolonial ria is complex but in a literal sense, postcolonialism refers to a w, which has been preceded by colonisation (Johnston et al 2000 614). The following extract from Blunt and Wills (2000 170, italics in original) explores the problematic nature of placing postcolonialism in a timeframe: in light of the difficulties of referring to a clearly defined postcolonial era, many writers refer to postcolonialism as being beyond rather than necessarily after colonialism. In this case, the `post' in `postcolonialism' refers more to a critical than to a temporal aftermath
bell hooks (nee Gloria Watkins) has chosen to use her grandmother's name to "honor both her grandmother and her mother, as well as provide her the opportunity to establish a separate voice from the person Gloria Watson" (Anonymous 2004 1). She writes her entire name in lower case. 6 Johnston et al (2000 801) define a subaltern as "the collective agency of exploited, oppressed and marginalized groups".
5

10

as postcolonial perspectives explore and resist colonial and neocolonial power and knowledge. Frankenburg and Mani (1996 361) suggest that colonialism and postcolonialism are intertwined. Furthermore, postcolonialisms and postcolonial horopaki are highly complex and political whi (Mohanty 1991 53). Postcolonialism has multiple meanings and "as with cultural geography, the boundaries of what counts as postcolonialism are also fluid" (Nash 2002 219). In this thesis I consider the impacts of colonialism in its historical and contemporary forms upon Mori chook keepers (as will be discussed below), the colonial underclass in Aotearoa. In order to better comprehend postcolonial perspectives, McClintock (1992 87) suggests that it is helpful to understand processes of colonisation: the term "post-colonialism" should not be understood as everything that has happened since European colonialism but rather everything that has happened from the very beginning of colonialism, which means turning back the clocks and unrolling the maps of "postcolonialism" to 1492, and earlier. Postcolonialism is a series of global and local processes originating from the birth of colonial interests and activities. To apply this aspect of postcolonial ria to the thesis, I have considered historical and contemporary colonial practices in the Waikato rohe that have had an effect on Mori. By investigating kwanatanga introduced legislative and military policies in this rohe,7 I can better understand important issues (such as poverty and hybridity) that affect the rangahau participants' everyday experiences as chook keepers. Colonialism and Imperialism Colonialism is multi-faceted as it involves control of the military, economic, political

7

Hei tauira, in poko Tuarima: "(Post)colonial Identities", (Post)colonialism, Class and Ethnicity I address the effects of colonial interferences in relation to Mori chook keeping enterprises in the Waikato rohe. Specifically, I make reference to the impacts of the colonial invasion of the Waikato rohe (during the 1860s) and consequent raupatu of whenua. I also discuss a colonial institution, the Native Land Court, and its implications for Waikato Mori (see whrangi 63-65).

11

and social dynamics of a country (Johnston et al 1994 75-77). Loomba (1998 2) defines colonialism thus: colonialism was not an identical process in different parts of the world but everywhere it locked the original inhabitants and the newcomers into the most complex and traumatic relationships in human history. European countries have historically been significant in their colonial "influence extending over vast areas in Asia, Africa, the Americas and Australasia" (Blunt and Wills 2000 172). Blunt and Wills (2000 180) describe this colonialism as a cultural project, whereby discourses were promoted that "helped to legitimate and to perpetuate colonial power". For the purposes of this thesis, neocolonialism is a new form of colonialism in the contemporary setting. 8 Although colonialism is a variant of imperialism, it is helpful to separate and define the two kupu. Imperialism is the idea of subordination and domination over space whereas colonialism is the practice of imposing imperialism by conquest and territorial expansion. Blunt and Wills (2000 176) describe imperialism as encompassing "the practice, the theory, and the attitudes of a dominating metropolitan centre ruling a distant territory". The Crown's involvement in conflicts in the Waikato rohe during the 1860s and subsequent raupatu of ancestral whenua can be read as an act of colonialism (Belich 1996 230-231). This military invasion of the Waikato was an attempt to challenge Mori economic, 9 political and social structures. Belich (1996 230-231) argues that the Crown's decision to invade was not a matter of land but rather about asserting their sovereignty. He also postulates that the Crown's involvement in the Waikato Wars was over an idea of conquest rather than primarily over whenua. The precedents and prophesies of empire and settlement, the selfimages of governors and settlers, the ethos of a colonising and
8

Hei tauira, the kwanatanga interference with Mori customary ownership of the foreshore and seabed of Aotearoa can be interpreted as an act of neocolonialism (Greensill 2005). 9 This included enterprises such as chook keeping for domestic and commercial purposes. Keeping chooks during this period was an economically productive activity for Waikato Mori (for a detailed discussion of this issue, see poko Tuarima: "(Post)colonial Identities", (Post)colonialism, Class and Ethnicity, whrangi 62-64).

12

progressive race, demanded that the British rule the whole of New Zealand in fact as well as name. To people subject to the myths of empire, and to hardening racial ideologies, there was something unnatural, unEuropean, about white communities living in equal partnership with blacks. If New Zealand had contained no land at all, and Pakeha and Maori had both been societies of boat people, these ideologies might still have pressured the former to assert their sway over the latter (Belich 1996 230-231). This quotation draws attention to the ideological construct of supremacy that underpins the colonial military invasion of the Waikato. Belich (1996 239) suggests that the British victory in the Waikato rohe was "limited but real and a turning point in New Zealand history." This is because it created an unbalanced power relationship between the coloniser, Pkeh and the colonised, Mori. Prior to the Waikato conflicts, Mori had a strong economic ba