Molecular Systems Biology 3; Article number 78; doi:10.1038/msb4100120 Citation: Molecular Systems Biology 3:78 & 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 1744-4292/07 www.molecularsystemsbiology.com

REVIEW

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles
Mukesh Bansal1,2,5, Vincenzo Belcastro3,5, Alberto Ambesi-Impiombato1,4 and Diego di Bernardo1,2,*
1 2

Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Via P Castellino, Naples, Italy, European School of Molecular Medicine, Naples, Italy, 3 Department of Natural Sciences, University of Naples `Federico II', Naples, Italy and 4 Department of Neuroscience, University of Naples `Federico II', Naples, Italy 5 These authors contributed equally to this work * Corresponding author. Systems Biology Lab, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Via P Castellino 111, Naples 18131, Italy. Tel.: þ 39 081 6132 319; Fax: þ 39 081 6132 351; E-mail: dibernardo@tigem.it
Received 30.5.06; accepted 18.12.06

Inferring, or `reverse-engineering', gene networks can be defined as the process of identifying gene interactions from experimental data through computational analysis. Gene expression data from microarrays are typically used for this purpose. Here we compared different reverseengineering algorithms for which ready-to-use software was available and that had been tested on experimental data sets. We show that reverse-engineering algorithms are indeed able to correctly infer regulatory interactions among genes, at least when one performs perturbation experiments complying with the algorithm requirements. These algorithms are superior to classic clustering algorithms for the purpose of finding regulatory interactions among genes, and, although further improvements are needed, have reached a discreet performance for being practically useful. Molecular Systems Biology 13 February 2007; doi:10.1038/msb4100120
Subject Categories: metabolic and regulatory networks; simulation and data analysis Keywords: gene network; reverse-engineering; gene expression; transcriptional regulation; gene regulation

Introduction
Gene expression microarrays yield quantitative and semiquantitative data on the cell status in a specific condition and time. Molecular biology is rapidly evolving into a quantitative science, and as such, it is increasingly relying on engineering and physics to make sense of high-throughput data. The aim is to infer, or `reverse-engineer', from gene expression data, the regulatory interactions among genes using computational algorithms. There are two broad classes of reverse-engineering algorithms (Faith and Gardner, 2005): those based on the `physical interaction' approach that aim at identifying interactions among transcription factors and their target genes & 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group

(gene-to-sequence interaction) and those based on the `influence interaction' approach that try to relate the expression of a gene to the expression of the other genes in the cell (gene-to-gene interaction), rather than relating it to sequence motifs found in its promoter (gene-to-sequence). We will refer to the ensemble of these `influence interactions' as gene networks. The interaction between two genes in a gene network does not necessarily imply a physical interaction, but can also refer to an indirect regulation via proteins, metabolites and ncRNA that have not been measured directly. Influence interactions include physical interactions, if the two interacting partners are a transcription factor, and its target, or two proteins in the same complex. Generally, however, the meaning of influence interactions is not well defined and depends on the mathematical formalism used to model the network. Nonetheless, influence networks do have practical utility for (1) identifying functional modules, that is, identify the subset of genes that regulate each other with multiple (indirect) interactions, but have few regulations to other genes outside the subset; (2) predicting the behaviour of the system following perturbations, that is, gene network models can be used to predict the response of a network to an external perturbation and to identify the genes directly `hit' by the perturbation (di Bernardo et al, 2005), a situation often encountered in the drug discovery process, where one needs to identify the genes that are directly interacting with a compound of interest; (3) identifying real physical interactions by integrating the gene network with additional information from sequence data and other experimental data (i.e. chromatin immunoprecipitation, yeast two-hybrid assay, etc.). In addition to reverse-engineering algorithms, network visualisation tools are available online to display the network surrounding a gene of interest by extracting information from the literature and experimental data sets, such as Cytoscape (Shannon et al, 2003) (http://www.cytoscape.org/features.php) and Osprey (Breitkreutz et al, 2003) (http://biodata.mshri.on. ca/osprey/servlet/Index). Here we will focus on gene network inference algorithms (the influence approach). A description of other methods based on the physical approach and more details on computational aspects can be found in (Beer and Tavazoie, 2004; Tadesse et al, 2004; Faith and Gardner, 2005; Prakash and Tompa, 2005; Ambesi and di Bernardo, 2006; Foat et al, 2006). We will also briefly describe two `improper' reverseengineering tools (MNI and TSNI), whose main focus is not inferring interactions among genes from gene expression data, but rather identification of the targets of the perturbation (point (2) above). Among the plethora of algorithms proposed in the literature to solve the network inference problem, we selected one algorithm for each class of mathematical formalism proposed in the literature, for which ready-to-use software is available and that had been tested on experimental data sets.
Molecular Systems Biology 2007 1

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles M Bansal et al

Gene network inference algorithms
We will indicate the gene expression measurement of gene i with the variable xi, the set of expression measurements for all the genes with D and the interaction between genes i and j with aij. D may consist of time-series gene expression data of N genes in M time points (i.e. gene expression changing dynamically with time), or measurements taken at steadystate in M different conditions (i.e. gene expression levels in homeostasis). Some inference algorithms can work on both kind of data, whereas others have been specifically designed to analyse one or the other. Depending on the inference algorithm used, the resulting gene network can be either an undirected graph, that is, the direction of the interaction is not specified (aij¼aji), or a directed graph specifying the direction of the interaction, that is, gene j regulates gene i (and not vice versa) (aijaaji). A directed graph can also be labeled with a sign and strength for each interaction, signed directed graph, where aij has a positive, zero or negative value indicating activation, no interaction and repression, respectively. An overview of softwares described here is given in Figure 1 and Table I.

understand what can be gained by advanced gene network inference algorithms, whose aim is to infer direct interactions among genes, as compared with `simple' clustering, for the purpose of gene network inference. The most common clustering approach is hierarchical clustering (Eisen et al, 1998), where relationships among genes are represented by a tree whose branch lengths reflect the degree of similarity between genes, as assessed by a pairwise similarity function such as Pearson correlation coefficient: ðxi ðkÞxj ðkÞÞ k¼1 rij ¼ sffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi M M P P 2 ð x2 ðkÞ xj ðkÞÞ i
k¼1 k¼1 M P

ð1Þ

Coexpression networks and clustering algorithms
Clustering, although not properly a network inference algorithm, is the current method of choice to visualise and analyse gene expression data. Clustering is based on the idea of grouping genes with similar expression profiles in clusters (Eisen et al, 1998). Similarity is measured by a distance metric, as for example the correlation coefficient among a pair of genes. The number of clusters can be set either automatically or by the user depending on the clustering algorithm used (Eisen et al, 1998; Amato et al, 2006). The rationale behind clustering is that coexpressed genes (i.e. genes in the same cluster) have a good probability of being functionally related (Eisen et al, 1998). This does not imply, however, that there is a direct interaction among the coexpressed genes, as genes separated by one or more intermediaries (indirect relationships) may be highly coexpressed. It is therefore important to

For a set of n profiles, all the pairwise correlation coefficients rij are computed; the highest value (representing the most similar pair of genes) is selected and a node in the tree is created for this gene pair with a new expression profile given by the average of the two profiles. The process is repeated by replacing the two genes with a single node, and all pairwise correlations among the nÀ1 profiles (i.e. nÀ2 profiles from single genes plus 1 of the gene pair) are computed. The process stops when only one element remains. Clusters are obtained by cutting the tree at a specified branch level. In order to compare clustering to the other network inference strategies, we assumed that genes in the same clusters regulate each other, that is, each gene represents a node in the network and is connected to all the other genes in the same cluster. Clustering will thus recover an undirected graph.

Bayesian networks
A Bayesian network is a graphical model for probabilistic relationships among a set of random variables Xi, where i¼1 y n. These relationships are encoded in the structure of a directed acyclic graph G, whose vertices (or nodes) are the random variables Xi. The relationships between the variables

START (Expression data)

Infer a gene network?

No

Predict targets of a perturbation? Yes

Yes

ARACNE(*) BANJO (DBN) CLUSTERING

Time series

What kind of expression data? Steady state

What kind of expression data? Steady state

Time series

TSNI

ARACNE BANJO (BN) NIR CLUSTERING

MNI NIR

Figure 1 Flowchart to choose the most suitable network inference algorithms according to the problem to be addressed. (*): check for independence of time points (see text for details); (BN): Bayesian networks; (DBN): Dynamic Bayesian Networks.
2 Molecular Systems Biology 2007

& 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles M Bansal et al

Table I Features of the network inference algorithms reviewed in this tutorial

Software BANJO ARACNE NIR/MNIa

Download www.cs.duke.edu/~amink/ software/banjo amdec-bioinfo.cu-genome.org/html/ caWork-Bench/upload/arcane.zip tgardner@bu.edu

Data type S/D S/D S

Command line java-jar banjo.jar settingFile¼mysettings.txt arance-i inputfile-o outputfile [options] MATLAB

Notes Good performance if large datasets is available (MbN) Good performance even for MpN. Not useful for short time series NIR: good performance but requires knowledge of perturbed genes/MNI: good performance for inferring targets of a perturbation Useful for finding coexpressed genes, but not for network inference

Hierarchical clustering

http://bonsai.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ mde-hoon/software/cluster

S/D

GUI

Abbreviations: D: dynamic time-series; N: number of genes; M: number of experiments; S: steay-state. a Predicts only targets of a perturbation (see text for details).

Bayesian Networks D E

Information-theoretic D E

Ordinary differential equations D E

B

C

B

C

B

C

H

A

H

A

H

A

F

G

F

G

F

G

P(A/B,C,D,E)=P(A/B,C)

MI(A,H)=0 MI(A,B)> 0 0 < MI(A,D)  min{MI(A,B), MI(B,D)}

dA/dt =1A+2B+3C or more generally: dA/dt =f(A,B,C,)

Figure 2 Bayesian networks: A is conditionally independent of D and E given B and C; information-theoretic networks: mutual information is 0 for statistically independent variables, and Data Processing Inequality helps pruning the network; ordinary differential equations: deterministic approach, where the rate of transcription of gene A is a function (f) of the level of its direct causal regulators.

are described by a joint probability distribution P(X1, y, Xn) that is consistent with the independence assertions embedded in the graph G and has the form: PðX1 ; . . . ; Xn Þ ¼
N Y i¼1

PðXi ¼ xi jjXj ¼ xj ; . . . ; Xjþp ¼ xjþp Þ

ð2Þ

where the p þ 1 genes, on which the probability is conditioned, are called the parents of gene i and represent its regulators, and the joint probability density is expressed as a product of conditional probabilities by applying the chain rule of probabilities and independence. This rule is based on the Bayes theorem: PðA; BÞ ¼ PðBjjAÞ Ã PðAÞ ¼ PðAjjBÞ Ã PðBÞ: We observe that the JPD (joint probability distribution) can be decomposed as the product of conditional probabilities as in Equation 2 only if the Markov assumption holds, that is, each variable Xi is independent of its non-descendants, given its parent in the directed acyclic graph G. A schematic overview of the theory underlying Bayesian networks is given in Figure 2. & 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group

In order to reverse-engineer a Bayesian network model of a gene network, we must find the directed acyclic graph G (i.e. the regulators of each transcript) that best describes the gene expression data D, where D is assumed to be a steady-state data set. This is performed by choosing a scoring function that evaluates each graph G (i.e. a possible network topology) with respect to the gene expression data D, and then searching for the graph G that maximises the score. The score can be defined using the Bayes rule: PðG=DÞ ¼ PðD=GÞÃPðGÞ, where P(G) can either contain some a PðDÞ priori knowledge on network structure, if available, or can be a constant non-informative prior, and P(D/G) is a function, to be chosen by the algorithm that evaluates the probability that the data D has been generated by the the graph G. The most popular scores are the Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC) or Bayesian Dirichlet equivalence (BDe). Both scores incorporate a penalty for complexity to guard against overfitting of data. Trying out all possible combinations of interaction among genes, that is, all possible graphs G, and choosing the G with
Molecular Systems Biology 2007 3

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles M Bansal et al

the maximum Bayesian score is an NP-hard problem. Therefore, a heuristic search method is used, like the greedy-hill climbing approach, the Markov Chain Monte Carlo method or simulated annealing. In Bayesian networks, the learning problem is usually underdetermined and several high-scoring networks are found. To address this problem, one can use model averaging or bootstrapping to select the most probable regulatory interactions and to obtain confidence estimates for the interactions. For example, if a particular interaction between two transcripts repeatedly occurs in high-scoring models, one gains confidence that this edge is a true dependency. Alternatively, one can augment an incomplete data set with prior information to help select the most likely model structure. Bayesian networks cannot contain cycles(i.e. no feedback loops). This restriction is the principal limitation of the Bayesian network models. Dynamic Bayesian networks overcome this limitation. Dynamic Bayesian networks are an extension of Bayesian networks able to infer interactions from a data set D consisting of time-series rather than steady-state data. We refer the reader to (Yu et al, 2004). A word of caution: Bayesian networks model probabilistic dependencies among variables and not causality, that is, the parents of a node are not necessarily also the direct causes of its behaviour. However, we can interpret the edge as a causal link if we assume that the Causal Markov Condition holds. This can be stated simply as: a variable X is independent of every other variable (except the targets of X) conditional on all its direct causes. It is not known whether this assumption is a good approximation of what happens in real biological networks. For more information and a detailed study of Bayesian networks for gene network inference, we refer the reader to Pe'er et al (2000).

Information-theoretic approaches
Information-theoretic approaches use a generalisation of pairwise correlation coefficient in equation (1), called Mutual Information (MI), to compare expression profiles from a set of microarrays. For each pair of genes, their MIij is computed and the edge aij¼aji is set to 0 or 1 depending on a significance threshold to which MIij is compared. MI can be used to measure the degree of independence between two genes. Mutual information, MIij, between gene i and gene j is computed as: MIi;j ¼ Hi þ Hj À Hij where H, the entropy, is defined as: n X pðxk Þ logðpðxk ÞÞ Hi ¼ À
k¼1

ð3Þ

ð4Þ

Banjo
Banjo is a gene network inference software that has been developed by the group of Hartemink (Yu et al, 2004). Banjo is based on Bayesian networks formalism and implements both Bayesian and Dynamic Bayesian networks. Therefore it can infer gene networks from steady-state gene expression data or from time-series gene expression data. In Banjo, heuristic approaches are used to search the `network space' to find the network graph G (Proposer/ Searcher module in Banjo). For each network structure explored, the parameters of the conditional probability density distribution are inferred and an overall network's score is computed using the BDe metric in Banjo's Evaluator module. The output network will be the one with the best score (Banjo's Decider module). Banjo outputs a signed directed graph indicating regulation among genes. Banjo can analyse both steady-state and timeseries data. In the case of steady-state data, Banjo, as well as the other Bayesian networks algorithms, is not able to infer networks involving cycles (e.g. feedback or feed forward loops). Other Bayesian network inference algorithms for which software is available have been proposed (Murphy, 2001; Friedman and Elidan, 2004).
4 Molecular Systems Biology 2007

The entropy Hi has many interesting properties; specifically, it reaches a maximum for uniformly distributed variables, that is, the higher the entropy, the more randomly distributed are gene expression levels across the experiments. From the definition, it follows that MI becomes zero if the two variables xi and xj are statistically independent (P(xixj)¼P(xi)P(xj)), as their joint entropy Hij¼Hi þ Hj. A higher MI indicates that the two genes are non-randomly associated to each other. It can be easily shown that MI is symmetric, Mij¼Mji, therefore the network is described by an undirected graph G, thus differing from Bayesian networks (directed acyclic graph). MI is more general than the Pearson correlation coefficient. This quantifies only linear dependencies between variables, and a vanishing Pearson correlation does not imply that two variables are statistically independent. In practical application, however, MI and Pearson correlation may yield almost identical results (Steuer et al, 2002). The definition of MI in equation (3) requires each data point, that is, each experiment, to be statistically independent from the others. Thus information-theoretic approaches, as described here, can deal with steady-state gene expression data set, or with time-series data as long as the sampling time is long enough to assume that each point is independent of the previous points. Edges in networks derived by information-theoretic approaches represent statistical dependences among geneexpression profiles. As in the case of Bayesian network, the edge does not represent a direct causal interaction between two genes, but only a statistical dependency. A `leap of faith' must be performed in order to interpret the edge as a direct causal interaction. It is possible to derive the information-theoretic approach as a method to approximate the JPD of gene expression profiles, as it is performed for Bayesian networks. We refer the interested readers to Margolin et al (2006).

ARACNE
ARACNE (Basso et al, 2005; Margolin et al, 2006) belongs to the family of information-theoretic approaches to gene network inference first proposed by Butte and Kohane (2000) with their relevance network algorithm. ARACNE computes Mij for all pairs of genes i and j in the data set. Mij is estimated using the method of Gaussian kernel & 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles M Bansal et al

density (Steuer et al, 2002). Once Mij for all gene pairs has been computed, ARACNE excludes all the pairs for which the null hypothesis of mutually independent genes cannot be ruled out (Ho: MIij¼0). A P-value for the null hypothesis, computed using Montecarlo simulations, is associated to each value of the mutual information. The final step of this algorithm is a pruning step that tries to reduce the number of false-positive (i.e. inferred interactions among two genes that are not direct causal interaction in the real biological pathway). They use the Data Processing Inequality (DPI) principle that asserts that if both (i,j) and (j,k) are directly interacting, and (i,k) is indirectly interacting through j, then Mi, kpmin(Mij, Mjk). This condition is necessary but not sufficient, that is, the inequality can be satisfied even if (i, k) are directly interacting. Therefore the authors acknowledge that by applying this pruning step using DPI they may be discarding some direct interactions as well.

measurements (time-series network identification--TSNI) following transcriptional perturbations, to reconstruct gene­ gene interactions and to identify the mediators of the activity of a drug. Other algorithms based on ODEs have been proposed in the literature (D'haeseleer et al, 1999; Tegner et al, 2003; Bonneau et al, 2006; van Someren et al, 2006). The network is described as a system of linear ODEs (de Jong, 2002) representing the rate of synthesis of a transcript as a function of the concentrations of every other transcript in a cell, and the external perturbation: X . xi ðtk Þ ¼ aij xj ðtk Þ þ bi uðtk Þ
N j¼1

ð6Þ

Ordinary differential equations
Reverse-engineering algorithms based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs) relate changes in gene transcript concentration to each other and to an external perturbation. By external perturbation, we mean an experimental treatment that can alter the transcription rate of the genes in the cell. An example of perturbation is the treatment with a chemical compound (i.e. a drug), or a genetic perturbation involving overexpression or downregulation of particular genes. This is a deterministic approach not based on the estimation of conditional probabilities, unlike Bayesian networks and information-theoretic approaches. A set of ODEs, one for each gene, describes gene regulation as a function of other genes: . xi ðtÞ ¼ fi ðx1 ; . . . ; xN ; u; yi Þ ð5Þ where yi is a set of parameters describing interactions among genes (the edges of the graph), i¼1 y N, xi(t) is the . concentration of transcript i measured at time t, xi ðtÞ ¼ dxi ðtÞ dt is the rate of transcription of transcript i, N is the number of genes and u is an external perturbation to the system. As ODEs are deterministic, the interactions among genes (yi) represent causal interactions, and not statistical dependencies as the other methods. To reverse-engineer a network using ODEs means to choose a functional form for fi and then to estimate the unknown parameters yi for each i from the gene expression data D using some optimisation technique. The ODE-based approaches yield signed directed graphs and can be applied to both steady-state and time-series expression profiles. Another advantage of ODE approaches is that once the parameters yi, for all i are known, equation (5) can be used to predict the behaviour of the network in different conditions (i.e. gene knockout, treatment with an external agent, etc.).

where i¼1 ,y, N; k¼1 y M, N is the number of genes, M is the . number of time points, xi(tk) is the concentration of transcript i . measured at time tk, xi(tk) is the rate of change of concentration of gene i at time tk, that is, the first derivative of the mRNA concentration of gene i measured at time tk, aij represents the influence of gene j on gene i, bi represents the effect of the external pertrurbation on xi and u(tk) represents the external perturbation at time tk (aij and bi are the y in equation (5)). . In the case of steady-state data, xi(tk)¼0 and equation (6) for gene i becomes independent of time and can be simplified and rewritten in the form of a linear regression:
N X j¼1

aij xj ¼ Àbi u

ð7Þ

NIR, MNI and TSNI
In recent studies (Gardner et al, 2003; di Bernardo et al, 2005; Bansal et al, 2006), ODE-based algorithms have been developed (Network identification by multiple regression (NIR) and microarray network identifcation (MNI)) that use a series of steady-state RNA expression measurements, or time-series & 2007 EMBO and Nature Publishing Group

The NIR algorithm (Gardner et al, 2003) computes the edges aij from steady-state gene expression data using equation (7). NIR needs, as input, the gene expression profiles following each perturbation experiment (xj), knowledge of which genes have been directly perturbed in each perturbation experiment (biu) and optionally, the standard deviation of replicate measurements. NIR is based on a network sparsity assumption, that is, a maximum number of ingoing edges per gene (i.e. maximum number of regulators per gene), which can be chosen by the user. The output is in matrix format, where each element is the edge aij. The inference algorithm reduces to solving equation (7) for the unknown parameters aij, that is, a classic linearregression problem. The MNI algorithm (di Bernardo et al, 2005) is based on equation (7) as well, and uses steady-state data like NIR, but importantly, each microarray experiment can result from any kind of perturbation, that is, we do not require knowledge of biu. MNI is different from other inference methods as the inferred network is used not per se but to filter the gene expression profile following a treatment with a compound to determine pathways and genes directly targeted by the compound. This is achieved in two steps. In the first step, the parameters aij are obtained from gene expression data D; in the second step, the gene expression profile following compound treatment is measured (xd with i¼1 y N), and i equation (7) is used to compute the values biu for each i, as aij is known and u is simply a constant representing the treatment. bi different from 0 represents the genes that are directly hit by the compound. The output is a ranked list of genes; genes at the top of the list are the most likely targets of the compound (i.e. the ones with the highest value of bi).
Molecular Systems Biology 2007 5

How to infer gene networks from expression profiles M Bansal et al

The network inferred by MNI could be used per se, and not only as a filter; however, if we do not have any knowledge about which genes have been perturbed directly in each perturbation experiment in dataset D (right-hand side in equation (7)), then, differently from NIR, the solution to equation (7) is not unique, and we can only infer one out of many possible networks that can explain the data. What remains unique are the predictions (bi), that is, all the possible networks predict the same bi. MNI performance is not tested here, not being a `proper' network inference algorithm, but we refer the interested readers to di Bernardo et al (2005), where the performance is tested in detail. The TSNI (Time Series Network Identification) algorithm (Bansal et al, 2006) identifies the gene network (aij) as well as the direct targets of the perturbations (bi). TSNI is based on equation (6) and is applied when gene expression data are dynamic (time-series). To solve equation (6), we need the values . of xi(tk) for each gene i and each time point k. This can be estimated directly from the time-series of gene expression profiles. TSNI assumes that a single perturbation experiment is performed (e.g. treatment with a compound, gene overexpression, etc.) and M time points following the perturbation are measured (rather than M different conditions at steady-state as for NIR and MNI). For small networks (tens of genes), it is able to correctly infer the network structure (i.e. aij). For large networks (hundreds of genes), its performance is best for predicting the direct targets of a perturbation (i.e. bi) (for example, finding the direct targets of a transcription factor from gene expression time series following overexpression of the factor). TSNI is not tested here, but we refer the reader to Bansal et al (2006).

Reverse-engineering algorithm performance
We performed a comparison using `fake' gene expression data generated by a computer model of gene regulation (`in silico' data). The need of simulated data arises from imperfect knowledge of real networks in cells, from the lack of suitable gene expression data set and of control on the noise levels. In silico data enable one to check the performance of algorithms against a perfectly known ground truth (simulated networks in the computer model). To simulate gene expression data and gene regulation in the form of a network, we use linear ODEs relating the changes in gene transcript concentration to each other and to the external perturbations. Linear ODEs can simulate gene networks as directed signed graphs with realistic dynamics and generate both steady-state and time-series gene expression profiles. Linear ODEs are generic, as any non-linear process can be approximated to a linear process, as long as the system is not far from equilibrium, whereas non-linear processes are all different from each other. There are many other choices possible (Brazhnik et al, 2003), but we valued the capability of linear ODEs of quickly generating many random networks with realistic behaviour and the availability of a general mathematical theory. We generated 20 random networks with 10, 100 and 1000 genes and with an average in-degree per gene of 2, 10 and 100, respectively. For each network we generated three kinds of
6 Molecular Systems Biology 2007

data: steady-state-simulated microarray data resulting from M global perturbations (i.e. all the genes in the network are perturbed simultaneously in each perturbation experiment); steady-state data resulting from M local perturbations (i.e. a different single gene in the network is perturbed in each experiment) and dynamic time-series-simulated microarray data resulting from perturbing 10% of the genes simultaneously and measuring M time points following the perturbation experiment. For all data sets, M was chosen equal to 10, 100 and 1000 experiments. Noise was then added to all data sets by summing to each simulated gene expression level in the data set, white noise with zero mean and standard deviation equal to 0.1 multiplied by the absolute value of the simulated gene expression level (Gardner et al, 2003). All the algorithms were run on all the data sets using default parameters (Supplementary Table 1). Banjo was not run on the 1000 gene data set, as it was crashing owing to memory limitations, whereas NIR needed an excessively long computation time. Results from the simulations are described in Table II. PPV stands for positive predictive value (or accuracy) defined as TP/(TP þ FP) and Sensitivity (Se) is TP/(TP þ FN), where TP, true positive; FP, false positive and FN, false negative. The label `Random' refers to the expected performance of an algorithm that selects a pair of genes randomly and `infers' an edge between them. For example, for a fully connected network, the random algorithm would have a 100% accuracy for all the levels of sensitivity (as any pair of genes is connected in the real network). Some algorithms infer the network just as an undirected graph, and others as a directed and/or signed graph. Thus, in order to facilitate comparison among algorithms, we computed PPV and Se by first transforming the real (signed directed graph) and the inferred networks (when directed and/or signed) in an undirected graph (labeled