What Shanl We Mam?

Population, as Malthus said, naturally tends to grow "geometrically," or, as we would now say, exponentially. In a finite world this means that the per capita share of the world's goods must steadily decrease. Is ours a finite world? A fair defense can be put forward for the view that the world is infinite; or The population problem has no technical solution; that we do not know that it is not. But, it requires a fundamental extension in morality. in terms of the practical problems that we must face in the next few generations with the foreseeable technology, it Garrett Hardin is clear that we will greatly increase human misery if we do not, during the immediate future, assume that the world available to the terrestrial human popAt the end of a thoughtful article on sional judgment. . . ." Vhether they ulation is finite. "Space" is no escape the future of nuclear war, Wiesner and were right or not is not the concern of (2). A finite world can support only a York (1) concluded that: "Both sides in the present article. Rather, the concern the arms race are ... confronted by the here is with the important concept of a finite population; therefore, population dilemma of steadily increasing military class of human problems which can be growth must eventually equal zero. (The power and steadily decreasing national called "no technical solution problems," case of perpetual wide fluctuations security. It is our considered profes- and, more specifically, with the identifi- above and below zero is a trivial variant sional judgment that this dilemma has cation and discussion of one of these. that need not be discussed.) When this no technical solution. If the great powIt is easy to show that the class is not condition is met, what will be the situaers continue to look for solutions in a null class. Recall the game of tick- tion of mankind? Specifically, can Benthe area of science and technology only, tack-toe. Consider the problem, "How tham's goal of "the greatest good for the result will be to worsen the situa- can I win. the game of tick-tack-toe?" the greatest number" be realized? tion." It is well known that I cannot, if I asNo-for two reasons, each sufficient I would like to focus your attention sume (in keeping with the conventions by itself. The first is a theoretical one. not on the subject of the article (na- of game theory) that my opponent un- It is not mathematically possible to tional security in a nuclear world) but derstands the game perfectly. Put an- maximize for two (or more) variables at on the kind of conclusion they reached, other way, there is no "technical solu- the same time. This was clearly stated namely that there is no technical solu- tion" to the problem. I can win only by von Neumann and Morgenstern (3), tion to the problem. An implicit and by giving a radical meaning to the word but the principle is implicit in the theory almost universal assumption of discus- "win." I can hit my opponent over the of partial differential equations, dating sions published in professional and head; or I can drug him; or I can falsify back at least to D'Alembert (1717semipopular scientific journals is that the records. Every way in which I "win" 1783). the problem under discussion has a involves, in some sense, an abandonThe second reason springs directly technical solution. A technical solution ment of the game, as we intuitively un- from biological facts. To live, any may be defined as one that requires a derstand it. (I can also, of course, organism must have a source of energy change only in. the techniques of the openly abandon the game-refuse to (for example, food). This energy is natural sciences, demanding little or play it. This is what most adults do.) utilized for two puposes: mere mainnothing in the way of change in human The class of "No technical solution tenance and work. For man, maintevalues or ideas of morality. problems" has members. My thesis is nance of life requires about 1600 kiloIn our day (though not in earlier that the "population problem," as con- calories a day ("maintenance calories'). times) technical solutions are always ventionally conceived, is a member of Anything that he does over and above welcome. Because of previous failures this class. How it is conventionally con- merely staying alive will be defined as in prophecy, it takes courage to assert ceived needs some comment. It is fair work, and is supported by "work calthat a desired technical solution is not to say that most people who' anguish ories" which he takes in. Work calories possible. Wiesner and York exhibited over the population problem are trying are used not only for what we call work this courage; publishing in a science to find a way to avoid the evils of over- in common speech; they are also rejournal, they insisted that the solution population without relinquishing any of quired for all forms of enjoyment, from to the problem was not to be found in the privileges they now enjoy. They swimming and automobile racing to the natural sciences. They cautiously think that farming the seas or develop- playing music and writing poetry. If qualified their statement with the ing new strains of wheat will solve the our goal is to maximize population it is phrase, "It is our considered profes- problem-technologically. I try to show obvious what we must do: We must here that the solution they seek cannot make the work calories per person apThe author is professor of biology, University of California, Santa Barbara. This article is be found. The population problem can- proach as close to zero as possible. No based on a presidential address presented before not be solved in a technical way, any gourmet meals, no vacations, no sports, the meeting of the Pacific Division of the Amerimore than can the problem of winning no music, no literature, no art. . . . I can Association for the Advancement of Science at Utah State University, Logan, 25 June 1968. the game of tick-tack-toe. think that everyone will grant, without

The Tragedy of the Commons

13 DECEMBER 1968

1243

time,-p - rate of zero. Any people that has intuitively identified its optimum point will soon reach it, after which its growth rate becomes and remains zero. Of course, a positive growth rate might be taken as evidence that a population is below its optimum. However, assumption. However, given an infinite by any reasonable standards, the most source of energy, population growth rapidly growing populations on earth still produces an inescapable problem. today are (in general) the most miseraThe problem of the acquisition of en- ble. This association (which need not be ergy is replaced by the problem of its invariable) casts doubt on the optimistic dissipation, as J. H. Fremlin has so wit- assumption that the positive growth rate tily shown (4). The arithmetic signs in of a population is evidence that it has -t-he analysis are, as it were, reversed; yet to reach its optimum. but Bentham's goal is still unobtainable. We can make little progress in workThe optimum population is, then, less ing toward optimum poulation size until than the maximum. The difficulty of we explicitly exorcize the spirit of defining the optimum is enormous; so Adam Smith in the field of practical far as I know, no one has seriously demography. In economic affairs, The tackled this problem. Reaching an ac- Wealth of Nations (1776) popularized ceptable and stable solution will surely the "invisible hand," the idea that an require more than one generation of individual who "intends only his own hard analytical work-and much per- gain," is, as it were, "led by an invisible hand to promote . .,. the public interest" suasion. We want the maximum good per (5). Adam Smith did not assert that person; but what is good? To one per- this was invariably true, and perhaps son it is wilderness, to another it is ski neither did any of his followers. But he lodges for thousands. To one it is estu- contributed to a dominant tendency of aries to nourish ducks for hunters to thought that has ever since interfered shoot; to another it is factory land. with positive action based on rational Comparing one good with another is, analysis, namely, the tendency to aswe usually say, impossible because sume that decisions reached individually goods are incommensurable. Incommen- will, in fact, be the best decisions for an entire society. If this assumption is surables cannot be compared. Theoretically this may be true; but in correct it justifies the continuance of real life incommensurables are commen- our present policy of laissez-faire in surable. Only a criterion of judgment reproduction. If it is correct we can asand a system of weighting are needed. sume that men will control their individIn nature the criterion is survival. Is it ual fecundity so as to produce the optibetter for a species to be small and hide- mum population. If the assumption is able, or large and powerful? Natural not correct, we need to reexamine our selection commensurates the incommen- individual freedoms to see which ones surables. The compromise achieved de- are defensible. pends on a natural weighting of the values of the variables. Man must imitate this process. There Tragedy of Freedom in a Commons is no doubt that in fact he already does, The rebuttal to the invisible hand in but unconsciously. It is when the hidden decisions are made explicit that the population control is to be found in a arguments begin. The problem for the scenario first sketched in a little-known years ahead is to work out an accept- pamphlet (6) in 1833 by a mathematical able theory of weighting. Synergistic amateur named William Forster Lloyd effects, nonlinear variation, and difficul- (1794-1852). We may well call it "the ties in discounting the future make the tragedy of the commons," using the intellectual problem difficult, but not word "tragedy" as the philosopher Whitehead used it (7): "The essence of (in principle) insoluble. Has any cultural group solved this dramatic tragedy is not unhappiness. It practical problem at the present time, resides in the solemnity of the remorseeven on an intuitive level? One simple less working of things." He then' goes on. fact proves that none has: there is no to say, "This inevitableness of destiny prosperous population in the world to- can only be illustrated in terms of huday that has, and has had for some man life by incidents which in fact in1244

argument or proof, that maximizing population does not max2imize goods. Bentham's goal is impossible. In reaching this conclusion I have made the usual assumption that it is the acquisition of energy that is the problem. The appearance of atomic energy has led some to question this

volve unhappiness. For it is only by them that the futility of escape can be made evident in the drama." The tragedy of the commons develops in this way. Picture a pasture open to all. It is to be expected that each herdsman will try to keep as many cattle as possible on the commons. Such an arrangement may work reasonably satisfactorily for centuries because tribal wars, poaching, and disease keep the numbers of both man and beast well below the carrying capacity of the land. Finally, however, comes the day of reckoning, that is, the day when the long-desired goal of social stability becomes a reality. At this point, the inherent logic of the commons remorselessly generates tragedy. As a rational being, each herdsman seeks to maximize his gain. Explicitly or implicitly, more or less consciously, he asks, "What is the utility to me of adding one more animal to my herd?" This utility has one negative and one positive component. 1) The positive component is a function of the increment of one animal. Since the herdsman receives all the proceeds from the sale of the additional animal, the positive utility is nearly +1. 2) The negative component is a function of the additional overgrazing created by one more animal. Since, however, the effects of overgrazing are shared by all the herdsmen, the negative utility for any particular decisionmaking herdsman is only a fraction of -1. Adding together the component partial utilities, the rational herdsman concludes that the only sensible course for him to pursue is to add another animal to his herd. And another; and another.... But this is the conclusion reached by each and every rational herdsman sharing a commons. Therein is the tragedy. Each man is locked into a system that compels him to increase his herd without limit-in a world that is limited. Ruin is the destination toward which all men rush, each pursuing his own best interest in a society that believes in the freedom of the commons. Freedom in a commons brings ruin to all. Some would say that this is a platitude. Would that it were! In a sense, it was learned thousands of years ago, but natural selection favors the forces of psychological denial (8). The individual benefits as an individual from his ability to deny the truth even though society as a whole, of which he is a part, suffers.
SCIENCE, VOL. 162

Education can counteract the natural tendency to do the wrong thing, but the inexorable succession of generations requires that the basis for this knowledge be constantly refreshed. A simple incident that occurred a few years ago in Leominster, Massachusetts, shows how perishable the knowledge is. During the Christmas shopping season the parking meters downtown were covered with plastic bags that bore tags reading: "Do not open until after Christmas. Free parking courtesy of the mayor and city council." In other words, facing the prospect of an increased demand for already scarce space, the city fathers reinstituted the system of the commons. (Cynically, we suspect that they gained more votes than they lost by this retrogressive act.) In an approximate way, the logic of the commons has been understood for a long time, perhaps since the discovery of agriculture or the invention of private property in real estate. But it is understood mostly only in special cases which are not sufficiently generalized. Even at this late date, cattlemen leasing national land on the western ranges demonstrate no more than an ambivalent understanding, in constantly pressuring federal authorities to increase the head count to the point where overgrazing produces erosion and weeddominance. Likewise, the oceans of the world continue to suffer from the survival of the philosophy of the commons. Maritime nations still respond automatically to the shibboleth of the "freedom of the seas." Professing to believe in the "inexhaustible resources of the oceans," they bring species after species of fish and whales closer to extinction

upon standards. It might be by lottery. Or it might be on a first-come, firstserved basis, administered to long queues. These, I think, are all the reasonable possibilities. They are all objectionable. But we must choose-or acquiesce in the destruction of the commons that we call our National Parks. Pollution
In a reverse way, the tragedy of the commons reappears in problems of pollution. Here it is not a question of taking something out of the commons, but of putting something in-sewage, or chemical, radioactive, and heat wastes into water; noxious and dangerous fumes into the air; and distracting and unpleasant advertising signs into the line of sight. The calculations of utility are much the same as before. The rational man finds that his share of the cost of the wastes he discharges into the commons is less than the cost of purifying his wastes before releasing them. Since this is true for everyone, we are locked into a system of "fouling our own nest," so long as we behave only as independent, rational, free-enterprisers. The tragedy of the commons as a food basket is averted by private property, or something formally like it. But the air and waters surrounding us cannot readily be fenced, and so the tragedy of the commons as a cesspool must be prevented by different means, by coercive laws or taxing devices that make it cheaper for the polluter to treat his pollutants than to discharge them untreated. We have not progressed as far with the solution of this problem as we have with the first. Indeed, our particular concept of private property, which deters us from exhausting the positive resources of the earth, favors pollution. The owner of a factory on the bank of a stream-whose property extends to the middle of the stream-often has difficulty seeing why it is not his natural right to muddy the waters flowing past his door. The law, always behind the times, requires elaborate stitching and fitting to adapt it to this newly perceived aspect of the commons. The pollution problem is a consequence of population. It did not much matter how a lonely American frontiersman disposed of his waste. "Flowing water purifies itself every 10 miles," my grandfather used to say, and the myth was near enough to the truth when he

was a boy, for there were not too many people. But as population became denser,

the natural chemical and biological recycling processes became overloaded, calling for a redefinition of property

rights.

How To Legislate Temperance?

Analysis
of
an act

of the

pollution problem

as

a function of population density uncovers a not generally recognized prin-

ciple of morality, namely:
is a function

the morality

(9).
The National Parks present another instance of the working out of the tragedy of the commons. At present, they are open to all, without limit. The
parks themselves are limited in extentthere is only one Yosemite Valleywhereas population seems to grow without limit. The values that visitors seek in the parks are steadily eroded. Plainly, we must soon cease to treat the parks as commons or they will be of no value to anyone. What shall we do? We have several options. We might sell them off as private property. We might keep them as public property, but allocate the right to enter them. The allocation might be on the basis of wealth, by the use of an auction system. It might be on the basis of merit, as defined by some agreed13 DECEMBER 1968

others until one knows the total system in which his act appears. "One picture is worth a thousand words," said an ancient Chinese; but it may take 10,000 words to validate it. It is as tempting to ecologists as it is to reformers in general to try to persuade others by way of the photographic shortcut. But the essense of an argument cannot be photographed: it must be presented rationally -in words. That morality is system-sensitive escaped the attention of most codifiers of ethics in the past. "Thou shalt not . . ." is the form of traditional ethical directives which make no allowance for particular circumstances. The laws of our society follow the pattern of ancient ethics, and therefore are poorly suited to governing a complex, crowded, changeable world. Our epicyclic solution is to augment statutory law with administrative law. Since it is practically impossible to spell out all the conditions under which it is safe to burn trash in the back yard or to run an automobile without smog-control, by law we delegate the details to bureaus. The result is administrative law, which is rightly feared for an ancient reason-Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?-"Who shall
1245

of the state of the system at the time it is performed (10). Using the commons as a cesspool does not harm the general public under frontier conditions, because there is no public; the same behavior in a metropolis is unbearable. A hundred and fifty years ago a plainsman could kill an American bison, cut out only the tongue for his dinner, and discard the rest of the animal. He was not in any important sense being wasteful. Today, with only a few thousand bison left, we would be appalled at such behavior. In passing, it is worth noting that the morality of an act cannot be determined from a photograph. One does not know whether a man killing an elephant or setting flre to the grassland is harming

-A

watch the watchers themselves?" John Adams said that we must have "a government of laws and not men." Bureau
administrators, trying to evaluate the morality of acts in the total system, are singularly liable to corruption, producing a government by men, not laws. Prohibition is easy to legislate (though not necessarily to enforce); but how do we legislate temperance? Experience indicates that it can be accomplished best through the mediation of administrative law. We limit possibilities unnecessarily if we suppose that the sentiment of Quis custodiet denies us the use of administrative law. We should rather retain the phrase as a perpetual reminder of fearful dangers we cannot avoid. The great challenge facing us now is to invent the corrective feedbacks that are needed to keep custodians honest. We must find ways to legitimate the needed authority of both the custodians and the corrective feedbacks.

equal right to the commons is to lock the world into a tragic course of action. Unfortunately this is just the course of action that is being pursued by the United Nations. In late 1967, some 30 nations agreed to the following (14): The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights describes the family as the natural and fundamental unit of society. It follows that any choice and decision with regard to the size of the family must irtevocably rest with the family itself, and cannot be made by anyone else.

It is painful to have to deny categorically the validity of this right; denying it, one feels as uncomfortable as a resident of Salem, Massachusetts, who denied the reality of witches in the 17th century. At the present time, in liberal quarters, something like a taboo acts to inhibit criticism of the United Nations. There is a feeling that the United Nations is "our last and best hope," that we shouldn't find fault with it; we shouldn't play into the hands of the archconservatives. However, let us not forget what Robert Louis Stevenson said: "The truth that is suppressed by Freedom To Breed Is Intolerable friends is the readiest weapon of the enemy." If truth we must The tragedy of the commons is in- openly deny we love theof the Universal the validity volved in population problems in anRights, other way. In a world governed solely Declarationis of Human by the even though it promoted by the principle of "dog eat dog"-if Nations. We should also joinUnited with indeed there ever was such a world- Kingsley Davis (15) in attempting to how many children a family had would get Planned Parenthood-World Populanot be a matter of public concern. tion to see the error of its ways in emParents who bred too exuberantly would bracing the same tragic ideal. leave fewer descendants, not more, because they would be unable to care adequately for their children. David Conscience Is Self-Eliminating Lack and others have found that such a negative feedback demonstrably conIt is a mistake to think that we can trols the fecundity of birds (11). But control the breeding of mankind in the men are not birds, and have not acted long run by an appeal to conscience. like them for millenniums, at least. Charles Galton Darwin made this point If each human family were depen- when he spoke on the centennial of the dent only on its own resources; if the publication of his grandfather's great children of improvident parents starved book. The argument is straightforward to death; if, thus, overbreeding brought and Darwinian. its own "punishment" to the germ linePeople vary. Confronted with appeals then there would be no public interest to limit breeding, some people will unin controlling the breeding of families. doubtedly respond to the plea more But our society is deeply committed to than others. Those who have more the welfare state (12), and hence is children will produce a larger fraction confronted with another aspect of the of the next generation than those with more susceptible consciences. The diftragedy of the commons. In a welfare state, how shall we deal ference will be accentuated, generation with the family, the religion, the race, by generation. In C. G. Darwin's words: "It may or the class (or indeed any distinguishable and cohesive group) that adopts well be that it would take hundreds of overbreeding as a policy to secure its generations for the progenitive instinct own aggrandizement (13)? To couple to develop in this way, but if it should the concept of freedom to breed with do so, nature would have taken her the belief that everyone born has an revenge, and the variety Homo contra1246

cipiens would become extinct and would be replaced by the variety Homo progenitivus" (16). The argument assumes that conscience or the desire for children (no matter which) is hereditary-but hereditary only in the most general formal sense. The result will be the same whether the attitude is transmitted through germ cells, or exosomatically, to use A. J. Lotka's term. (If one denies the latter possibility as well as the former, then what's the point of education?) The argument has here been stated in the context of the population problem, but it applies equally well to any instance in which society appeals to an individual exploiting a commons to restrain himself for the general good-by means of his conscience. To make such an appeal is to set up a selective system that works toward the elimination of conscience from the race.
Pathogenic Effects of Conscience
The long-term disadvantage of an appeal to conscience should be enough to condemn it; but has serious shortterm disadvantages as well. If we ask a man who is exploiting a commons to desist "in the name of conscience," what are we saying to him? What does he hear?-not only at the moment but also in the wee small hours of the night when, half asleep, he remembers not merely the words we used but also the nonverbal communication cues we gave him unawares? Sooner or later, consciously or subconsciously, he senses that he has received two communications, and that they are contradictory: (i) (intended communication) "If you don't do as we ask, we will openly condemn you for not acting like a responsible citizen"; (ii) (the unintended communication) "If you do behave as we ask, we will secretly condemr. you for a simpleton who can be shamed into standing aside while the rest of us exploit the commons." Everyman then is caught in what Bateson has called a "double bind." Bateson and his co-workers have made a plausible case for viewing the double bind as an important causative factor in the genesis of schizophrenia (17). The double bind may not always be so damaging, but it always endangers the mental health of anyone to whom it is applied. "A bad conscience," said Nietzsche, "is a kind of illness." To conjure up a conscience in others
SCIENCE, VOL. 162

is tempting to anyone who wishes to extend his control beyond the legal limits. Leaders at the highest level succumb to this temptation. Has any President during the past generation failed to call on labor unions to moderate voluntarily their demands for higher wages, or to steel companies to honor voluntary guidelines on prices? I can recall none. The rhetoric used on such occasions is designed to produce feelings of guilt in noncooperators. For centuries it was assumed without proof that guilt was a valuable, perhaps even an indispensable, ingredient of the civilized life. Now, in this post-Freudian world, we doubt it. Paul Goodman speaks from the modern point of view when he says: "No good has ever come from feeling guilty, neither intelligence, policy, nor compassion. The guilty do not pay attention to the object but only to themselves, and not even to their own interests, which might make sense, but to their anxieties" (18). One does not have to be a professional psychiatrist to see the consequences of anxiety. We in the Western world are just emerging from a dreadful two-centuries-long Dark Ages of Eros that was sustained partly by prohibition laws, but perhaps more effectively by the anxiety-generating mechanisms of education. Alex Comfort has told the story well in The Anxiety Makers (19); it is not a pretty one. Since proof is difficult, we may even concede that the results of anxiety may sometimes, from certain points of view, be desirable. The larger question we should ask is whether, as a matter of policy, we should ever encourage the use of a technique the tendency (if not the intention) of which is psychologically pathogenic. We hear much talk these days of responsible parenthood; the coupled words are incorporated into the titles of some organizations devoted to birth control. Some people have proposed massive propaganda campaigns to instill responsibility into the nation's (or the world's) breeders. But what is the meaning of the word responsibility in this context? Is it not merely a synonym for the word conscience? When we use the word responsibility in the absence of substantial sanctions are we not trying to browbeat a free man in a commons into acting against his own interest? Responsibility is a verbal counterfeit for a substantial quid pro quo. It is an attempt to get something for nothing.
13 DECEMBER 1968

If the word responsibility is to be used at all, I suggest that it be in the sense Charles Frankel uses it (20). "Responsibility," says this philosopher, "is the product of definite social arrangements." Notice that Frankel calls for social arrangements-not propa-

coercion is not to say that we are re-

ganda.
Mutual Coercion

quired to enjoy it, or even to pretend we enjoy it. Who enjoys taxes? We all grumble about them. But we accept compulsory taxes because we recognize that voluntary taxes would favor the conscienceless. We institute and (grumblingly) support taxes and other coercive
devices to escape the horror of the
commons.

Mutually Agreed upon The social arrangements that produce responsibility are arrangements that
create coercion, of some sort. Consider bank-robbing. The man who takes money from a bank acts as if the bank were a commons. How do we prevent such action? Certainly not by trying to

control his behavior solely by a verbal appeal to his sense of responsibility. Rather than rely on propaganda we follow Frankel's lead and insist that a bank is not a commons; we seek the definite social arrangements that will keep it from becoming a commons. That we thereby infringe on the freedom of would-be robbers we neither deny nor regret. The morality of bank-robbing is particularly easy to understand because we accept complete prohibition of this activity. We are willing to say "Thou shalt not rob banks," without providing for exceptions. But temperance also can be created by coercion. Taxing is a good coercive device. To keep downtown shoppers temperate in their use of parking space we introduce parking meters for short periods, and traffic fines for longer ones. We need not actually forbid a citizen to park as long as he wants to; we need merely make it increasingly expensive for him to do so. Not prohibition, but carefully biased options are what we offer him. A Madison Avenue man might call this persuasion; I prefer the greater candor of the word coercion. Coercion is a dirty word to most liberals now, but it need not forever be so. As with the four-letter words, its dirtiness can be cleansed away by exposure to the light, by saying it over and over without apology or embarrassment. To many, the word coercion implies arbitrary decisions of distant and irresponsible bureaucrats; but this is not a necessary part of its meaning. The only kind of coercion I recommend is mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon by the majority of the people affected. To say that we mutually agree to

An alternative to the commons need perfectly just to be preferable. With real estate and other material goods, the alternative we have chosen is the institution of private property coupled with legal inheritance. Is this system perfectly just? As a genetically trained biologist I deny that it is. It seems to me that, if there are to be differences in individual inheritance, legal possession should be perfectly correlated with biological inheritance-that those who are biologically more fit to be the custodians of property and power should legally inherit more. But genetic recombination continually makes a mockery of the doctrine of "like father, like son" implicit in our laws of legal inheritance. An idiot can inherit millions, and a trust fund can keep his estate intact. We must admit that our legal system of private property plus inheritance is unjust-but we put up with it because we are not convinced, at the moment, that anyone has invented a better system. The alternative of the commons is too horr