Cerebral Cortex October 2007;17:2407--2419 doi:10.1093/cercor/bhl149 Advance Access publication January 4, 2007

Small-World Anatomical Networks in the Human Brain Revealed by Cortical Thickness from MRI

Yong He, Zhang J. Chen and Alan C. Evans McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H3A 2B4

An important issue in neuroscience is the characterization for the underlying architectures of complex brain networks. However, little is known about the network of anatomical connections in the human brain. Here, we investigated large-scale anatomical connection patterns of the human cerebral cortex using cortical thickness measurements from magnetic resonance images. Two areas were considered anatomically connected if they showed statistically significant correlations in cortical thickness and we constructed the network of such connections using 124 brains from the International Consortium for Brain Mapping database. Significant short- and long-range connections were found in both intra- and interhemispheric regions, many of which were consistent with known neuroanatomical pathways measured by human diffusion imaging. More importantly, we showed that the human brain anatomical network had robust small-world properties with cohesive neighborhoods and short mean distances between regions that were insensitive to the selection of correlation thresholds. Additionally, we also found that this network and the probability of finding a connection between 2 regions for a given anatomical distance had both exponentially truncated power-law distributions. Our results demonstrated the basic organizational principles for the anatomical network in the human brain compatible with previous functional networks studies, which provides important implications of how functional brain states originate from their structural underpinnings. To our knowledge, this study provides the first report of small-world properties and degree distribution of anatomical networks in the human brain using cortical thickness measurements. Keywords: anatomy, connectivity, cortical thickness, magnetic resonance imaging, morphometry, scale free, small world Introduction The human brain is a large, interacting, complex network with nontrivial topological properties (Sporns et al. 2004; Stam 2004; Eguiluz et al. 2005; Salvador, Suckling, Coleman, et al. 2005; Achard et al. 2006; Stam et al. 2007). The characterization for the underlying architectures of such a network is an important issue in neuroscience. It can reveal general principles of structural and functional organization in the human brain and increase our understanding of how the human brain is capable of generating and integrating information from multiple sources in real time (Sporns et al. 2004). Thus far, most studies of complex brain networks in human have focused upon exploring connectivity patterns under functional brain states. For example, recent electroencephalogram (EEG) (Micheloyannis et al. 2006; Stam et al. 2007), magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recordings (Stam 2004) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Eguiluz et al. 2005; Salvador, Suckling, Coleman, et al. 2005; Achard et al.
Ó The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

2006) studies have consistently demonstrated that human brain functional networks during behavior or even at resting state have the small-world property, a prominent feature shared by various social, economic, and biological networks (for a review, see Strogatz 2001). A small-world architecture indicates that the minimum path length between any pair of nodes is approximately equivalent to a comparable random network but the nodes of the network have greater local interconnectivity or cliquishness than a random network (Watts and Strogatz 1998). In addition to the small-world features, Eguiluz et al. (2005) demonstrated that human brain functional networks derived from experimentally activated fMRI data at a mesoscale (voxel level) have a scale-free power-law connection degree distribution, implying that there are a small number of regions (hubs) with an unusually large number of connections. On the other hand, another study from Achard et al. (2006) showed that functional networks of the human brain derived from restingstate fMRI data at a macroscale (regional level) follow an exponentially truncated power-law distribution, implying relatively reduced probabilities of huge hubs. The discrepancies between the connectivity degree distributions could be due to the different spatial scale analysis and/or experimental conditions of the subjects applied in the 2 studies. Although there have been a number of studies investigating functional connectivity networks (Stam 2004; Eguiluz et al. 2005; Salvador, Suckling, Coleman, et al. 2005; Achard et al. 2006; Stam et al. 2007), little is known about the network of anatomical connections in the human brain. Definition of anatomical connectional models of the human brain is usually based on inferring knowledge from primate species such as the macaque monkey in which the connection pattern is well known (Crick and Jones 1993; Stephan et al. 2001; Penny et al. 2004). The procedure is problematic, however, partly because of our poor understanding of the evolutionary discrepancies. Direct evidence for the underlying architecture of human brain anatomical networks is still lacking (Tootell et al. 2003). Characterization of such a network would be particularly vital to reveal intrinsically structural organizational principles in the human brain and enhance our understanding of how functional brain states are associated with their structural substrates. Recently, Sporns et al. (2005) have referred to the comprehensive, detailed structural description of the network of elements and connections forming the human brain as ``human connectome.'' There is little evidence for such an interesting but also very challenging scheme to date because of the difficulties of defining the basic structural elements of the human brain in terms of network nodes and connections (Sporns et al. 2005). In this study, we propose an avenue of research to characterize large-scale anatomical connectivity patterns of the human

brain using morphological measurements from in vivo MRI. Cortical thickness was chosen as a morphometric feature because it reflects the size, density, and arrangement of cells (neurons, neuroglia, and nerve fibers) (Parent and Carpenter 1995; Narr et al. 2005). Particularly, 2 recent studies have suggested that interregional statistical associations in cortical thickness provide important connectivity information in the human brain (Worsley et al. 2005; Lerch et al. 2006) (we will return to this issue in the Discussion section). To study largescale anatomical connectivity patterns in the human brain, we first segmented the entire cerebral cortex into 54 areas and automatically measured regional cortical thickness using computational neuroanatomy. Two areas were considered anatomically connected if they had significant correlations of cortical thickness across a population of 124 normal brains drawn from the International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM) MRI database (Mazziotta et al. 2001). Finally, we thresholded the interregional correlation matrix to construct an undirected graph and estimated its statistical and anatomical properties, especially small-world properties and connectivity degree distribution, using graph theoretical analysis. This allows us for the first time to assess the dependencies of interregional anatomical connectivity on the anatomical relationship between regions, and to demonstrate the small-world attributes and degree distribution of human cortical networks using cortical thickness measurements from in vivo MRI. Materials and Methods
Subjects The subjects scanned were 152 unselected normal volunteers of the ICBM database. Each subject gave written informed consent and this study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital. The scans of 28 subjects were excluded from the analysis due to the left-handedness (14 subjects), unknown handedness (10 subjects), and failure of imaging processing (4 subjects). Of the remaining 124 right-handed subjects, 71 were male and 53 female. Ages ranged from 18 to 39 years (mean age 24.38, standard deviation 4.25). The characteristics of the subjects have been described previously (Watkins et al. 2001). MRI Acquisition MRI scans were performed on a Phillips Gyroscan 1.5-T superconducting magnet system. T1, T2, and proton density images were acquired for each subject with the following sequences: T1-weighted (3D fast field echo scan with 140--160 slices, 1-mm isotropic resolution, time repetition [TR] = 18 ms, time echo [TE] = 10 ms, flip angle = 30°), T2weighted (2D multislice fast spin echo scan with 140--160 2-mm slices with a 1 mm overlap, TR = 3300 ms, TE = 35 ms), and proton density (as for T2 scan but with TE = 120 ms) images of the whole head. Only T1 image of each subject was applied in this study. Measurements of Cortical Thickness The native MR images were first registered into stereotaxic space (Talairach and Tournoux 1988) using a 9-parameter linear transformation (Collins et al. 1994). Simultaneously, images were corrected for nonuniformity artifacts using the N3 algorithms (Sled et al. 1998). The registered and corrected images were further segmented into gray matter, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and background using an advanced neural net classifier (Zijdenbos et al. 2002). The inner and outer gray matter surfaces were then automatically extracted from each MR volume using the Constrained Laplacian-based Automated Segmentation with Proximities (CLASP) algorithm (MacDonald et al. 2000; Kim et al. 2005) and cortical thickness was measured in native space using the linked distance between 2 surfaces at 40 962 vertices throughout the cortex. The measurement in native space provided an unadjusted estimate of absolute cortical thickness (Shaw et al. 2006). A representative

cortical thickness map was shown in Figure 1A. The CLASP cortical thickness algorithm has been validated using both manual measurements (Kabani et al. 2001) and simulation approaches (Lerch and Evans 2005; Lee et al. 2006), and recently applied to Alzheimer's disease (Lerch et al. 2005) and cortical development studies (Shaw et al. 2006). Individual cortical thickness maps were parcellated using the Automated Nonlinear Image Matching and Anatomical Labeling package (Collins et al. 1995; Robbins et al. 2004). By registering each subject's MR images to a presegmented volumetric template using nonlinear deformations (Collins et al. 1995), the labels of brain regions were transformed to the cortical surface by assigning the value of the voxel label to each vertex on the surface. An average cortical parcellation was generated by finding the anatomical label with the highest occurrence at each vertex (Fig. 1B) and 27 separate cortical regions were identified for each hemisphere (Supplementary Table). Cortical thickness for each region was measured as the mean thickness of all vertices defined as belonging to that region. Construction of Anatomical Connection Matrix A key issue in characterizing human brain networks is the construction of the anatomical connection matrix (Sporns et al. 2005). To address this issue, in this study, we first defined anatomical connection as statistical associations in cortical thickness between brain regions (Fig. 1C). Such a morphometry-based connection concept has been introduced by the 2 recent studies (Worsley et al. 2005; Lerch et al. 2006). The statistical similarity in cortical thickness between 2 regions was measured by computing the Pearson correlation coefficient across subjects and interregional correlation matrix (N 3 N, where N is the number of brain regions, here N = 54) of such connections was acquired using the 124 brains included in this study (Fig. 1D). Prior to the correlation analysis, a linear regression was performed at every region to remove the effects of age, gender, age--gender interaction, and mean overall cortical thickness; the residuals of this regression were then substituted for the raw cortical thickness values. Because the correlation analysis was performed for all 54 3 53/2 = 1431 pairs of regions, it was necessary to perform a multiple comparisons correction to test the significance of these correlations. We applied the false discovery rate (FDR) procedure (Genovese et al. 2002) to correct the multiple comparisons at a q value of 0.05. Using this threshold, we constructed a symmetric connection matrix (Fig. 1E), whose element was 1 if the cortical thickness correlation between 2 regions was statistically significant and 0 otherwise. This binarized connection matrix captures the underlying anatomical connection patterns of the human brain common to the population sample under study. The anatomical and statistical properties of this network are further characterized below. It is also possible to characterize the network with continuous weighting between nodes (Barrat et al. 2004; Jiang et al. 2004) but this leads to complications of statistical features descriptions in subsequent graph theoretical analysis. This initial study therefore confined itself to a simpler on--off connectivity analysis. Anatomical Connections and Anatomical Distance The binarized anatomical connection matrix can be visualized in 3D anatomical space (Fig. 1F) by locating cortical regions according to their y and z centroid stereotaxic coordinates. In this study, we also examined the relationship between the anatomical connections and their corresponding anatomical distance (Fig. 2). The anatomical distance between 2 regions was defined as Euclidean distance Dij (in mm) between qffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi regional centroids: Dij = ðxi ­xj Þ2 + ðyi ­yj Þ2 + ðzi ­zj Þ2 where (xi, yi, zi) and (xj, yj, zj) are the stereotaxic coordinates of the centroids for regions i and j. The connections with D > 75 mm were considered longrange connections shown in Figure 3. The Euclidean distance used in the present study provides an approximate reflection on the true physical distance (axonal length) of connections between regions and has been applied in previous functional brain networks studies (Salvador, Suckling, Coleman, et al. 2005; Salvador, Suckling, Schwarzbauer, et al. 2005; Achard et al. 2006). Graph Theoretical Analysis To perform a graph theoretical analysis, the anatomical connection matrix obtained above was described as an undirected graph G with N

2408 Small-World Anatomical Networks

d

He et al.

nodes and K edges, where nodes represent brain regions and edges represent undirected connections between regions. In this study, we estimated 3 important metrics of the graph G, namely, the mean degree Ækæ, the clustering coefficient Cp, and the characteristic path length Lp. The mean degree Ækæ of the graph G is the average of the degree over all nodes, where the degree ki of a node i corresponds to the number of connections to that node. The clustering coefficient Cp of the graph G is the average of the clustering coefficient over all nodes, where the clustering coefficient Ci of a node i is defined as the number of existing connections between the node's neighbors divided by all their possible connections (Watts and Strogatz 1998). Cp is a measure of the extent of local cluster or cliquishness of the network. Clearly, 0 < Cp < 1; and Cp = 1 if and only if the network is fully connected, that is, each node is connected to all other nodes. The characteristic path length Lp of the graph G is the smallest number of connections required to connect one node to another, averaged overall all pairs of nodes. Lp is a measure of the extent of average connectivity or overall routing efficiency of the network. In this study, we also defined the mean shortest path length Li of a node i as the average of the shortest path lengths between this node and all other nodes in this network. The nodes with the smallest Li or largest ki were considered the hubs of the network (Achard et al. 2006). real real To examine the small-world properties, the values of Cp and Lp of the anatomical network were compared with those of 1000 random networks. We generated these random graphs using the random rewiring procedure described by Maslov and Sneppen (2002) and Milo et al. (2002), which preserves the same number of nodes, mean degree Ækæ, and degree distribution as the real network. Typically, a small-world network should fulfill the following conditions: real rand real rand c = Cp =Cp >1 and k = Lp =Lp ~1 (Watts and Strogatz 1998). These 2 conditions can also be summarized into a simple quantitative measurement, small worldness, r = c/k > 1 (Humphries et al. 2005; Achard et al. real rand 2006), implying that the magnitude ratio between Cp and Cp is real rand greater than the magnitude ratio between Lp and Lp : In this study, we real real primarily report the results of Cp and Lp of the anatomical network of the human brain based on the FDR thresholded correlation matrix (Genovese et al. 2002). It is reasonable that the small-world attributes can change with the correlation thresholds. When the threshold is increased, some weaker connections will be dropped out and the resulting graphs will become sparser, leading to a decrease of the mean degree (Fig. 4A). When the correlation threshold reaches an value of Rmax, the mean degree of the resulting network will be less than the log of the number of nodes [i.e., Ækæ < logðN Þ = 3:99] and small-world properties are not estimable (Watts and Strogatz 1998; Achard et al. 2006). To explore the influence of thresholding on the small-world attributes, in this study, we applied the maximum range of correlation thresholds (0 < R < Rmax, with an incremental interval of 0.01) to the correlation matrix, and repeated the small-world analysis for every R value. In addition to the small-word attributes, we also examined the connectivity degree distribution of the brain network (Fig. 5). It has been demonstrated that the small-world networks can be classified into different categories (e.g., scale-free and exponentially truncated powerlaw distribution) according to their connectivity distributions and each of which exhibits specific network behaviors such as the resilience to random errors or hubs attacks (Albert et al. 2000; Amaral et al. 2000; Achard et al. 2006). Finally, the hub regions in this network were identified by using a regionally shortest path length Li averaged over both hemispheres. To visualize the hubs, we also mapped the human brain network with the Pajek software package (http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/ pub/networks/pajek/) (Batagelj and Mrvar 1998) using a Kamada--Kawai layout algorithm (Kamada and Kawai 1989) (Fig. 6). To assess the importance of the hubs for the brain network, we individually eliminated the hub and nonhub regions from the network and compared the changes in the global properties (largest component size, clustering coefficients and characteristic path lengths) of the resulting networks using a 2-sample t test.

significant anatomical connectivity (cortical thickness correlations), which resulted in a binarized anatomical connection matrix with a sparsity of ~7.3% (104/1431). Furthermore, we observed a single component with 45 connected nodes and 9 disconnected nodes in the sparse matrix (Fig. 1E). In this study, the properties of a network were calculated on its largest component. Interregional Anatomical Connections About half of the connections (46/104; 44.2%) were intrahemispheric, involving brain regions in the same lobe and anatomically adjacent regions across different lobes. Several symmetrically interhemispheric connections (18/104; 17.3%) among certain bilaterally homologous regions in the cerebral hemispheres were also found to be very significant. In addition, we also observed significant asymmetrically interhemispheric connections between the nonhomologous regions in different hemispheres (40/104; 38.5%). Table 1 included the most significant 15 interregional cortical thickness connections (corrected P < 1.0 3 10­05) and their approximately associated white matter fibers measured by diffusion imaging in human. Anatomical Connections and Anatomical Distance Figure 2 demonstrated the dependencies of anatomical connectivity on anatomical distances. Most of the significant connections appeared to have shorter anatomical distances (D < 75 mm) but we also observed some long-range (D > 75 mm) connections in this brain network. The probability of finding a significant connection between any 2 regions for a given anatomical distance can be modeled as an exponentially truncated power law: P ðDÞ~D a­1 e­D=Dc with an estimated exponent a = 1.33 and a cutoff distance Dc = 35.2 mm (Fig. 2C). This model indicates a scaling regimen, followed by an exponential decay in the probability of connections with an anatomical distance greater than a cutoff value of ~35 mm. To further explore the pairs of regions that pertain to either the short- or the long-range connections, we visualized the connection map in the anatomical space (Fig. 3). In Figure 3B, we observed that short-range (D < 75 mm) connections (69; 66.3%) existed predominantly in the posterior cortex. Figure 3C indicated that long-range (D > 75 mm) connections (35; 33.7%) are mainly between regions of the frontal cortex (superior frontal gyrus [SFG], middle frontal gyrus [MFG], inferior frontal gyrus [IFG], medial front-orbital gyrus [MOFG] and precentral gyrus [PrCG]) and regions of the temporal (superior temporal gyrus [STG], middle temporal gyrus [MTG], inferior temporal gyrus [ITG] and lateral occipitotemporal gyrus [LOTG]), parietal (superior parietal lobe [SPL], precuneus [PCU], supramarginal gyrus [SMG] and angular gyrus [AG]) and occipital association cortices (superior occipital gyrus [SOG]). Small-World Properties In the present study, we calculated the clustering coefficient and characteristic path length for both of the cortical thickness real real connectivity network (Cp = 0:30; Lp = 3:05) and the corresponding random networks with the same number of nodes, mean degree, and degree distribution (Cprandom = 0:13; Lprandom = 2:65). In other words, the clustering coefficient of the brain network is approximately twice that of a comparable random network (c = 2.36), whereas the path length is approximately equivalent to the random network (k = 1.15),
Cerebral Cortex October 2007, V 17 N 10 2409

Results Under the statistical threshold of p value of 0.05 (corrected by FDR), we observed that the 104 pairs of regions exhibited

Figure 1. A flowchart for the construction of the human brain anatomical network using cortical thickness measurements from MRI. (A) Cortical thickness was estimated using computational neuroanatomy. The native images were nonuniformity corrected and registered into stereotaxic space. The resulting images were then classified (1) to extract the inner (2) and outer (3) gray matter surfaces. Cortical thickness was measured at each vertex (4,5). (B) The cerebral cortex was segmented into 54 cortical areas displayed on the average cortex, each color representing a different region. (C) Anatomical connection was defined as statistically association in cortical thickness between 2 areas. As an example of anatomical connections using cortical thickness correlations used in this study, we demonstrated that the thickness of right middle prefrontal gyrus had significant association with that of left middle prefrontal gyrus. The left plot showed the associations (r 5 0.86, P 5 6.17 3 10À37) using raw cortical thickness values but the right plot showed

2410 Small-World Anatomical Networks

d

He et al.

Figure 2. The dependencies of anatomical connectivity on anatomical distance. (A) Plot of anatomical connections (cortical thickness correlations) versus anatomical distance between regions. Red circles indicate the anatomical connections between bilaterally homologous regions. The dotted lines indicate the values of correlations under the FDR threshold (P 5 0.05). (B) Distribution of anatomical distance. Frequency indicates the number of significant connections for a given anatomical distance. The figure shows many strong local-range connections and a few long-range connections. (C) Probability of finding a significant connection for a given distance in the log--log plot fitted by an exponentially truncated power law (black solid line). The observed data points (plus sign) were obtained by a FDR threshold. Distance shown in figures indicates Euclidean distance between regional centroids in stereotaxic space.

thus resulting in a small-world scalar parameter of r = 2.04 (Table 2). In Figure 4, we showed the small-world properties of the anatomical network as a function of correlation threshold. For a lower threshold value, the corresponding brain network is almost fully connected and the small-world properties are real real indiscernible (both Cp and Lp are close to 1) from the matched random networks. As the correlation threshold values increased the clustering coefficient also increased rapidly (Fig. 4D), whereas the path length only changed slightly (Fig. 4E), leading to the increases of the small worldness (Fig. 4F). Overall, small-world properties were salient at higher threshold (Fig. 2D--F ). The small-world models shown here therefore indicated that anatomical networks of the human brain have greater local interconnectivity or cliquishness and short mean distance between regions. Connectivity Degree Distribution and Hub Regions In addition to the investigation of the small-world properties, we also examined the degree distribution of the anatomical network in the human brain. Clearly, the brain network does not follow a power-law form because the fitted curve is not

a straight line on the log--log plot (Fig. 5). Rather, this distribution can be well fitted by an exponentially truncated power-law form: P ðkÞ~ka­1 e­k=kc with an estimated exponent a = 1.38 and a cutoff degree kc = 2.50. This model indicates a scaling regimen, followed by an exponential decay in the probability of finding nodes with a connection degree greater than a cutoff value of ~3. In addition, we also demonstrated that the exponentially truncated power-law distribution was apparent under several different correlation thresholds with only a slight change in the values of estimated parameters (Fig. 5). This distribution model indicated that the brain networks included some hub nodes with many connections but prevented the appearance of huge hubs with very many connections. Twelve hub nodes of this network were identified by using a regionally shortest path length averaged over both hemispheres. These hubs included 9 regions of the heteromodal or unimodal association cortex, 2 regions of the primary motor and sensorymotor cortex and one region of the paralimbic cortex (Fig. 6, Table 3), which had a large overlap with the hub nodes identified in a very recent functional brain network study

associations (r 5 0.53, P 5 1.76 3 10À10) using the residuals of cortical thickness obtained by removing the effects of gender, age, gender--age interaction, and mean overall cortical thickness. It was noted that the use of the residuals removed some of correlations between regions. Each data point represents a single subject in the study. (D) Correlation matrix of the cortical thickness in the human brain was acquired using the 124 brains from the ICBM database. (E) Anatomical connection matrix was constructed by thresholding the correlation matrix in (D) using a FDR procedure. The labeled matrix was presented below. Note that the matrix shown here only included interregional pathways with strong correlations due to the conservative FDR threshold (Genovese et al. 2002) used to in this study. The sparse matrix was composed of 45 connected nodes and 9 disconnected nodes including several unimodal (bilateral cuneus, bilateral middle occipital gyrus, and left inferior occipital gyrus), paralimbic, and limbic regions (bilateral uncus, bilateral insula, and right cingulate region). R, right; L, left. For the abbreviations of the regions, see Supplementary Table. (F) The thresholded connection matrix was visualized in anatomical space. For details, see Materials and Methods.

Cerebral Cortex October 2007, V 17 N 10 2411

Figure 3. Short- and long-range anatomical connections in the anatomical space. (A) One hundred and four undirected edges (~7.3% of the 1431 possible connections among regions) representing the significant connections were shown in a sagittal view of the brain. Edges were classified into (B) short-range connections (D \ 75 mm, red) and (C) longrange connections (D [ 75 mm, blue) The locations of the nodes indicated the y and z coordinates of the regional centroids in Talairach space.

Figure 4. Small-world properties of the anatomical networks as a function of correlation threshold. (A) The mean degree of human brain anatomical networks decreases as the correlation threshold increases. Small-world properties are not estimable when the mean degree of anatomical network obtained under the correlation threshold Rmax is less than log(N) 5 3.99 (Watts and Strogatz 1998; Achard et al. 2006). (B) The largest component size decreases as the correlation threshold increases. (C) The connectedness tends to decrease as the correlation threshold, where the connectedness is assessed by the reachability matrix recording if at least one path exists between all pairs of nodes (Sporns et al. 2000). (D) The clustering coefficient increases as the correlation threshold increases. (E) The path length has relatively small changes as the correlation threshold increases. (F) The small worldness tends to increase as the correlation threshold increases. The black arrows indicate the values of small-world properties of the human brain anatomical network constructed by a FDR threshold.

(Achard et al. 2006). To elucidate the importance of these hub regions for the brain network, we removed the hub and nonhub regions separately and compared the global properties of the resulting 2-group networks (Fig. 7). Compared with the nonhubs, the elimination of the hub regions only resulted in slight changes in the largest component size (t = 0.31, P = 0.76) but significant decreases in the clustering coefficient (t = ­4.80, P = 8.67 3 10­5) and increases in the characteristic path length (t = 4.91, P = 6.50 3 10­5). In addition, we also found that, when individual hub node was removed from the brain network, the characteristic path lengths of the resulting networks were real larger than those (Lp = 3:05) of the experimental network (Table 3).
2412 Small-World Anatomical Networks
d

Discussion This is the first study, to our knowledge, to demonstrate the large-scale anatomical connectivity patterns in the entire human cerebral cortex using cortical thickness measurements. We found significant short- and long-range anatomical connections (cortical thickness correlations) in both intrahemispheric and interhemispheric regions. More importantly, we showed that the human brain anatomical network had small-world properties with cohesive neighborhoods and short path length between regions. In addition, we also demonstrated that both the anatomical network and the probability of finding a connection between 2 regions for a given anatomical distance followed an exponentially truncated power-law model. Taken together,

He et al.

we concluded that our results provided an important structural description for the network of anatomical connections in the human brain.

Figure 5. The degree distributions of human brain anatomical networks for 3 different correlation threshold values. The black solid lines indicate exponentially truncated power-law fits in the log--log plot of the cumulative probability degree versus the degree for the 3 correlation threshold values. Here a cumulative distribution was used to reduce the effects of noise on this smaller data set (Strogatz 2001). Upright triangles: correlation threshold R 5 0.31 (corresponding to P value of 0.05 corrected by FDR); mean degree hki55.4; estimated exponent a 5 1.38; and cutoff degree kc 5 2.50. P