5796 · The Journal of Neuroscience, May 23, 2007 · 27(21):5796 ­5804

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Time Discounting for Primary Rewards
Samuel M. McClure,1 Keith M. Ericson,2 David I. Laibson,2,3 George Loewenstein,4 and Jonathan D. Cohen1,5
Center for the Study of Brain, Mind, and Behavior and Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, 2National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, 3Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, 4Department of Social and Decision Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, and 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
1

Previous research, involving monetary rewards, found that limbic reward-related areas show greater activity when an intertemporal choice includes an immediate reward than when the options include only delayed rewards. In contrast, the lateral prefrontal and parietal cortex (areas commonly associated with deliberative cognitive processes, including future planning) respond to intertemporal choices in general but do not exhibit sensitivity to immediacy (McClure et al., 2004). The current experiments extend these findings to primary rewards (fruit juice or water) and time delays of minutes instead of weeks. Thirsty subjects choose between small volumes of drinks delivered at precise times during the experiment (e.g., 2 ml now vs 3 ml in 5 min). Consistent with previous findings, limbic activation was greater for choices between an immediate reward and a delayed reward than for choices between two delayed rewards, whereas the lateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex responded similarly whether choices were between an immediate and a delayed reward or between two delayed rewards. Moreover, relative activation of the two sets of brain regions predicts actual choice behavior. A second experiment finds that when the delivery of all rewards is offset by 10 min (so that the earliest available juice reward in any choice is 10 min), no differential activity is observed in limbic reward-related areas for choices involving the earliest versus only more delayed rewards. We discuss implications of this finding for differences between primary and secondary rewards. Key words: discounting; primary reward; ventral striatum; medial prefrontal cortex; DLPFC; ACC

Introduction
Empirical studies of intertemporal choice find that value declines rapidly over the short run but at a slower rate over the long run (Ainslie, 1975; Thaler, 1981; Loewenstein and Prelec, 1992; Kirby, 1997). A convenient functional form for representing such "time preferences" is the quasihyperbolic discount function (Laibson, 1997), according to which the present value of a stream of consumptions (c1, c2, . . .) is as follows:

Vt

u ct
t 1

t

u ct

,

(1)

where u is the utility function, and discount parameters and are bounded between 0 and 1. A multiplicatively scaled transformation of V can be decomposed into two distinct processes:

Wt

1 u ct Ç system

1

u ct . 0 Ç
system

(2)

Received Sept. 28, 2006; revised March 4, 2007; accepted April 3, 2007. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants P30 AG024361 (J.D.C.), T32 MH065214 (J.D.C.), F32 MH072141 (S.M.M.), 3 P30 AG012810 (D.I.L.), and P01 AG005842 (D.I.L.). K. D'Ardenne contributed significantly to the task design and was critical in data collection. P. Dayan provided valuable comments on this manuscript. Correspondence should be addressed to Samuel M. McClure, Center for the Study of Brain, Mind, and Behavior, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540. E-mail: smcclure@princeton.edu. DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4246-06.2007 Copyright © 2007 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/07/275796-09$15.00/0

The term labeled " system" exhibits exponential discounting with discount factor . That labeled " system" captures the extra weight given to immediate rewards. Based on previous research (McClure et al., 2004; Tanaka et al., 2004), we expected the impatient system to be related to the mesolimbic dopamine system and associated structures (henceforth, "limbic reward areas"). Humans share this limbic reward system with many other mammalian species, none of which respond to costs and benefits delayed more than a few minutes, except in a rigid, preprogrammed manner. Moreover, recent research finds that people with greater activation in these limbic reward regions in response to gaining or losing money also place greater weight on immediate rewards relative to delayed rewards (Hariri et al., 2006). Additionally, we anticipated the component to be associated with prefrontal and parietal cortex. These regions have been implicated in planning and deliberation. Damage to these areas in humans produces a pattern of short-sighted nondeliberative behavior termed "reward-dependency syndrome" (Lhermitte, 1986). Previously, we studied intertemporal choices between gift certificates (McClure et al., 2004). We found that activity in limbic reward areas (ventral striatum, medial prefrontal cortex, and orbitofrontal cortex) is associated with choices involving immediate rewards; in contrast, prefrontal and parietal regions are active in all intertemporal choices (not just the choices with an immediate option). One purpose of the current study was to test whether these results replicate with primary rewards and shorter delays. Thirsty subjects chose between volumes of juice or water available at different times within the experiment. Unlike gift certificates,

McClure et al. · Time Discounting

J. Neurosci., May 23, 2007 · 27(21):5796 ­5804 · 5797

larger option on every choice (which seemed to indicate either lack of engagement with the task or inappropriate calibration of the task for this subject's intertemporal preferences). The timing structure of both experiments is shown in Figure 1. Each 30 s period was broken into a decision period and a fluid delivery period. During each decision period, subjects were shown a choice (example display shown in Fig. 1 B) and given up to 10 s to indicate their preference via a button box. During the 15 s fluid delivery period, a total of four squirts of fluid could be delivered, depending on the subjects' choices in previous decision periods. The experiment was separated into four 7 min blocks with a 1 min rest period between blocks. The ordering of the choices is discussed in section 1 of the supplemental material (available at www.jneurosci.org). Figure 1. Experiment design. A, Each 30 s of the experiment was split into a response period and a liquid delivery period. Experiment 1 choices. Subjects answered one Subjects were allowed a maximum of 10 s to respond during the response period. B, Choices were displayed with juice or water control question (one squirt of juice at 0 min indicated by the color of a circle icon (red, juice; blue, water). Responses were indicated with a button box. To avoid startling delay or one squirt of juice at 30 min delay) at subject, a button press was required to initiate liquid delivery. Max, Maximum. the beginning of the experiment to acquaint them with the task. This was followed by an drink rewards allow us to control both when reward is delivered intermixed set of 36 experimental choices and 19 control trials (to be described below). and when it is consumed. Such control is absent from most preThe intertemporal characteristics of the experimental choices can be vious studies of time discounting in people (Ainslie and divided into six delay categories. We represent each delay category as a Monterosso, 2004), which has generated debate over the validity pair of alternatives, D versus D , where D is the delay to the early reward of time discounting studies (Cubitt and Read, 2005). and D is the delay to the alternative later reward. In a given trial, the We extend our previous statistical analysis by estimating a subject chose one of these two options: early or late. The six delay catemore flexible functional form for discounting. We generalize the gories follow: 0 versus 1 min, 0 versus 5 min, 10 versus 11 min, 10 versus idea that discounting can be decomposed into present-oriented 15 min, 20 versus 21 min, and 20 versus 25 min. Given this structure, it and more patient processes. Let D( ) represent an aggregate disfollows that the time difference between the late reward and the early count function, where is the delay until consumption, and D( ) reward, D D, was either 1 or 5 min, and the time of the earliest reward, represents the current value of one unit of delayed utility. We D, was 0, 10, or 20 min. The reward magnitudes can be divided into three magnitude categohypothesize that D( ) is composed of weighted subcomponents ries. We represent each magnitude category as a pair of alternatives, R associated with different brain systems, with one component, and R , where R is the magnitude of the early reward (in 1 ml "squirts" of D ( ), that discounts at a faster rate than another, D ( ). The fluid), and R is the magnitude of the mutually exclusive later reward (in overall utility function is as follows: squirts of fluid). The three magnitude categories were 1 versus 2, 1 versus 3, and 2 versus 3. Over the duration of the experiment, subjects were presented with V t 1 D u ct D u ct . each possible combination of (R, D) versus (R , D ) twice: once with juice 0 0 Ç Ç (3) and once with water. Hence, the experimental choices had a 6 3 2 system system structure (six delay categories by three magnitude categories by two fluid categories), or 36 experimental choices in total. The type of fluid (juice or We estimate this function for choice behavior and neural activity. water) was indicated visually as depicted in Figure 1 B; red circles indiMaterials and Methods cated juice, and blue circles indicated water. The control trials were introduced to control for the motor and visual Subjects made a series of binary choices of the following form: choose requirements associated with task performance. On these trials, subjects either "R squirts of fluid delivered at delay D min," or "R squirts of fluid were simply required to press a button to receive a specified number of delivered at delay D min." Some choices were between early and late squirts after a given delay. Perhaps in part because of low power as a result delivery of juice, and other choices were between early and late delivery of of fitting only 19 events, we were unable to interpret the pattern of brain water. The use of juice and water allowed us to double the number of activity during control events and do not discuss these choices further. choices subjects responded to and reduce the risk that subjects would Experiment 2 choices. Subjects responded to a total of 36 intertemporal experience the task as repetitive and/or adopt a fixed, rote decision stratchoices in experiment 2. Delays to reward delivery corresponded to one egy. No trials were mixed; in other words, the choices between early of three values: 10 min (labeled as "early"), 20 min ("middle"), and 30 delivery and late delivery were always for the same type of fluid. Hence, min ("late"). Delay categories were early versus middle, middle versus each choice can be summarized by a quintuple (R, D; R , D ; fluid type), late, and early versus late. Subjects were told the meaning of the different where the fluid type was either juice or water. delay period labels before entering the scanner. Reward values were as in We scanned a total of 37 (18 female) Princeton graduate and underexperiment 1, with R and R corresponding to 1 versus 2, 1 versus 3, and graduate students with a 3 Tesla Siemens (Munich, Germany) Allegra 2 versus 3 squirts of juice or water. Subjects were given two choices for scanner, 23 (12 female) for experiment 1, and 14 (6 female) for experieach pairing of delay and reward value and one each for juice and water. ment 2. Subjects were prescreened to exclude history of psychiatric disJuice and water delivery. Squirts of juice and water were delivered by a order or drug use. Subjects were instructed to abstain from drinking any computer-controlled syringe pump and customized software. Individual fluids for 3 h before participating. squirts were delivered at a rate of 1 ml/s for 1 s, giving a squirt size of 1 ml. Three subjects were excluded from data analysis (all from experiment Before receiving a squirt, subjects were required to press a button. This 1), one for failing to abstain from drinking before the experiment, one because of excessive head movement, and a third for selecting the later, ensured that subjects would have control over, and not be surprised by,

5798 · J. Neurosci., May 23, 2007 · 27(21):5796 ­5804

McClure et al. · Time Discounting

the fluid delivery. This, plus the small squirt size, was sufficient to keep swallowing-related head movement to a minimum (all subjects included in the data analysis had total head movement 3 mm in any direction during the experiment). Functional magnetic resonance imaging data analysis. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data analysis was performed using AFNI (Cox, 1996), SPM2 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), and custom-written programs in Matlab. Whole-brain, blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)-weighted echo-planar images were acquired parallel to the anterior commissure­posterior commissure line with a repetition time of 2 s and echo time of 30 ms. Functional images were first aligned to correct for head movement during the scan. Slice timing correction was then performed using sinc interpolation. Images were subsequently normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates and resampled at 4 4 4 mm 3 resolution. A Gaussian smoothing kernel of 8 mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) was applied to improve comparison across subjects. Head movement estimates derived from the first realignment step were included as regressors in all analyses to help diminish the impact of any movement-related effects on the results. Analysis of a general linear model (GLM) was performed using SPM2. In our previous study (McClure et al., 2004), we conducted such an analysis with a regressor that was constructed by weighting decision periods with an immediate reward in the choice set by 1.0, weighting decision periods with only delayed options in the choice set by 0.5, and using a zero weighting for periods in which no decision is made. We called this the regressor. In contrast, the regressor used in our current analysis selectively weights decision periods with an immediate option in the choice set by 1.0 and all other periods by 0. This new regressor ensures that areas showing increased activity only for decisions involving an immediate reward will only load on the new regressor. The differences produced by the use of the new regressor on the data from our previous study are subtle and do not qualitatively change any of the effects originally reported. In comparing the results between studies (see Fig. 5), we have reanalyzed our previous data with the new regressor structure. In our previous study, we also used a regressor that was constructed by weighting all decision periods by 1.0 and weighting all other periods by 0. We called this the regressor, and we use the same regressor in the current study. In addition to the and regressors, regressors were included for head movement (six regressors for movements along the x-, y-, and z-axes as well as rotations around the x-, y-, and z-axes). Baseline drift in the magnetic resonance signal was accounted for with three regressors to estimate a quadratic dependence between signal amplitude and time. Finally, additional regressors were included to account for response time and time on task (i.e., linear dependence on choice number). All regressors were fit simultaneously in a single GLM analysis. GLMs were fit to each subject individually. Between-subjects t tests were then performed to identify voxels that loaded significantly on the and/or regressors. The AFNI program AlphaSim was used to determine our significance criterion. The smoothness of our data were estimated using 3dFWHM. Using these tools, we determined that a corrected (familywise) p 0.05 is achieved with a minimum of nine contiguous voxels each significant at p 0.001. Individual trial estimates of brain response. We estimated the amplitude of brain response for each identified brain region separately for each trial to correlate with choices and to fit discount functions. To do so, BOLD data for each voxel identified in the initial GLM were normalized by the mean across the experiment to give percentage signal change relative to baseline and then averaged across voxels in each identified brain region.We then fit gamma functions during each choice epoch with the following functional form:

Our fitting procedure was developed to overcome two main challenges. First, we did not know at which exact time choice-related brain responses occurred. This is because subjects had 10 s to make their choice on each trial and took several seconds on average to render their choice. We therefore included the temporal offset parameter , which was allowed to vary to give the best fit to the BOLD signal (where is at most the subject's response time). The second challenge arose in estimating the baseline from which the brain response occurred. The quadratic fit to the BOLD signal drift during the experiment was adequate for the full GLM analysis (above) but did not account for higher-frequency signal drift that was apparent during the period of each choice. We therefore fit the baseline signal individually for each choice by computing a weighted average of the BOLD signal amplitude around the time at which the choice was visually displayed. We gave maximal weight to the BOLD signal at the time when the choice was first displayed with linearly decreasing weight for the subsequent 2 s (to a weight of 0 at 2 s) because changes in BOLD response are known to lag neural events by at least 2 s. A linearly decreasing weight was also given to the BOLD signal for the 4 s before choice presentation (0 weight at 4 s). We did not weight BOLD signals beyond 4 s because of the proximity of preceding juice and water delivery events. After correcting for baseline BOLD amplitude, a simplex fitting procedure was performed in Matlab to find values of a and that minimized the sum-squared error from actual BOLD signal measures. Brain activity and behavior. To estimate the relationship between brain activity and behavior (including fits of discount functions to brain activity), we first mean normalized the BOLD response amplitudes by dividing by the mean amplitude across all voxels in each brain region for each subject and across all trials. We then averaged these mean normalized responses over all and areas, respectively. In fitting to behavior, probit models were used to predict, from brain activity, the probability of choosing the earlier of the two rewards in a given choice. In addition to the normed brain activity variables, we entered the following set of basic control variables: indicator variables for each subject, choice number, and the number of juice squirts the subject received in the delivery period before the choice. Where noted, we also control for specific choice type (i.e., an indicator variable for each combination of reward size and delay). Details for the procedure used to fit discount functions to brain activity are given in section 2 of the supplemental material (available at www.jneurosci.org).

Results
Experiment 1 Each subject was presented with 36 binary intertemporal choices (the timing and sequence of events in the experiment is depicted in Fig. 1). For each choice, subjects decided between a reward of size R at delay D and a second reward of size R at delay D (where R R and D D ). We varied the size of the two rewards (R and R ), the time to the earliest reward ( D), and the lag between rewards (D D) as detailed above. Each choice was repeated for juice squirts and water squirts. Choice behavior Subjects showed clear evidence of nonexponential discounting in their behavioral preferences. Figure 2 provides a nonparametric test of this property. In Figure 2, we bin the data by the value of D, the time delay to the early reward in a binary choice; in our experiment, D is 0, 10, or 20 min. The probability of selecting the earlier reward for the data labeled D 0 min in Figure 2 A is calculated as the percentage of trials that subjects select the early option from the six sets of trials listed in Table 1 (each row represents a trial, which is a choice between an early option and a later option). Likewise, the probability of selecting the early reward for the data labeled D 10 min is calculated as the percentage of trials that subjects select the early option from the trials detailed in Table 2 (again each row represents a choice/trial). Analogous calculations are conducted

h t

a cb
be b

t

b

et

/c

.

(4)

This is a normalized version of the gamma function developed by Cohen (1997); values for b and c were taken from Cohen (1997) (8.6 and 0.55, respectively).

McClure et al. · Time Discounting

J. Neurosci., May 23, 2007 · 27(21):5796 ­5804 · 5799

Figure 2. Impulsivity in choice behavior. A, The probability of selecting the earlier, smaller liquid reward was calculated for each subject based on the time to the earliest reward option (D). Subjects were significantly more likely to select the earlier option when they could obtain it at a 0 min delay than when the earlier reward was available after a 10 or 20 min delay. B, Additional inspection reveals that the enhanced preference for immediate rewards is driven primarily by choices between an immediate reward and a reward at 5 min delay. Subjects did not show evidence for impulsive responding for choices between an immediate reward and one available in only 1 min. Error bars represent SEM across subjects. Table 1. Trials with no delay for early option Early option Delay 0 min 0 min 0 min 0 min 0 min 0 min Magnitude 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts

Figure 3. Response to juice and water delivery. A, Brain areas activated by the delivery of juice and water included gustatory cortex in the insula (Ins), premotor areas, and regions in the ventral striatum (VStr; p 0.001; minimum 8 contiguous voxels). The VStr is strongly associated with reward processing. SMA, Supplementary motor area. B, In the VStr, responses to juice and water were of equal amplitude, suggesting that subjects found the two liquids to be approximately equally rewarding. Furthermore, choices for juice or water squirts were statistically indistinguishable. Because of these two findings, subsequent analyses do not distinguish between juice and water.

Later option Delay 1 min 1 min 1 min 5 min 5 min 5 min Magnitude 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts

Table 2. Trials with 10 min delay for early option Early option Later option Delay 10 min 10 min 10 min 10 min 10 min 10 min Magnitude 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts Delay 11 min 11 min 11 min 15 min 15 min 15 min Magnitude 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts

resented by Equation 3. We first estimated a probit model that predicts choice based on the ­ discounting model. This yields 0.52 (SE, 0.045) and 0.98 (SE, parameter estimates of 0.015). We cannot reject the hypothesis that the system does not discount at all [H0: 1; p 0.25, likelihood ratio (LR) test]. However, we can reject the hypothesis that the discounting is purely exponential (H0: 1; p 0.0001, LR test). Next, we fit choices with a "double-exponential" implementation of Equation 3, where D ( ) , and D ( ) . This is a continuous-time generalization of the ­ model (Harris and Laibson, 2004). Using a probit model, we estimate that 0.46 (SE, 0.107) and 1.02 (SE, 0.019). Once again, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the more patient system does not discount at all (H0: 1; p 0.18, Wald test). If the two discounting parameters and are identical, then this model is equivalent to the classic model of single-exponential discounting. We can reject the hypothesis that the two discounting parameters are the same in the pooled data (H0: ; p 0.0001, Wald test), suggesting that a two-system model is consistent with the behavioral data. Brain response to juice and water We identified brain regions that responded to juice and water delivery as those that correlate significantly with a regressor generated by convolving delivery times with a hemodynamic response kernel. This analysis reveals three brain regions (Fig. 3A). The first is bilateral primary taste cortex in the anterior insula. The second is a region in the premotor area (PMA), most likely resulting from the button press required to initiate fluid delivery. Finally, we find regions bilaterally in the ventral striatum that are also activated by fluid delivery. The ventral striatum has repeatedly been implicated in reward processing involving both money (Knutson et al., 2001) and primary rewards such as juice (McClure et al., 2003; O'Doherty et al., 2003). This is also a main projection site of midbrain dopamine neurons that are known to convey reward information (Schultz et al., 1997). To assess whether reward-related brain responses to juice and water are significantly different, we extract mean event-related activity changes from the ventral striatum bilaterally (Fig. 3B). No differences in the amplitudes of brain response to juice and water are found in this analysis (cf. Berns et al., 2001). Identification of and brain systems The main purpose of our study was to determine whether distinct brain regions would show qualitatively different patterns of time discounting and, if so, whether the division of regions would resemble that revealed by our previous research. To avoid imposing our hypotheses on the data, we do not use a region-of-interest

Table 3. Trials with 20 min delay for early option Early option Later option Delay 20 min 20 min 20 min 20 min 20 min 20 min Magnitude 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts 1 squirt 1 squirt 2 squirts Delay 21 min 21 min 21 min 25 min 25 min 25 min Magnitude 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts 2 squirts 3 squirts 3 squirts

for the data labeled D 20 min, for which the trials in Table 3 are used. Figure 2 A reveals a greater tendency to select the earlier reward option in the D 0 min trials compared with either D 10 min trials (paired t test; p 0.001) or the D 20 min trials ( p 0.001). Additionally, by comparing the plots for the 1 and 5 min differences between D and D, it can be seen that the immediacy effect is driven primarily by the trials with 5 min differences (Fig. 2 B). We next fit subjects' choice data to both the ­ discounting model (Eq. 1), which assumes that the system conforms to a discrete (1­ 0) function, and the more flexible formulation rep-

5800 · J. Neurosci., May 23, 2007 · 27(21):5796 ­5804

McClure et al. · Time Discounting

analysis to identify potential and brain areas but instead conduct a whole-brain analysis. We regress voxel-level neural activity (i.e., the BOLD signal measured in each voxel) on control variables (time in experiment and number of juice/water squirts in previous delivery period) and on dummy variables that represent different types of intertemporal choices. As described previously, one dummy variable identifies intertemporal choices that involve a decision between an immediate reward and a delayed reward ( dummy). A second dummy variable identifies all intertemporal choices (in other words, all decision epochs) ( dummy). Note that the dummy identifies a subset of the decision epochs identified by the dummy and that brain regions load on the regressor to the degree that they respond preferentially to Figure 4. and brain areas. fMRI data were fit with two regressors. A, The regressor identified those brain areas that are intertemporal choices involving immedi- preferentially activated by choices involving a reward available at a 0 min delay. Brain areas that correlated with this regressor ate rewards. Brain areas that load only on included a set of brain areas all closely linked with the mesolimbic dopamine system. These include the NAc, PCC, mOFC, and ACC the regressor do not respond preferen- ( p 0.001; minimum 8 contiguous voxels). PCu, Precuneus. B, The second ( ) regressor identifies brain areas that are activated tially to the presence of an option for im- by all intertemporal choices. This regressor identified several brain areas identified with general cognitive processing, including the PPar bilaterally, the Ant Ins, and regions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [Brodmann area 9 (BA9), BA44, BA46, and BA10; mediate reward. p 0.001]. Vis Ctx, Visual cortex. We identify several brain regions that load on the regressor (Fig. 4 A). These identified in our previous study of intertemporal choice for regions include the nucleus accumbens (NAc), subgenual cingumoney (McClure et al., 2004). To directly compare the responses late cortex (SGC), medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC), postein this and our previous report, we performed a conjunction rior cingulate cortex (PCC), and precuneus. As demonstrated analysis to identify overlapping voxels (Fig. 5). Among the arbelow, these are very similar to the areas identified by a similar eas, every region of activity replicates our previous findings, with analysis in our previous study (McClure et al., 2004). All of these the exception of the additional finding of a rostral area of the regions are within the limbic system and paralimbic cortex and PCC. There is substantial overlap of the voxels among the areas have been directly implicated in reward processing in previous at p 0.001 and even greater overlap with a threshold of p 0.01. studies (Breiter and Rosen, 1999; Knutson et al., 2001). The Among the areas, almost all regions of activity replicate dummy also identifies a region in the dorsal anterior cingulate across the two studies, but, unlike the regions, this region-level cortex (ACC). The ACC is frequently associated with the presreplication does not translate into voxel-level replication. At p ence of response conflict (Barch et al., 2001; Botvinick et al., 0.001, only seven voxels in the medial prefrontal cortex are con2001). Finding ACC activity in this context may imply that sistent across the two studies. Two of these voxels are in the SGC, choices involving an immediate reward option are associated and the other five are in the dorsal ACC. The number of overlapwith greater conflict. Such conflict is consistent with a twoping voxels increases somewhat at p 0.01 to include one voxel system model of decision making. in the PCC and one voxel in the NAc (Fig. 5B). As in our previous study, regions that correlate significantly A possible interpretation of these results is that cognitive ( ) with the dummy included both visual and motor areas, as well brain regions are domain general and hence are consistent across as regions commonly associated with higher-level cognitive functasks, a finding that has been reported by others (Shallice, 1982; tions. It is likely that areas of primary visual and premotor cortex Duncan, 1986; Miller and Cohen, 2001). In contrast, limbic (including PMA and supplementary motor area) were activated reward-related ( ) areas may be more stimulus or task specific. because task performance requires subjects to look at a visual The same general brain regions may be involved in a variety of display and press a button to indicate preference. The remaining functions, but the specific subregions involved may be dependent areas we find to correlate with the dummy include a region in on reward modality, time scale, or other details of the particular the PCC, bilateral areas in the posterior parietal cortex (PPar), task circumstance. bilateral areas in the anterior insula (Ant Ins), and several regions in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (Brodmann areas Neural discounting Our analysis has shown that subjects' behavioral choices are de9, 44, 46, and 10) (Fig. 4 B). Activity in DLPFC and PPar is obscribed by a two-system discounting model. Our analysis of the served commonly in tasks involving cognitive processes such as brain-imaging data has also identified two different neural sysworking memory, abstract problem solving, and exertion of contems, which appear to be associated with each of the two distrol in favor of long-term goals (Miller and Cohen, 2001). The counting systems. To test this relationship more directly, 