Vol 447 | 14 June 2007 | doi:10.1038/nature05874

ARTICLES
Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project
The ENCODE Project Consortium*
We report the generation and analysis of functional data from multiple, diverse experiments performed on a targeted 1% of the human genome as part of the pilot phase of the ENCODE Project. These data have been further integrated and augmented by a number of evolutionary and computational analyses. Together, our results advance the collective knowledge about human genome function in several major areas. First, our studies provide convincing evidence that the genome is pervasively transcribed, such that the majority of its bases can be found in primary transcripts, including non-protein-coding transcripts, and those that extensively overlap one another. Second, systematic examination of transcriptional regulation has yielded new understanding about transcription start sites, including their relationship to specific regulatory sequences and features of chromatin accessibility and histone modification. Third, a more sophisticated view of chromatin structure has emerged, including its inter-relationship with DNA replication and transcriptional regulation. Finally, integration of these new sources of information, in particular with respect to mammalian evolution based on inter- and intra-species sequence comparisons, has yielded new mechanistic and evolutionary insights concerning the functional landscape of the human genome. Together, these studies are defining a path for pursuit of a more comprehensive characterization of human genome function.
The human genome is an elegant but cryptic store of information. The roughly three billion bases encode, either directly or indirectly, the instructions for synthesizing nearly all the molecules that form each human cell, tissue and organ. Sequencing the human genome1­3 provided highly accurate DNA sequences for each of the 24 chromosomes. However, at present, we have an incomplete understanding of the protein-coding portions of the genome, and markedly less understanding of both non-protein-coding transcripts and genomic elements that temporally and spatially regulate gene expression. To understand the human genome, and by extension the biological processes it orchestrates and the ways in which its defects can give rise to disease, we need a more transparent view of the information it encodes. The molecular mechanisms by which genomic information directs the synthesis of different biomolecules has been the focus of much of molecular biology research over the last three decades. Previous studies have typically concentrated on individual genes, with the resulting general principles then providing insights into transcription, chromatin remodelling, messenger RNA splicing, DNA replication and numerous other genomic processes. Although many such principles seem valid as additional genes are investigated, they generally have not provided genome-wide insights about biological function. The first genome-wide analyses that shed light on human genome function made use of observing the actions of evolution. The evergrowing set of vertebrate genome sequences4­8 is providing increasing power to reveal the genomic regions that have been most and least acted on by the forces of evolution. However, although these studies convincingly indicate the presence of numerous genomic regions under strong evolutionary constraint, they have less power in identifying the precise bases that are constrained and provide little, if any, insight into why those bases are biologically important. Furthermore, although we have good models for how protein-coding regions
*A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper.

evolve, our present understanding about the evolution of other functional genomic regions is poorly developed. Experimental studies that augment what we learn from evolutionary analyses are key for solidifying our insights regarding genome function. The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) Project9 aims to provide a more biologically informative representation of the human genome by using high-throughput methods to identify and catalogue the functional elements encoded. In its pilot phase, 35 groups provided more than 200 experimental and computational data sets that examined in unprecedented detail a targeted 29,998 kilobases (kb) of the human genome. These roughly 30 Mb--equivalent to ,1% of the human genome--are sufficiently large and diverse to allow for rigorous pilot testing of multiple experimental and computational methods. These 30 Mb are divided among 44 genomic regions; approximately 15 Mb reside in 14 regions for which there is already substantial biological knowledge, whereas the other 15 Mb reside in 30 regions chosen by a stratified random-sampling method (see http://www.genome.gov/10506161). The highlights of our findings to date include: $ The human genome is pervasively transcribed, such that the majority of its bases are associated with at least one primary transcript and many transcripts link distal regions to established proteincoding loci. $ Many novel non-protein-coding transcripts have been identified, with many of these overlapping protein-coding loci and others located in regions of the genome previously thought to be transcriptionally silent. $ Numerous previously unrecognized transcription start sites have been identified, many of which show chromatin structure and sequence-specific protein-binding properties similar to wellunderstood promoters.

799
©2007 Nature Publishing Group

ARTICLES

NATURE | Vol 447 | 14 June 2007

Regulatory sequences that surround transcription start sites are symmetrically distributed, with no bias towards upstream regions. $ Chromatin accessibility and histone modification patterns are highly predictive of both the presence and activity of transcription start sites. $ Distal DNaseI hypersensitive sites have characteristic histone modification patterns that reliably distinguish them from promoters; some of these distal sites show marks consistent with insulator function. $ DNA replication timing is correlated with chromatin structure. $ A total of 5% of the bases in the genome can be confidently identified as being under evolutionary constraint in mammals; for approximately 60% of these constrained bases, there is evidence of function on the basis of the results of the experimental assays performed to date. $ Although there is general overlap between genomic regions identified as functional by experimental assays and those under evolutionary constraint, not all bases within these experimentally defined regions show evidence of constraint. $ Different functional elements vary greatly in their sequence variability across the human population and in their likelihood of residing within a structurally variable region of the genome. $ Surprisingly, many functional elements are seemingly unconstrained across mammalian evolution. This suggests the possibility of a large pool of neutral elements that are biochemically active but provide no specific benefit to the organism. This pool may serve as a `warehouse' for natural selection, potentially acting as the source of lineage-specific elements and functionally conserved but nonorthologous elements between species. Below, we first provide an overview of the experimental techniques used for our studies, after which we describe the insights gained from analysing and integrating the generated data sets. We conclude with a perspective of what we have learned to date about this 1% of the
$

human genome and what we believe the prospects are for a broader and deeper investigation of the functional elements in the human genome. To aid the reader, Box 1 provides a glossary for many of the abbreviations used throughout this paper.
Experimental techniques Table 1 (expanded in Supplementary Information section 1.1) lists the major experimental techniques used for the studies reported here, relevant acronyms, and references reporting the generated data sets. These data sets reflect over 400 million experimental data points (603 million data points if one includes comparative sequencing bases). In describing the major results and initial conclusions, we seek to distinguish `biochemical function' from `biological role'. Biochemical function reflects the direct behaviour of a molecule(s), whereas biological role is used to describe the consequence(s) of this function for the organism. Genome-analysis techniques nearly always focus on biochemical function but not necessarily on biological role. This is because the former is more amenable to largescale data-generation methods, whereas the latter is more difficult to assay on a large scale. The ENCODE pilot project aimed to establish redundancy with respect to the findings represented by different data sets. In some instances, this involved the intentional use of different assays that were based on a similar technique, whereas in other situations, different techniques assayed the same biochemical function. Such redundancy has allowed methods to be compared and consensus data sets to be generated, much of which is discussed in companion papers, such as the ChIP-chip platform comparison10,11. All ENCODE data have been released after verification but before this publication, as befits a `community resource' project (see http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/ doc_wtd003208.html). Verification is defined as when the experiment is reproducibly confirmed (see Supplementary Information section 1.2). The main portal for ENCODE data is provided by the UCSC Genome Browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE/); this is

Box 1 | Frequently used abbreviations in this paper AR Ancient repeat: a repeat that was inserted into the early mammalian lineage and has since become dormant; the majority of ancient repeats are thought to be neutrally evolving. CAGE tag A short sequence from the 59 end of a transcript CDS Coding sequence: a region of a cDNA or genome that encodes proteins ChIP-chip Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by detection of the products using a genomic tiling array CNV Copy number variants: regions of the genome that have large duplications in some individuals in the human population CS Constrained sequence: a genomic region associated with evidence of negative selection (that is, rejection of mutations relative to neutral regions) DHS DNaseI hypersensitive site: a region of the genome showing a sharply different sensitivity to DNaseI compared with its immediate locale EST Expressed sequence tag: a short sequence of a cDNA indicative of expression at this point FAIRE Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements: a method to assay open chromatin using formaldehyde crosslinking followed by detection of the products using a genomic tiling array FDR False discovery rate: a statistical method for setting thresholds on statistical tests to correct for multiple testing GENCODE Integrated annotation of existing cDNA and protein resources to define transcripts with both manual review and experimental testing procedures GSC Genome structure correction: a method to adapt statistical tests to make fewer assumptions about the distribution of features on the genome sequence. This provides a conservative correction to standard tests HMM Hidden Markov model: a machine-learning technique that can establish optimal parameters for a given model to explain the observed data
800

Indel An insertion or deletion; two sequences often show a length difference within alignments, but it is not always clear whether this reflects a previous insertion or a deletion PET A short sequence that contains both the 59 and 39 ends of a transcript RACE Rapid amplification of cDNA ends: a technique for amplifying cDNA sequences between a known internal position in a transcript and its 59 end RFBR Regulatory factor binding region: a genomic region found by a ChIP-chip assay to be bound by a protein factor RFBR-Seqsp Regulatory factor binding regions that are from sequence-specific binding factors RT­PCR Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction: a technique for amplifying a specific region of a transcript RxFrag Fragment of a RACE reaction: a genomic region found to be present in a RACE product by an unbiased tiling-array assay SNP Single nucleotide polymorphism: a single base pair change between two individuals in the human population STAGE Sequence tag analysis of genomic enrichment: a method similar to ChIP-chip for detecting protein factor binding regions but using extensive short sequence determination rather than genomic tiling arrays SVM Support vector machine: a machine-learning technique that can establish an optimal classifier on the basis of labelled training data TR50 A measure of replication timing corresponding to the time in the cell cycle when 50% of the cells have replicated their DNA at a specific genomic position TSS Transcription start site TxFrag Fragment of a transcript: a genomic region found to be present in a transcript by an unbiased tiling-array assay Un.TxFrag A TxFrag that is not associated with any other functional annotation UTR Untranslated region: part of a cDNA either at the 59 or 39 end that does not encode a protein sequence

©2007 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE | Vol 447 | 14 June 2007

ARTICLES

augmented by multiple other websites (see Supplementary Information section 1.1). A common feature of genomic analyses is the need to assess the significance of the co-occurrence of features or of other statistical tests. One confounding factor is the heterogeneity of the genome, which can produce uninteresting correlations of variables distributed across the genome. We have developed and used a statistical framework that mitigates many of these hidden correlations by adjusting the appropriate null distribution of the test statistics. We term this correction procedure genome structure correction (GSC) (see Supplementary Information section 1.3). In the next five sections, we detail the various biological insights of the pilot phase of the ENCODE Project.
Transcription Overview. RNA transcripts are involved in many cellular functions, either directly as biologically active molecules or indirectly by encoding other active molecules. In the conventional view of genome organization, sets of RNA transcripts (for example, messenger RNAs) are encoded by distinct loci, with each usually dedicated to a single biological role (for example, encoding a specific protein). However, this picture has substantially grown in complexity in recent years12. Other forms of RNA molecules (such as small nucleolar RNAs and micro (mi)RNAs) are known to exist, and often these are encoded by regions that intercalate with protein-coding genes. These observations are consistent with the well-known discrepancy between the levels of observable mRNAs and large structural RNAs
Table 1 | Summary of types of experimental techniques used in ENCODE
Feature class Experimental technique(s) Abbreviations References Number of experimental data points

Transcription

Tiling array, integrated annotation Tag sequencing Tiling array

TxFrag, RxFrag, GENCODE

59 ends of transcripts* Histone modifications Chromatin{ structure

PET, CAGE Histone nomenclature{, RFBR DHS, FAIRE

117 118 19 119 121 13 46

63,348,656

864,964 4,401,291

42 43 44 122 SequenceTiling array, tag STAGE, ChIP41,52 specific factors sequencing, Chip, ChIP-PET, 11,120 promoter assays RFBR 123 81 34,51 124 49 33 40 Replication Tiling array TR50 59 75 Computational Computational CCI, RFBR cluster 80 analysis methods 125 10 16 126 127 Genomic Comparative CS 87 sequencing, multisequence 86 sequence analysis* 26 alignments, computational analyses CNV 103 Polymorphisms* Resequencing, 128 copy number variation

QT-PCR, tiling array

15,318,324

324,846,018

14,735,740 NA

compared with the total RNA in a cell, suggesting that there are numerous RNA species yet to be classified13­15. In addition, studies of specific loci have indicated the presence of RNA transcripts that have a role in chromatin maintenance and other regulatory control. We sought to assay and analyse transcription comprehensively across the 44 ENCODE regions in an effort to understand the repertoire of encoded RNA molecules. Transcript maps. We used three methods to identify transcripts emanating from the ENCODE regions: hybridization of RNA (either total or polyA-selected) to unbiased tiling arrays (see Supplementary Information section 2.1), tag sequencing of cap-selected RNA at the 59 or joint 59/39 ends (see Supplementary Information sections 2.2 and S2.3), and integrated annotation of available complementary DNA and EST sequences involving computational, manual, and experimental approaches16 (see Supplementary Information section 2.4). We abbreviate the regions identified by unbiased tiling arrays as TxFrags, the cap-selected RNAs as CAGE or PET tags (see Box 1), and the integrated annotation as GENCODE transcripts. When a TxFrag does not overlap a GENCODE annotation, we call it an Un.TxFrag. Validation of these various studies is described in papers reporting these data sets17 (see Supplementary Information sections 2.1.4 and 2.1.5). These methods recapitulate previous findings, but provide enhanced resolution owing to the larger number of tissues sampled and the integration of results across the three approaches (see Table 2). To begin with, our studies show that 14.7% of the bases represented in the unbiased tiling arrays are transcribed in at least one tissue sample. Consistent with previous work14,15, many (63%) TxFrags reside outside of GENCODE annotations, both in intronic (40.9%) and intergenic (22.6%) regions. GENCODE annotations are richer than the more-conservative RefSeq or Ensembl annotations, with 2,608 transcripts clustered into 487 loci, leading to an average of 5.4 transcripts per locus. Finally, extensive testing of predicted protein-coding sequences outside of GENCODE annotations was positive in only 2% of cases16, suggesting that GENCODE annotations cover nearly all protein-coding sequences. The GENCODE annotations are categorized both by likely function (mainly, the presence of an open reading frame) and by classification evidence (for example, transcripts based solely on ESTs are distinguished from other scenarios); this classification is not strongly correlated with expression levels (see Supplementary Information sections 2.4.2 and 2.4.3). Analyses of more biological samples have allowed a richer description of the transcription specificity (see Fig. 1 and Supplementary Information section 2.5). We found that 40% of TxFrags are present in only one sample, whereas only 2% are present in all samples. Although exon-containing TxFrags are more likely (74%) to be expressed in more than one sample, 45% of unannotated TxFrags are also expressed in multiple samples. GENCODE annotations of separate loci often (42%) overlap with respect to their genomic coordinates, in particular on opposite strands (33% of loci). Further analysis of GENCODE-annotated sequences with respect to the positions of open reading frames revealed that some component exons do not have the expected synonymous versus non-synonymous substitution patterns of protein-coding sequence (see Supplement Information section 2.6) and some have deletions incompatible with
Table 2 | Bases detected in processed transcripts either as a GENCODE exon, a TxFrag, or as either a GENCODE exon or a TxFrag
GENCODE exon TxFrag Either GENCODE exon or TxFrag

NA

NA

* Not all data generated by the ENCODE Project. { Histone code nomenclature follows the Brno nomenclature as described in ref. 129. {Also contains histone modification.

Total detectable 1,776,157 (5.9%) 1,369,611 (4.6%) 2,519,280 (8.4%) transcripts (bases) Transcripts detected 1,447,192 (9.8%) 1,369,611 (9.3%) 2,163,303 (14.7%) in tiled regions of arrays (bases)
Percentages are of total bases in ENCODE in the first row and bases tiled in arrays in the second row.

801
©2007 Nature Publishing Group

ARTICLES

NATURE | Vol 447 | 14 June 2007

1/11

2/11

3/11

4/11

5/11

6/11

7/11

8/11

9/11

10/11

Annotated transcripts

10 8

Tiling array nucleotides (%)

4 2 0

Novel transcripts

4 6 8 10 12

Figure 1 | Annotated and unannotated TxFrags detected in different cell lines. The proportion of different types of transcripts detected in the indicated number of cell lines (from 1/11 at the far left to 11/11 at the far right) is shown. The data for annotated and unannotated TxFrags are indicated separately, and also split into different categories based on GENCODE classification: exonic, intergenic (proximal being within 5 kb of a gene and distal being otherwise), intronic (proximal being within 5 kb of an intron and distal being otherwise), and matching other ESTs not used in the GENCODE annotation (principally because they were unspliced). The y axis indicates the per cent of tiling array nucleotides present in that class for that number of samples (combination of cell lines and tissues).
802

0

1 1­ 5

Figure 2 | Length of genomic extensions to GENCODE-annotated genes on the basis of RACE experiments followed by array hybridizations (RxFrags). The indicated bars reflect the frequency of extension lengths among different length classes. The solid line shows the cumulative frequency of extensions of that length or greater. Most of the extensions are greater than 50 kb from the annotated gene (see text for details).

©2007 Nature Publishing Group

10 10 ­2 5 25 ­5 50 0 ­1 10 00 0­ 2 20 00 0­ 3 30 00 0­ 4 40 00 0­ 50 0  50 0

5

5­

0.

0.

<

5­

Extension length (kb)

0

10

20

30

5

40

2

50

60

10

70

6

GENCODE exonic Other ESTs Intergenic distal Intergenic proximal Intronic distal Intronic proximal

Per cent of RxFrag extensions (shaded boxes)

80

90

12

11/11 cell lines

15

Cumulative per cent of extensions this length or greater (line)

protein structure18. Such exons are on average less expressed (25% versus 87% by RT­PCR; see Supplementary Information section 2.7) than exons involved in more than one transcript (see Supplementary Information section 2.4.3), but when expressed have a tissue distribution comparable to well-established genes. Critical questions are raised by the presence of a large amount of unannotated transcription with respect to how the corresponding sequences are organized in the genome--do these reflect longer transcripts that include known loci, do they link known loci, or are they completely separate from known loci? We further investigated these issues using both computational and new experimental techniques. Unannotated transcription. Consistent with previous findings, the Un.TxFrags did not show evidence of encoding proteins (see Supplementary Information section 2.8). One might expect Un.TxFrags to be linked within transcripts that exhibit coordinated expression and have similar conservation profiles across species. To test this, we clustered Un.TxFrags using two methods. The first method19 used expression levels in 11 cell lines or conditions, dinucleotide composition, location relative to annotated genes, and evolutionary conservation profiles to cluster TxFrags (both unannotated and annotated). By this method, 14% of Un.TxFrags could be assigned to annotated loci, and 21% could be clustered into 200 novel loci (with an average of ,7 TxFrags per locus). We experimentally examined these novel loci to study the connectivity of transcripts amongst Un.TxFrags and between Un.TxFrags and known exons. Overall, about 40% of the connections (18 out of 46) were validated by RT­PCR. The second clustering method involved analysing a time course (0, 2, 8 and 32 h) of expression changes in human HL60 cells following retinoic-acid stimulation. There is a coordinated program of expression changes from annotated loci, which can be shown by plotting Pearson correlation values of the expression levels of exons inside annotated loci versus unrelated exons (see Supplementary Information section 2.8.2). Similarly, there is coordinated expression of nearby Un.TxFrags, albeit lower, though still significantly different from randomized sets. Both clustering methods indicate that there is coordinated behaviour of many Un.TxFrags, consistent with them residing in connected transcripts. Transcript connectivity. We used a combination of RACE and tiling arrays20 to investigate the diversity of transcripts emanating from protein-coding loci. Analogous to TxFrags, we refer to transcripts

detected using RACE followed by hybridization to tiling arrays as RxFrags. We performed RACE to examine 399 protein-coding loci (those loci found entirely in ENCODE regions) using RNA derived from 12 tissues, and were able to unambiguously detect 4,573 RxFrags for 359 loci (see Supplementary Information section 2.9). Almost half of these RxFrags (2,324) do not overlap a GENCODE exon, and most (90%) loci have at least one novel RxFrag, which often extends a considerable distance beyond the 59 end of the locus. Figure 2 shows the distribution of distances between these new RACE-detected ends and the previously annotated TSS of each locus. The average distance of the extensions is between 50 kb and 100 kb, with many extensions (.20%) being more than 200 kb. Consistent with the known presence of overlapping genes in the human genome, our findings reveal evidence for an overlapping gene at 224 loci, with transcripts from 180 of these loci (,50% of the RACE-positive loci) appearing to have incorporated at least one exon from an upstream gene. To characterize further the 59 RxFrag extensions, we performed RT­PCR followed by cloning and sequencing for 550 of the 59 RxFrags (including the 261 longest extensions identified for each locus). The approach of mapping RACE products using microarrays is a combination method previously described and validated in several studies14,17,20. Hybridization of the RT­PCR products to tiling arrays confirmed connectivity in almost 60% of the cases. Sequenced clones confirmed transcript extensions. Longer extensions were harder to clone and sequence, but 5 out of 18 RT­PCR-positive extensions over 100 kb were verified by sequencing (see Supplementary Information section 2.9.7 and ref. 17). The detection of numerous RxFrag extensions coupled with evidence of considerable intronic transcription indicates that protein-coding loci are more transcriptionally complex than previously thought. Instead of the traditional view that many genes have one or more alternative transcripts that code for alternative proteins, our data suggest that a given gene may both encode multiple protein products and produce other transcripts that include sequences from both strands and from neighbouring loci (often without encoding a different protein). Figure 3 illustrates such a case, in which a new fusion transcript is expressed in the small intestine, and consists of at least three coding exons from the ATP5O gene and at least two coding exons from the DONSON

100

NATURE | Vol 447 | 14 June 2007

ARTICLES

Chr. 21 33,900,000 RxFrag PETs (­) strand GENCODE (+) strand reference genes (­) strand

33,950,000

34,000,000

34,050,000

34,100,000

34,150,000

34,200,000

ITSN1 CRYZL1 DONSON ATP5O

DONSON

Cloned RT-PCR product

ATP5O

Figure 3 | Overview of RACE experiments showing a gene fusion. Transcripts emanating from the region between the DONSON and ATP5O genes. A 330-kb interval of human chromosome 21 (within ENm005) is shown, which contains four annotated genes: DONSON, CRYZL1, ITSN1 and ATP5O. The 59 RACE products generated from small intestine RNA and detected by

tiling-array analyses (RxFrags) are shown along the top. Along the bottom is shown the placement of a cloned and sequenced RT­PCR product that has two exons from the DONSON gene followed by three exons from the ATP5O gene; these sequences are separated by a 300 kb intron in the genome. A PET tag shows the termini of a transcript consistent with this RT­PCR product.

gene, with no evidence of sequences from two intervening proteincoding genes (ITSN1 and CRYZL1). Pseudogenes. Pseudogenes, reviewed in refs 21 and 22, are generally considered non-functional copies of genes, are sometimes transcribed and often complicate analysis of transcription owing to close sequence similarity to functional genes. We used various computational methods to identify 201 pseudogenes (124 processed and 77 non-processed) in the ENCODE regions (see Supplementary Information section 2.10 and ref. 23). Tiling-array analysis of 189 of these revealed that 56% overlapped at least one TxFrag. However, possible cross-hybridization between the pseudogenes and their corresponding parent genes may have confounded such analyses. To assess better the extent of pseudogene transcription, 160 pseudogenes (111 processed and 49 non-processed) were examined for expression using RACE/tiling-array analysis (see Supplementary Information section 2.9.2). Transcripts were detected for 14 pseudogenes (8 processed and 6 non-processed) in at least one of the 12 tested RNA sources, the majority (9) being in testis (see ref. 23). Additionally, there was evidence for the transcription of 25 pseudogenes on the basis of their proximity (within 100 bp of a pseudogene end) to CAGE tags (8), PETs (2), or cDNAs/ESTs (21). Overall, we estimate that at least 19% of the pseudogenes in the ENCODE regions are transcribed, which is consistent with previous estimates24,25. Non-protein-coding RNA. Non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) include structural RNAs (for example, transfer RNAs, ribosomal RNAs, and small nuclear RNAs) and more recently discovered regulatory RNAs (for example, miRNAs). There are only 8 wellcharacterized ncRNA genes within the ENCODE regions (U70, ACA36, ACA56, mir-192, mir-194-2, mir-196, mir-483 and H19), whereas representatives of other classes, (for example, box C/D snoRNAs, tRNAs, and functional snRNAs) seem to be completely absent in the ENCODE regions. Tiling-array data provided evidence for transcription in at least one of the assayed RNA samples for all of these ncRNAs, with the exception of mir-483 (expression of mir-483 might be specific to fetal liver, which was not tested). There is also evidence for the transcription of 6 out of 8 pseudogenes of ncRNAs (mainly snoRNA-derived). Similar to the analysis of proteinpseudogenes, the hybridization results could also originate from the known snoRNA gene elsewhere in the genome. Many known ncRNAs are characterized by a well-defined RNA secondary structure. We applied two de novo ncRNA prediction algorithms--EvoFold and RNAz--to predict structured ncRNAs (as well as functional structures in mRNAs) using the multi-species sequence alignments (see below, Supplementary Information section 2.11 and ref. 26). Using a sensitivity threshold capable of detecting all known miRNAs and snoRNAs, we identified 4,986 and 3,707 candidate ncRNA loci with EvoFold and RNAz, respectively. Only 268 loci (5% and 7%, respectively) were found with both programs, representing a 1.6-fold enrichment over that expected by chance; the lack of more extensive overlap is due to the two programs having optimal sensitivity at different levels of GC content and conservation. We experimentally examined 50 of these targets using RACE/ tiling-array analysis for brain and testis tissues (see Supplementary

Information sections 2.11 and 2.9.3); the predictions were validated at a 56%, 65%, and 63% rate for Evofold, RNAz and dual predictions, respectively. Primary transcripts. The detection of numerous unannotated transcripts coupled with increasing knowledge of the general complexity of transcription prompted us to examine the extent of primary (that is, unspliced) transcripts across the ENCODE regions. Three data sources provide insight about these primary transcripts: the GENCODE annotation, PETs, and RxFrag extensions. Figure 4 summarizes the fraction of bases in the ENCODE regions that overlap transcripts identified by these technologies. Remarkably, 93% of bases are represented in a primary transcript identified by at least two independent observations (but potentially using the same technology); this figure is reduced to 74% in the case of primary transcripts detected by at least two different technologies. These increased spans are not mainly due to cell line rearrangements because they were present in multiple tissue experiments that confirmed the spans (see Supplementary Information section 2.12). These estimates assume that the presence of PETs or RxFrags defining the terminal ends of a transcript imply t