Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition
Mark B. Gerstein, Can Bruce, Joel S. Rozowsky, Deyou Zheng, Jiang Du, Jan O. Korbel, Olof Emanuelsson, Zhengdong D. Zhang, Sherman Weissman and Michael Snyder Genome Res. 2007 17: 669-681 Access the most recent version at doi:10.1101/gr.6339607

Supplementary data References

"Fig._1_Timeline_Poster.pdf" http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/17/6/669/DC1 This article cites 99 articles, 42 of which can be accessed free at: http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/17/6/669#References Article cited in: http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/17/6/669#otherarticles

Open Access Email alerting service

Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option. Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top right corner of the article or click here

Notes

To subscribe to Genome Research go to: http://www.genome.org/subscriptions/

© 2007 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Perspective

What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition
Mark B. Gerstein,1,2,3,9 Can Bruce,2,4 Joel S. Rozowsky,2 Deyou Zheng,2 Jiang Du,3 Jan O. Korbel,2,5 Olof Emanuelsson,6 Zhengdong D. Zhang,2 Sherman Weissman,7 and Michael Snyder2,8
Program in Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA; 2Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA; 3Computer Science Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA; 4Center for Medical Informatics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA; 5European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany; 6Stockholm Bioinformatics Center, Albanova University Center, Stockholm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden; 7Genetics Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA; 8Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA While sequencing of the human genome surprised us with how many protein-coding genes there are, it did not fundamentally change our perspective on what a gene is. In contrast, the complex patterns of dispersed regulation and pervasive transcription uncovered by the ENCODE project, together with non-genic conservation and the abundance of noncoding RNA genes, have challenged the notion of the gene. To illustrate this, we review the evolution of operational definitions of a gene over the past century--from the abstract elements of heredity of Mendel and Morgan to the present-day ORFs enumerated in the sequence databanks. We then summarize the current ENCODE findings and provide a computational metaphor for the complexity. Finally, we propose a tentative update to the definition of a gene: A gene is a union of genomic sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products. Our definition sidesteps the complexities of regulation and transcription by removing the former altogether from the definition and arguing that final, functional gene products (rather than intermediate transcripts) should be used to group together entities associated with a single gene. It also manifests how integral the concept of biological function is in defining genes.
1

Introduction
The classical view of a gene as a discrete element in the genome has been shaken by ENCODE
The ENCODE consortium recently completed its characterization of 1% of the human genome by various high-throughput experimental and computational techniques designed to characterize functional elements (The ENCODE Project Consortium 2007). This project represents a major milestone in the characterization of the human genome, and the current findings show a striking picture of complex molecular activity. While the landmark human genome sequencing surprised many with the small number (relative to simpler organisms) of protein-coding genes that sequence annotators could identify (21,000, according to the latest estimate [see www.ensembl.org]), ENCODE highlighted the number and complexity of the RNA transcripts that the genome produces. In this regard, ENCODE has changed our view of "what is a gene" considerably more than the sequencing of the Haemophilus influenza and human genomes did (Fleischmann et al. 1995; Lander et al. 2001; Venter et al. 2001). The discrepancy between our previous protein-centric view of the gene and one that is revealed by the extensive transcriptional activity of the genome prompts us to reconsider now what a gene is. Here, we review how the concept of the gene has changed over
9 Corresponding author. E-mail Mark.Gerstein@yale.edu; fax (360) 838-7861. Article is online at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.6339607. Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.

the past century, summarize the current thinking based on the latest ENCODE findings, and propose a new updated gene definition that takes these findings into account.

History of the gene, 1860 to just before ENCODE
Definition 1860s­1900s: Gene as a discrete unit of heredity
The concept of the "gene" has evolved and become more complex since it was first proposed (see timeline in Fig. 1, accompanying poster). There are various definitions of the term, although common initial descriptions include the ability to determine a particular characteristic of an organism and the heritability of this characteristic. In particular, the word gene was first used by Wilhelm Johannsen in 1909, based on the concept developed by Gregor Mendel in 1866 (Mendel 1866). The word was a derivative of pangene, which was used by Hugo De Vries for entities involved in pangenesis, Darwin's hypothetical mechanism of heredity (Heimans 1962). Johnannsen called a gene the "special conditions, foundations and determiners which are present [in the gametes] in unique, separate and thereby independent ways [by which] many characteristics of the organism are specified" (Johannsen 1909, p. 124). The etymology of the term derives from the Greek genesis ("birth") or genos ("origin"). The related word genetics was used by the geneticist William Bateson in 1905 (http://www.jic.ac.uk/corporate/about/bateson.htm). Mendel showed that when breeding plants, some traits such as height or flower color do not appear blended in their off-

17:669­681 ©2007 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/07; www.genome.org

Genome Research
www.genome.org

669

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Gerstein et al.
Figure 1. (Enclosed poster) Timeline of the history of the term "gene." A term invented almost a century ago, "gene," with its beguilingly simple orthography, has become a central concept in biology. Given a specific meaning at its coinage, this word has evolved into something complex and elusive over the years, reflecting our ever-expanding knowledge in genetics and in life sciences at large. The stunning discoveries made in the ENCODE Project--like many before that significantly enriched the meaning of this term--are harbingers of another tide of change in our understanding of what a gene is.

in the early years of bacteriology. A practical view of the gene was that of the cistron, a region of DNA defined by mutations that in trans could not genetically complement each other (Benzer 1955).

Definition 1960s: Gene as transcribed code
It was the solution of the three-dimensional structure of DNA by Watson and Crick in 1953 (Watson and Crick 1953) that explained how DNA could function as the molecule of heredity. Base pairing explained how genetic information could be copied, and the existence of two strands explained how occasional errors in replication could lead to a mutation in one of the daughter copies of the DNA molecule. From the 1960s on, molecular biology developed at a rapid pace. The RNA transcript of the protein-coding sequences was translated using the genetic code (solved in 1965 by Nirenberg et al. [1965] and Söll et al. [1965]) into an amino acid sequence. Francis Crick (1958) summarized the flow of information in gene expression as from nucleic acid to protein (the beginnings of the "Central Dogma"). However, there were some immediate exceptions to this: It was known that some genes code not for protein but for functional RNA molecules such as rRNA and tRNA. In addition, in RNA viruses the gene is made of RNA. The molecular view of the gene that developed through the 1960s can be summarized in general terms to be a code residing on nucleic acid that gives rise to a functional product.

spring--that is, these traits are passed on as distinct, discrete entities (Mendel 1866). His work also demonstrated that variations in traits were caused by variations in inheritable factors (or, in today's terminology, phenotype is caused by genotype). It was only after Mendel's work was repeated and rediscovered by Carl Correns, Erich von Tschermak-Seysenegg, and Hugo De Vries in 1900 that further work on the nature of the unit of inheritance truly began (Tschermak 1900; Vries 1900; Rheinberger 1995).

Definition 1910s: Gene as a distinct locus
In the next major development, the American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan and his students were studying the segregation of mutations in Drosophila melanogaster. They were able to explain their data with a model that genes are arranged linearly, and their ability to cross-over is proportional to the distance that separated them. The first genetic map was created in 1913 (Sturtevant 1913), and Morgan and his students published The Mechanism of Mendelian Inheritance in 1915 (Morgan et al. 1915). To the early geneticists, a gene was an abstract entity whose existence was reflected in the way phenotypes were transmitted between generations. The methodology used by early geneticists involved mutations and recombination, so the gene was essentially a locus whose size was determined by mutations that inactivated (or activated) a trait of interest and by the size of the recombining regions. The fact that genetic linkage corresponded to physical locations on chromosomes was shown later, in 1929, by Barbara McClintock, in her cytogenetic studies on maize (McClintock 1929).

Definition 1970s­1980s: Gene as open reading frame (ORF) sequence pattern
The development of cloning and sequencing techniques in the 1970s, combined with knowledge of the genetic code, revolutionized the field of molecular biology by providing a wealth of information on how genes are organized and expressed. The first gene to be sequenced was from the bacteriophage MS2, which was also the first organism to be fully sequenced (Fiers et al. 1971, 1976). The parallel development of computational tools led to algorithms for the identification of genes based on their sequence characteristics (e.g., for review, see Rogic et al. 2001). In many cases, a DNA sequence could be used to infer structure and function for the gene and its products. This situation created a new concept of the "nominal gene," which is defined by its predicted sequence rather than as a genetic locus responsible for a phenotype (Griffiths and Stotz 2006). The identification of most genes in sequenced genomes is based either on their similarity to other known genes, or the statistically significant signature of a protein-coding sequence. In many cases, the gene effectively became identified as an annotated ORF in the genome (Doolittle 1986).

Definition 1940s: Gene as a blueprint for a protein
Beadle and Tatum (1941), who studied Neurospora metabolism, discovered that mutations in genes could cause defects in steps in metabolic pathways. This was stated as the "one gene, one enzyme" view, which later became "one gene, one polypeptide." In this viewpoint, the gene is being implicitly considered as the information behind the individual molecules in a biochemical pathway. This view became progressively more explicit and mechanistic in later decades.

Definition 1950s: Gene as a physical molecule
The fact that heredity has a physical, molecular basis was demonstrated by the observation that X rays could cause mutations (Muller 1927). Griffith's (1928) demonstration that something in virulent but dead Pneumococcus strains could be taken up by live nonvirulent Pneumococcus and transform them into virulent bacteria was further evidence in this direction. It was later shown that this substance could be destroyed by the enzyme DNase (Avery et al. 1944). In 1955, Hershey and Chase established that the substance actually transmitted by bacteriophage to their progeny is DNA and not protein (Hershey and Chase 1955). Moreover, the idea that a gene's product is a diffusible substance underlies the complementation test that was used to define genes

Definition 1990s­2000s: Annotated genomic entity, enumerated in the databanks (current view, pre-ENCODE)
The current definition of a gene used by scientific organizations that annotate genomes still relies on the sequence view. Thus, a gene was defined by the Human Genome Nomenclature Organization as "a DNA segment that contributes to phenotype/ function. In the absence of demonstrated function a gene may be characterized by sequence, transcription or homology" (Wain et al. 2002). Recently, the Sequence Ontology Consortium reportedly called the gene a "locatable region of genomic sequence, corresponding to a unit of inheritance, which is associated with

670

Genome Research
www.genome.org

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

What is a gene?
regulatory regions, transcribed regions and/or other functional sequence regions" (Pearson 2006). The sequencing of first the Haemophilus influenza genome and then the human genome (Fleischmann et al. 1995; Lander et al. 2001; Venter et al. 2001) led to an explosion in the amount of sequence that definitions such as the above could be applied to. In fact, there was a huge popular interest in counting the number of genes in various organisms. This interest was crystallized originally by Gene Sweepstake's wager on the number of genes in the human genome, which received extensive media coverage (Wade 2003). It has been pointed out that these enumerations overemphasize traditional, protein-coding genes. In particular, when the number of genes present in the human genome was reported in 2003, it was acknowledged that too little was known about RNAcoding genes, such that the given number was that of proteincoding genes. The Ensembl view of the gene was specifically summarized in the rules of the Gene Sweepstake as follows: "alternatively spliced transcripts all belong to the same gene, even if the proteins that are produced are different." (http://web.archive. org/web/20050627080719/www.ensembl.org/Genesweep/). post-translational modification. Such sequences could reside within the coding sequence as well as in the flanking regions, and in the case of enhancers and related elements, very far away from the coding sequence. Although functionally required for the expression of the gene product, regulatory elements, especially the distant ones, made the concept of the gene as a compact genetic locus problematic. Regulation is integral to many current definitions of the gene. In particular, one current textbook definition of a gene in molecular terms is the entire nucleic acid sequence that is necessary for the synthesis of a functional polypeptide (or RNA) (Lodish et al. 2000). If that implies appropriately regulated synthesis, the DNA sequences in a gene would include not only those coding for the pre-mRNA and its flanking control regions, but also enhancers. Moreover, many enhancers are distant along the DNA sequence, although they are actually quite close due to three-dimensional chromatin structure.

2. Overlapping and spliced genes Overlapping
As genes, mRNAs, and eventually complete genomes were sequenced, the simple operon model turned out to be applicable only to genes of prokaryotes and their phages. Eukaryotes were different in many respects, including genetic organization and information flow. The model of genes as hereditary units that are nonoverlapping and continuous was shown to be incorrect by the precise mapping of the coding sequences of genes. In fact, some genes have been found to overlap one another, sharing the same DNA sequence in a different reading frame or on the opposite strand. The discontinuous structure of genes potentially allows one gene to be completely contained inside another one's intron, or one gene to overlap with another on the same strand without sharing any exons or regulatory elements.

A current computational metaphor: Genes as "subroutines" in the genomic operating system
Given that counting genes in the genome is such a large-scale computational endeavor and that genes fundamentally deal with information processing, the lexicon of computer science naturally has been increasingly applied to describing them. In particular, people in the computational biology community have used the description of a formal language to describe the structure of genes in very much the same way that grammars are used to describe computer programs--with a precise syntax of upstream regulation, exons, and introns (Searls 1997, 2001, 2002). Moreover, one metaphor that is increasingly popular for describing genes is to think of them in terms of subroutines in a huge operating system (OS). That is, insofar as the nucleotides of the genome are put together into a code that is executed through the process of transcription and translation, the genome can be thought of as an operating system for a living being. Genes are then individual subroutines in this overall system that are repetitively called in the process of transcription.

Splicing
Splicing was discovered in 1977 (Berget et al. 1977; Chow et al. 1977; Gelinas and Roberts 1977). It soon became clear that the gene was not a simple unit of heredity or function, but rather a series of exons, coding for, in some cases, discrete protein domains, and separated by long noncoding stretches called introns. With alternative splicing, one genetic locus could code for multiple different mRNA transcripts. This discovery complicated the concept of the gene radically. For instance, in the sequencing of the genome, Celera defined a gene as "a locus of co-transcribed exons" (Venter et al. 2001), and Ensembl's Gene Sweepstake Web page originally defined a gene as "a set of connected transcripts," where "connected" meant sharing one exon (http://web.archive. org/web/20050428090317/www.ensembl.org/Genesweep). The latter definition implies that a group of transcripts may share a set of exons, but no one exon is common to all of them.

Problematic issues with the current definition of a gene
There are a number of problematic aspects of the current definition of a gene, as applied to the human genome, which we discuss below. Several additional complications are summarized in Table 1.

1. Gene regulation
Jacob and Monod (1961), in their study of the lac operon of Escherichia coli, provided a paradigm for the mechanism of regulation of the gene: It consisted of a region of DNA consisting of sequences coding for one or more proteins, a "promoter" sequence for the binding of RNA polymerase, and an "operator" sequence to which regulatory genes bind. Later, other sequences were found to exist that could affect practically every aspect of gene regulation from transcription to mRNA degradation and

Trans-splicing
The phenomenon of trans-splicing (ligation of two separate mRNA molecules) further complicated our understanding (Blumenthal 2005). There are examples of transcripts from the same gene, or the opposite DNA strand, or even another chromosome, being joined before being spliced. Clearly, the classical concept of the gene as "a locus" no longer applies for these gene products whose DNA sequences are widely separated across the genome.

Genome Research
www.genome.org

671

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Gerstein et al.
Table 1. Phenomena complicating the concept of the gene Phenomenon Gene location and structure Intronic genes Genes with overlapping reading frames Enhancers, silencers Description Issue

A gene exists within an intron of another (Henikoff et al. 1986) A DNA region may code for two different protein products in different reading frames (Contreras et al. 1977) Distant regulatory elements (Spilianakis et al. 2005)

Two genes in the same locus No one-to-one correspondence between DNA and protein sequence DNA sequences determining expression can be widely separated from one another in genome. Many-to-many relationship between genes and their enhancers. A genetic element may be not constant in its location Gene structure is not hereditary, or structure may differ across individuals or cells/tissues Genetic elements may differ in their number

Structural variation Mobile elements Gene rearrangements/structural variants Copy-number variants

Genetic element appears in new locations over generations (McClintock 1948) DNA rearrangement or splicing in somatic cells results in many alternative gene products (Early et al. 1980) Copy number of genes/regulatory elements may differ between individuals (Iafrate et al. 2004; Sebat et al. 2004; Tuzun et al. 2005) Inherited information may not be DNA-sequence based (e.g., Dobrovic et al. 1988); a gene's expression depends on whether it is of paternal or maternal origin (Sager and Kitchin 1975) Chromatin structure, which does influence gene expression, only loosely associated with particular DNA sequences (Paul 1972) One transcript can generate multiple mRNAs, resulting in different protein products (Berget et al. 1977; Gelinas and Roberts 1977) Alternative reading frames of the INK4a tumor suppressor gene encodes two unrelated proteins (Quelle et al. 1995) Distant DNA sequences can code for transcripts ligated in various combinations (Borst 1986). Two identical transcripts of a gene can trans-splice to generate an mRNA where the same exon sequence is repeated (Takahara et al. 2000). RNA is enzymatically modified (Eisen 1988)

Epigenetics and chromosome structure Epigenetic modifications, imprinting

Phenotype is not determined strictly by genotype

Effect of chromatin structure

Gene expression depends on packing of DNA. DNA sequence is not enough to predict gene product. Multiple products from one genetic locus; information in DNA not linearly related to that on protein Two alternative splicing products of a pre-mRNA produce protein products with no sequence in common A protein can result from the combined information encoded in multiple transcripts

Post-transcriptional events Alternative splicing of RNA Alternatively spliced products with alternate reading frames RNA trans-splicing, homotypic trans-splicing

RNA editing Post-translational events Protein splicing, viral polyproteins Protein trans-splicing Protein modification Pseudogenes and retrogenes Retrogenes

The information on the DNA is not encoded directly into RNA sequence Start and end sites of protein not determined by genetic code Start and end sites of protein not determined by genetic code The information on the DNA is not encoded directly into protein sequence RNA-to-DNA flow of information

Protein product self-cleaves and can generate multiple functional products (Villa-Komaroff et al. 1975) Distinct proteins can be spliced together in the absence of a trans-spliced transcript (Handa et al. 1996) Protein is modified to alter structure and function of the final product (Wold 1981) A retrogene is formed from reverse transcription of its parent gene's mRNA (Vanin et al. 1980) and by insertion of the DNA product into a genome A pseudogene is transcribed (Zheng et al. 2005, 2007)

Transcribed pseudogenes

Biochemical activity of supposedly dead elements

Finally, a number of recent studies have highlighted a phenomenon dubbed tandem chimerism, where two consecutive genes are transcribed into a single RNA (Akiva et al. 2006; Parra et al. 2006). The translation (after splicing) of such RNAs can lead to a new, fused protein, having parts from both original proteins.

3. Parasitic and mobile genes
A challenge to our concept of the gene has been that of the selfish or parasitic gene. The idea first proposed by Richard Dawkins is that the unit of evolution is not the organism but the gene (Dawkins 1976). Organisms are just tools that genes use to rep-

672

Genome Research
www.genome.org

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

What is a gene?
licate themselves. Dawkins' concept of the optimon (or selecton) is a unit of DNA that survives recombination for enough generations to be selected for together. The term parasitic certainly appears appropriate for transposons, whose only function is to replicate themselves and which do not provide any obvious benefit to the organism. Transposons can change their locations in addition to copying themselves by excision, recombination, or reverse transcription. They were first discovered in the 1930s in maize and were later found to exist in all branches of life, including humans (McClintock 1948). Transposons have altered our view of the gene by demonstrating that a gene is not fixed in its location.

Unannotated and alternative TSSs
A second observation is that there are a large number of unannotated transcription start sites (TSSs) identified by either sequencing of the 5 end of transcribed mRNAs or the mapping of promoter-associated transcription factors via ChIP­chip or ChIP­ PET (The ENCODE Project Consortium 2007). Furthermore, the consortium found that many known protein genes have alternative TSSs that are sometimes >100 kb upstream of the annotated transcription start site. In particular, Denoeud et al. (2007) performed 5 rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) on all 399 well-characterized protein-coding loci contained in the ENCODE regions. The RACE primer was selected from a 5 exon that was shared among most annotated transcripts from each locus, and the RACE products were hybridized to arrays and mapped. They found that more than half of the loci had an alternative transcription start site upstream of the known site in at least one of the 12 tissues tested. Some of these distal TSSs used the promoter of an entirely different gene locus (i.e., they share the same transcription start site). The significance of this discovery is that the alternative TSS for some of these transcripts started two or three gene loci upstream of the locus from which the RACE primer was selected. Thus, some alternative isoforms are transcripts that span multiple gene loci. (A cartoon schematic is shown in Fig. 2.) Many of the alternative isoforms code for the same protein differing only in their 5 untranslated regions (UTRs).

4. The large amount of "junk DNA" under selection
The "ORF sequence pattern concept" of the gene as it existed from the 1980s onward made it clear that there were large expanses of nongenic elements in eukaryotic genomes, particularly the human genome. In the absence of knowledge of a function for these regions, it was proposed that they lacked a function by some who used the label of "junk DNA" (Ohno 1972). This was underscored by the subsequent sequencing of the human genome, where it was shown that only 1.2% of the DNA bases code for exons (Lander et al. 2001; Venter et al. 2001). However, some early pilot functional genomics experiments on chromosomes 21 and 22 indicated that appreciable amounts of the supposedly junk DNA were transcribed (Kapranov et al. 2002; Rinn et al. 2003). Moreover, comparison of the human, dog, mouse, and other vertebrate genomes showed that a large fraction of these was conserved, with 5% under negative selection since the divergence of these species (Waterston et al. 2002; Lindblad-Toh et al. 2005).

More alternative splicing
Taking these findings into account, the Havana team at the Sanger Institute produced the well-curated GENCODE annotation (Harrow et al. 2006). They have not found that the number of known protein-coding gene loci has increased significantly over time. Conversely, the number of annotated alternative isoforms per locus has increased. (The GENCODE annotation currently contains on average 5.4 transcripts per locus). Thus, while part of the large amount of new, unannotated transcription could correspond to entirely new protein-coding gene loci, most of it is likely to correspond to segments of unannotated alternatively spliced transcripts involving known gene loci or to entirely novel noncoding RNAs.

The modern ENCODE view of dispersed genome activity
As described above, before the advent of the ENCODE project, there were a number of aspects of genes that were very complicated, but much of this complexity was in some sense swept under the rug and did not really affect the fundamental definition of a gene. The experience of the ENCODE project, particularly the mapping of transcriptional activity and regulation using tiling arrays, has extended these puzzling and confusing aspects of genes, bringing them to the forefront, where one has to grapple more directly with them in relation to the definition of what a gene is.

Dispersed regulation
As schematized in Figure 2B, the ENCODE project has provided evidence for dispersed regulation spread throughout the genome (The ENCODE Project Consortium 2007). Moreover, the regulatory sites for a given gene are not necessarily directly upstream of it and can, in fact, be located far away on the chromosome, closer to another gene. While the binding of many transcription factors appears to blanket the entire genome, it is not arranged according to simple random expectations and tends to be clumped into regulatory rich "forests" and poor "deserts" (Zhang et al. 2007). Moreover, it appears that some of regulatory elements may actually themselves be transcribed. In a conventional and concise gene model, a DNA element (e.g., promoter, enhancer, and insulator) regulating gene expression is not transcribed and thus is not part of a gene's transcript. However, many early studies have discovered in specific cases that regulatory elements can reside in transcribed regions, such as the lac operator (Jacob and Monod 1961), an enhancer for regulating the beta-globin gene (Tuan et al. 1989), and the DNA binding site of YY1 factor (Shi et al. 1991). The ENCODE project and other recent ChIP­chip ex-

What the ENCODE experiments show: Lattices of long transcripts and dispersed regulation Unannotated transcription
A first finding from the ENCODE consortium that has reproduced earlier results (Bertone et al. 2004; Cheng et al. 2005) is that a vast amount of DNA, not annotated as known genes, is transcribed into RNA (The ENCODE Project Consortium 2007). These novel transcribed regions are usually called TARs (i.e., transcriptionally active regions) and transfrags. While the majority of the genome appears to be transcribed at the level of primary transcripts, only about half of the processed (spliced) transcription detected across all the cell lines and conditions mapped is currently annotated as genes.

Genome Research
www.genome.org

673

Downloaded from www.genome.org on May 7, 2008 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Gerstein et al.
there is less of a distinction to be made between genic and intergenic regions. Genes now appear to extend into what was once called intergenic space, with newly discovered transcripts originating from additional regulatory sites. Moreover, there is much activity between annotated genes in the intergenic space. Two well-characterized sources can contribute to this, transcribed non-proteincoding RNAs (ncRNAs) and transcribed pseudogenes, and an appreciable fraction of these transcribed elements are under evolutionary constraint. A number of these transcribed pseudogenes and ncRNA genes are, in fact, located within introns of protein-coding genes. One cannot simply ignore these components within introns because some of them may influence the expression of their host genes, either directly or indirectly.

Noncoding RNAs
The roles of ncRNA genes are quite diverse, including gene regulation (e.g., miRNAs), RNA processing (e.g., snoRNAs), and protein synthesis (tRNAs and rRNA) (Eddy 2001; Mattick and Makunin 2006). Due to the lack of codons and thus open reading f