Cerebral Cortex February 2008;18:386--396 doi:10.1093/cercor/bhm073 Advance Access publication June 7, 2007

Large-Scale Gamma-Band Phase Synchronization and Selective Attention

Sam M. Doesburg1, Alexa B. Roggeveen1, Keiichi Kitajo1,2 and Lawrence M. Ward1,3 Psychophysics and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver V6T 1Z4, Canada, 2Laboratory for Dynamics of Emergent Intelligence, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama 351-0198, Japan and 3Brain Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver V6T 1Z4, Canada
1

Explaining the emergence of a coherent conscious percept and an intentional agent from the activity of distributed neurons is key to understanding how the brain produces higher cognitive processes. Gamma-band synchronization has been proposed to be a mechanism for the functional integration of neural populations that together form a transitory, large-scale, task- and/or percept-specific network. The operation of this mechanism in the context of attention orienting entails that cortical regions representing attended locations should show more gamma-band synchronization with other cortical areas than would those representing unattended locations. This increased synchronization should be apparent in the same time frame as that of the deployment of attention to a particular location. In order to observe this effect, we made electroencephalogram recordings while subjects attended to one side or the other of the visual field (which we confirmed by event-related potential analysis) and calculated phase-locking statistics between the signals recorded at relevant electrode pairs. We observed increased gamma-band phase synchronization between visual cortex contralateral to the attended location and other, widespread, cortical areas approximately 240--380 ms after the directional cue was presented, confirming the prediction of a large-scale gamma synchronous network oriented to the cued location. Keywords: alpha, attention, EEG, gamma, neural synchrony Introduction Performance of the myriad perceptual and cognitive processes of which the brain is capable requires transient functional coupling, and subsequent decoupling, of specific, task-relevant, neural populations. Gamma-band synchronization is a plausible mechanism for the selection and integration of such neuronal groups (e.g., Varela et al. 2001). Direct brain recordings show that increased gamma-band synchronization within a cortical area occurs most strongly between columns representing information that is being integrated, for example, between columns representing features of a common object (Gray and Singer 1989; Gray et al. 1989; Engel, Kreiter et al. 1991). Stimulus-specific gamma synchronization has been observed between monkey V1 and V2, between V1 and extrastriate motion areas, and between left and right hemisphere V1s of cats (Engel, Konig, and Singer 1991; Engel, Konig et al. 1991; Frein ¨ ¨ et al. 1994). The summation of such gamma synchronous activation yields increased gamma-band power in the electroencephalogram (EEG) and has been experimentally linked to a wide range of cognitive processes including attention, learning, and memory and visual and auditory perception (Ward 2003; Kaiser and Lutzenberger 2005). Human EEG recordings also reveal increased long-range gamma-band synchrony between task-relevant brain areas
Ó The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

during associative learning, mental rotation, conscious recollection, visual working memory, and coherent perception (Tallon-Baudry et al. 1998; Miltner et al. 1999; Rodriguez et al. 1999; Bhattacharya et al. 2001; Burgess and Ali 2002; Gruber et al. 2002). Such results support the hypothesis that gammaband synchronization enables the selective activation of a functionally coupled ensemble of neuronal groups relevant for the performance of a particular task and for binding the features of an object into a unified percept (Engel and Singer 2001; Varela et al. 2001). Of more specific relevance to the present experimental paradigm, the deployment of covert attention in humans has been linked to changes in local oscillatory synchronization in the alpha band. Covert deployment of visuospatial attention entails that attended areas in the visual field receive enhanced processing, whereas ignored areas are suppressed (e.g., Posner et al. 1980). Whereas EEG studies have traditionally focused on the enhanced processing of attended targets relative to unattended distractors (for a review, see Gazzaniga et al. 2002), recent research has focused on the anticipatory biasing of the cortex after attention has been deployed to a location but before the appearance of the target. Attending to one visual hemifield yields a sustained increase of alpha-band EEG activation over the ipsilateral visual cortex, a process thought to accomplish the suppression of distractors (Worden et al. 2000; Sauseng et al. 2005; Kelly et al. 2006). Moreover, these lateralized changes in local oscillatory activity have been shown to determine the speed of detection for subsequently appearing targets (Thut et al. 2006). Cortical gamma-band activity, conversely, appears to be relevant for the enhanced processing of attended information, as studies using implanted electrodes and human EEG have shown that local gamma synchrony is increased by selective attention (Tiitinen et al. 1993; Fries et al. 2001; Gobbele et al. 2002). Such evidence, taken together with the data cited above implicating gamma-band synchronization in feature binding and transient functional connectivity between brain areas and the assumption that many of the effects of attention would seem to require transient functional coupling between select populations of cortical neurons, leads to the hypothesis that large-scale gamma-band synchrony might play an important role in selective attention. As mentioned earlier, the allocation of attention to one location results in certain advantages being given to stimuli appearing at that location, relative to those at unattended locations. Specifically, attended stimuli are promoted for processing in cortical regions responsible for higher cognition and are biased for inclusion in consciousness, a highly integrated yet, apparently, anatomically distributed state (Treisman 1996;

Tononi 2004). Attention also produces more effective feature binding both within and across sensory modalities. For example, attended stimuli avoid illusory conjunctions and receive feature binding that can be absent for unattended stimuli (for reviews, see Treisman 1996; Wright and Ward 1998). Accordingly, cortical areas representing attended loci must be biased for inclusion in a large-scale functional network to support the enhanced feature binding, higher processing, and propensity for conscious experience that stimuli appearing at such a locus of attention are known to receive. We hypothesized that longrange gamma-band synchronization mediates this transient functional network, enabling the increased communication between cortical areas representing attended loci and other diverse cortical regions and creating a preparatory network for the enhanced processing of attended stimuli. To test this hypothesis, we recorded EEG while subjects were engaged in a covert attention-orienting task. Our specific a priori hypothesis was that when attention was deployed endogenously to one side of visual space, electrodes over the contralateral visual cortex would show increased gamma-band phase synchronization with other, widespread cortical areas, indexing the establishment of the predicted long-range gamma synchronous attentional network. We also predicted that this would occur in the same time frame as that uncovered in behavioral studies of endogenous orienting that is beginning around 250--300 ms after cue onset (see Wright and Ward 1998). Moreover, we expected that the establishment of this long-range network would occur in coordination with reciprocal changes in local alpha-band and gamma-band activation (see Ward 2003).

Figure 1. Stimulus display and its time course (not drawn to scale for clarity). See text for measurement intervals for synchrony and ERP analyses.

Methods
Thirteen healthy adults (8 males) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision participated in the experiment after giving written informed consent (approved by University of British Columbia Behavioral Research Ethics Board; mean age, 19.4 years; standard deviation [SD], 1.2 years). Subjects were seated with eyes approximately 35 cm from a computer monitor and were instructed to maintain fixation on a plus sign in the center of the screen. An arrow cue appeared at the center of the screen, replacing the fixation plus, to instruct subjects to covertly attend to a box either to the left or to the right (18.5° visual angle laterally) of fixation on a given trial (see Fig. 1). Arrow cues (1.64° by 1.64° visual angle) were presented for 100 ms, after which the fixation point (1.31° by 1.31° visual angle) reappeared. Targets were presented in boxes (1.97° by 1.97° visual angle), which were positioned 6.2° below the plane of fixation (Fig. 1). Either a ``+'' or an ``3'' (50/50 probability) would appear in one of the 2 boxes (50/50 probability) 1000--1200 ms after the cue onset (rectangular distribution to produce random jitter, both to reduce the overlap of event-related potentials (ERPs) from the cue on those to the target and to reduce the effects of evoked neural sources on phase synchrony measures). Target stimuli were presented for 100 ms and subtended a visual angle of 1.64° by 1.64°. Subjects were instructed to make a button-press response if they detected a ``+'' but not if they detected an ``3'' in the cued location and to make no response if either stimulus appeared at the uncued location. This paradigm was adapted from that of an earlier study (Worden et al. 2000) and was chosen because it successfully produced lateralized changes in ongoing local power following the deployment of spatial selective attention. The EEG was recorded from 59 electrodes positioned at standard 1010 locations plus 3 electrodes at nonstandard sites near the inion. The electro-oculogram (EOG) was recorded bipolarly with electrodes positioned 1 cm from the outer canthi of both eyes and above and below the right eye. Electrode impedances were kept below 15 kX (sufficient because of amplifier input impedance >2 GX). EEG and EOG were amplified with a gain of 20 000, band-pass filtered between 0.1 and

100 Hz, digitized at 500 Hz, and stored on disk for analysis. Scalp voltages were referenced to the right mastoid. Synchrony Analysis Four subjects were excluded for the synchrony analysis due to particularly noisy data in the postcue period and/or in the high frequency domain (both of which are irrelevant for the ERP analysis; mean age of the 9 analyzed subjects, 19.6 years; SD, 1.3 years; 6 males). Epochs for the synchrony analysis were extracted from 400 ms before the cue until 1200 ms after its onset. After deleting any epochs containing ocular or nonocular artifacts (identified by the automatic rejection algorithm in EEGLAB; Delorme and Makeig 2004), 3530 epochs for the left cue and 3584 epochs for the right cue remained for all 9 subjects combined ranging from 130 to 598 epochs per subject per cue condition. The data in the retained epochs were band-pass filtered digitally at 1 Hz intervals between 6 and 60 Hz [passband = f ± 0.05f, where f represents the filter frequency; e.g., at 40 Hz the passband was from 40 ­ (0.05 3 40) = 38 to 40 + (0.05 3 40) = 42 Hz]. Then, using algorithms in the MATLAB Signal Processing Toolbox, we calculated the analytic signal
i/ðt Þ 1ðt Þ = f ðt Þ + if~ ðt Þ = Aðt Þ e

of the filtered waveform for each epoch, f (t), to obtain the instantaneous phase, /(t), and amplitude, A(t), at each sample point (800 points per pffiffiffiffiffi epoch), where f~ ðt Þis the Hilbert transform of f (t) and i= ­1 (Pikovski et al. 2001). Instantaneous amplitudes from this analysis represent the envelope of the filtered waveform and are roughly equivalent to Fourier amplitudes except that they are estimated for each instant in time rather than as an average over a sliding window. We interpreted these amplitudes as reflecting variations in local neural synchrony in the various frequency bands, much as do power spectral densities (Fourier amplitude squared) from a Fourier analysis. We measured long-range neural phase synchrony by calculating phase-locking values (PLVs) both for individual data and for the

Cerebral Cortex February 2008, V 18 N 2 387

combined data. PLVs were obtained by comparing the instantaneous phases of the signals recorded by various pairs of electrodes, for example, electrodes j and k, at each point in time, t, across the N epochs available (Lachaux et al. 1999):     ­ ­ PLVj;k;t = N 1  + ei½/j ðt Þ /k ðt Þ   
N

PLV is a real value between 0 (random phase difference, no phase locking) and 1 (constant phase difference, maximum phase locking). Because of distortions involved in calculating the Hilbert transform at the edges of the analyzed epochs (e.g., Freeman 2004), we do not display the first or the last 200 ms (100 sample points) of the synchrony analyses of our epochs (note that the last 200 ms also would be contaminated by the target presentation at a random time within that interval). Thus, we report amplitude and phase-locking measures only for reduced epochs from 200 ms before until 1000 ms after cue onset. To remove the record of ongoing synchrony unrelated to the task, we standardized PLVs and amplitudes relative to the precue interval from 200 ms before cue onset until cue onset (0 ms). This was done by subtracting the mean PLV for the baseline interval at a given frequency from the PLV for every data point at that frequency and dividing the difference by the SD of PLV for the baseline interval at that frequency. The resulting index, PLVz, indicates standardized changes from the average baseline PLV at a given frequency in the direction of increased synchronization (positive values) or decreased synchronization (negative values). The same standardization was applied to the amplitude values. To reduce the effects of volume conduction (see Appendix for a more detailed discussion of the problem of volume conduction in the analysis of phase locking using these techniques) and to remove spurious synchronization arising from using a right mastoid reference electrode, the same calculations were performed for the scalp current density (SCD) or more properly the scalp divergence of the current density, a reference-free measure that sharpens the borders of synchronous regions and reduces spurious synchronies (Lachaux et al. 1999). Classically, SCD = ­1 3 scalp conductivity 3 Laplacian of scalp potential, where the Laplacian is the local second spatial derivative. Perrin et al. (1987) showed that SCD, in a spherical coordinate system, could be approximated for any point on the scalp surface using a 3concentric sphere head model, Legendre polynomials, and spline interpolation. To compute SCD, we used a MATLAB script supplied by Carsten Allefeld (http://www.agnld.uni-potsdam.de/~allefeld/index. html) that implements the algorithm of Perrin et al. (1987) (see their eqs 3 and 5). Allefeld's script computes a spherical Laplacian operator using Legendre polynomials, the supplied spherical coordinates of a set of electrodes, and splines of order 4. In a separate script, we then applied the Laplacian operator to the potentials recorded at our electrodes to compute SCD. This procedure has been shown to be superior to other methods used previously to approximate SCD from recorded potentials and to give a close approximation to the ``true'' SCD (Perrin et al. 1987, 1989). All reported results pertain to the PLVz values based on SCD unless otherwise specified, although analyses of scalp potentials and SCDs gave highly similar results. For this reason and because the SCD derived from the scalp potential at a given electrode should reflect primarily neural sources in cortical regions close to that electrode (see Appendix), we often refer to synchrony changes between the cortical regions underlying the relevant electrodes interchangeably with the recording electrodes themselves. In addition, we measured long-range synchrony only for a sparse array of 19 electrodes distributed uniformly across the scalp; the distance between the closest electrode pairs was approximately 4 cm. At this distance, the effects of volume conduction on phase synchrony is much reduced, both for intracranial electrodes (Lachaux et al. 1999) and for scalp electrodes (Nunez et al. 1999; see Appendix). This array was chosen before any analyses were conducted and was used in previous studies as well (e.g., Doesburg et al. 2005). Finally, to characterize the statistical reliability of changes in synchronization and desynchronization in the time courses of recorded potentials and inferred SCD between pairs of electrodes, relevant sets of epochs were shuffled 200 times for each frequency and data point combination, measuring PLVz in the same way for each shuffled data set, to create surrogate distributions of PLVz values (Lachaux et al. 1999).
388 Gamma-Band Phase Synchronization and Selective Attention

This procedure produces distributions of PLVz that very closely approximate a normal distribution. We considered a measured PLVz above the 97.5th percentile of the relevant surrogate distribution to be a significant increase in synchronization and one below the 2.5th percentile to be a significant decrease in synchronization. Only changes in synchronization that met or exceeded this criterion are discussed. This still results in a large number of possible tests, and the surrogate method by itself does not protect against the accumulation of experimentwise Type I error from making many such tests. To deal with this problem, we rely upon demonstrations that 1) the changes we observed were predicted a priori in the regions of interest (ROIs) in which they were found and 2) the patterns of changes we observed persist across several nearby frequencies and time points, the surrogate distributions of which are derived from independent shufflings, rendering it highly unlikely that the observed patterns resulted from a random set of false positives. ERP Analysis Epochs for analysis of ERPs were extracted from 100 ms before until 600 ms after target onset. After deleting any of these epochs contaminated by ocular or nonocular artifacts (in this case using the automatic rejection algorithm of ERPSS from the University of California San Diego ERPLAB), ERPs to targets were computed by averaging the EEG signal across artifact-free epochs for each subject. For these ERP analyses, the EEG records were digitally rereferenced to averaged mastoids and, after averaging, digitally low-pass filtered using a half-amplitude Gaussian filter to view ERPs <13 Hz. Three of the 13 subjects were excluded from the ERP analysis because their EEG signals contained too many artifacts, in particular eye movements or blinks after the presentation of the target, resulting in a large number of trials being rejected from their data. Thus, the subject groups used in the ERP analysis differed slightly from that used in the synchronization analysis. Although the subgroup used for ERP analysis is the optimum one for that analysis, ERPs were also analyzed using data only from the 9 subjects included in the PLV analysis in order to ensure that any observed ERP effects were also present in that data set. Multiway analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were performed on averaged ERPs. ERPs at electrodes P7 and P8, the electrodes of interest in the phase synchronization analysis, were analyzed, as were electrodes PO7, POz, and PO8, which are electrodes typically of interest when examining ERPs in visual attention tasks. These particular electrodes are known to reflect attentional modulation of activity over parietal and occipital cortices reflected by shifts of attention at the electrode contralateral to visual field presentation (see Results for a more extensive rationale). Because our interest in the ERP analyses was solely to confirm that attention had been directed to the cued location by the arrow cue and maintained there until target onset, our analyses focused on the P1 component, the first positive component, within a window of 75--150 ms after target onset and the N1 component, or first negative component, within a window of 100--200 ms after target onset.

Results Phase Synchronization Our main a priori prediction was confirmed, as increased gamma-band (36--43 Hz) phase synchronization was observed between posterior visual cortical areas contralateral to the cued location and other, widespread, cortical areas occurring from about 240 ms until about 380 ms after the cue appeared (Fig. 2). The most prominent increases were observed between electrode P7 and electrodes over widespread cortical areas, and electrode P8 and electrodes over widespread cortical areas, following right and left cues, respectively (Fig. 2A,B). Although present following the onset of either directional cue, the effect is more pronounced and more prolonged following the left cue. We interpret this burst of increased, lateralized, phase synchronization as an indicator of the establishment of the hypothesized gamma synchronous attentional network. This effect was

d

Doesburg et al.

Figure 2. Lateralization of large-scale gamma-band phase synchronization at 39 Hz in source current density (SCD). Black lines indicate reliable increases in synchronization, and white lines indicate reliable decreases in synchronization; colors represent interpolated instantaneous amplitude (SCD). (A) Long-range 39-Hz synchronization 300 ms after cue onset for all electrode pairs that include either P7 or P8. (B) Time course of synchronization/desynchronization for all electrode pairs throughout the analyzed epoch after presentation of the left and right cues, respectively. (C) Time course of the second lateralized gamma burst following the left cue for all pairs that include P7 or P8. (D) Time course of the second gamma burst following the right cue for all pairs that include P7 or P8.

maximal around 39 Hz (because the data were filtered using a bandwidth of 0.1f, this signal contains energy from nearby frequencies) but was also visible at other frequencies in the gamma band (see Supplementary Material A). A second burst of lateralized large-scale gamma-band phase synchronization, again maximal at 39 Hz, was also observed approximately 520--580 ms postcue onset (Fig. 2C,D). As was the case for the first burst of increased gamma-band synchronization, this lateralization was anchored at electrodes P7 and P8 following the right and left cues, respectively, and was more pronounced and more prolonged following the left cue. No such bursts of long-range synchronization lateralized as a function of cue direction were present in other frequency bands; they occurred only in the gamma frequency band, although nonlateralized increases and decreases in synchronization did occur in other frequency bands around the time of the first gamma burst (see Supplementary Material A). No reliable patterns of coordinated synchronization or desynchronization in other frequency bands were observed in conjunction with the second gamma burst. Analysis of individual subject data revealed similar, although less striking, patterns of lateralized gamma-band synchronization (because of poorer signal-to-noise ratio, which is a function of the number of epochs analyzed). For some subjects, reliable effects closely resembled those in the group data, whereas for some others, the pattern took the form of decreases in synchronization between visual cortical areas ipsilateral to the cued hemifield and widespread electrodes as well as, or in place of, the increases contralateral to the cued hemifield observed in the main effect for our group data (Supplementary Material B). In addition to the changes in long-range gamma-band synchrony just described, we observed a reduction in the local (standardized) amplitude of the signal in the alpha frequency band (8--12 Hz) occurring from about 200 to 650 ms after cue onset over the left visual cortex and from cue onset until about 500 ms after it over the right visual cortex (Fig. 3). This reduction of alpha-band amplitude coincided with an increase

in gamma-band amplitude (Fig. 3) and with the lateralized gamma-band synchronization patterns described earlier. The decrement in alpha amplitude was, surprisingly, larger at visual electrodes ipsilateral to the cued location than at contralateral electrodes. A subsequent reversal was then observed as greater alpha-band amplitude was seen at electrodes ipsilateral to the cued location relative to that at contralateral electrodes. This latter effect endured from about 650 ms until about 1000 ms after cue onset over the left visual cortex and from about 500 ms after cue onset until beyond the end of the displayed epoch over the right visual cortex (Fig. 3) and replicates the pattern reported by Worden et al. (2000). Although also visible in the SCD, plotted data for this result are taken from the scalp potentials because they pertain only to local EEG amplitude (comparable SCD amplitude data can be seen in Supplementary Material A). The possibility should be considered whether the bursts of lateralized gamma-band synchrony we observed could have arisen from a single oscillating source whose activity could have been volume conducted to several electrodes, for example, a strong local gamma-band activation located in visual cortex contralateral to the cued location. Such a scenario, however, would entail a much greater gamma amplitude increase over contralateral visual cortex than over ipsilateral visual cortex. This was not observed; in fact, gamma amplitude increased more over ipsilateral visual cortex than over contralateral visual cortex (see Figs 2 and 3 and Appendix). For these reasons, we can confidently reject the notion that our lateralized longrange phase synchrony results arose from this kind of volume conduction scenario. Other possibilities are discussed in the Appendix. An increase in beta-band phase synchronization also was observed from about 220 ms until about 400 ms after the cue onset (see Supplementary Material A). This increased synchronization was strongly anchored at the right occipitoparietal and left frontal electrodes, with strong connectivity linking these 2 regions and increased phase synchrony between these
Cerebral Cortex February 2008, V 18 N 2 389

Figure 3. Standardized amplitude from filtered (alpha, 11 Hz and gamma, 39 Hz) electrode (P7 and P8) potentials (vertical axes) as a function of time after cue onset (at 0 ms) for the various cue conditions.

electrodes and other cortical areas. Corresponding local amplitude changes were also evident, with prominent increases in left frontal, right occipitoparietal electrodes, and those over the right frontal areas. The topology of this beta oscillatory network emerged following both the left and the right cue but did not appear to be affected by the direction of attentional deployment. Event-Related Potentials The current paradigm was chosen due to its success in a previous study in illuminating changes in local EEG power during selective visual attention (Worden et al. 2000). In that study, electrophysiological measures were used to confirm that attention had been effectively deployed, as no behavioral measures are available in this paradigm, and it is important to any arguments about the mechanism of attention deployment to confirm that attention was indeed deployed as specified to subjects. Worden et al. (2000) did confirm appropriate attention deployment in their study although they based their conclusion only on attentional modulation of the N1 amplitude. They failed to find P1 modulations although some other studies with similar endogenous orienting paradigms have found modulations of both components (e.g., Mangun and Hillyard 1991; Sauseng et al. 2005). We also confirmed that attention indeed was shifted to the cued location by analyzing ERPs to the targets. Figure 4 presents
390 Gamma-Band Phase Synchronization and Selective Attention
d

Figure 4. ERP waveforms to targets at electrodes P7, P8, PO7, POz, and PO8. Waveforms to targets presented in the right visual field are at the top of the figure; waveforms to targets presented in the left visual field are presented at the bottom of the figure. Note that N1 amplitude to validly cued targets is largest contralateral to target presentation.

the results of our analyses (see also Supplementary Material C). For trials where the stimulus presented was a target, we performed 2 sets of 3-way ANOVAs on the P1 and N1 amplitudes separately: Electrode (P7, P8) 3 Stimulus side (Left, Right) 3 Validity (Valid, Invalid) and Electrode (PO7, POz, PO8) 3 Stimulus side (Left, Right) 3 Validity (Valid, Invalid). Analysis of the N1 component revealed a significant attention modulation, replicating the results of Worden et al. (2000). At electrodes P7 and P8, a significant main effect of validity was found (F1,9 = 5.47, P < 0.05), showing that N1 amplitude was larger on trials where the stimulus appeared in a validly cued location. The interaction of Electrode 3 Side was also significant (F1,9 = 19.89, P < 0.01), revealing that N1 amplitude was greatest when the stimulus was presented contralateral to the recording electrode. The 3-way interaction between Electrode, Side, and Validity was also significant (F1,9 = 7.49, P < 0.05), indicating that the effect of attention on the N1 was larger on the side contralateral to the cued location.

Doesburg et al.

Analysis of N1 amplitude at electrodes PO7, POz, and PO8 showed the same pattern with a significant main effect of Validity (F1,9 = 6.51, P < 0.05). Also as for electrodes P7 and P8, an interaction between Electrode and Side was found (F2,9 = 24.37, P < 0.01), with larger amplitude to targets presented contralateral to electrodes PO7 and PO8 and larger amplitude at electrode POz to targets presented to the left of fixation. Finally, there was also a significant 3-way interaction between Electrode, Side, and Validity (F2,9 = 5.28, P < 0.05). Analysis of ERPs using only data from the 9 subjects included in the synchrony analysis showed the same patterns of results, confirming that results from the main ERP analysis generalize to the subject group for whom the synchrony results are presented (see Supplementary Material C). The same analyses showed no attentional modulation of P1 amplitudes, again, as found by Worden et al. (2000). For electrodes P7 and P8, there was no main effect of, nor significant interactions involving, Validity. There was an interaction between Side and Electrode, with larger P1 amplitude for targets presented contralateral to the electrode (F1,9 = 6.93, P < 0.05). For electrodes PO7, POz, and PO8, as for P7 and P8, the analysis revealed no main effect, nor any interactions involving, Validity. There was, however, an interaction between Side and Electrode (F2,9 = 7.65, P < 0.01), with larger amplitude contralateral to target presentation for electrodes PO7 and PO8 and larger amplitude to targets to the left of fixation at electrode POz. Although they reveal nothing new about attention orienting in this paradigm, these ERP results do provide convincing evidence that attention was indeed directed to the cued location by the arrow cue and maintained there until target onset. First, as mentioned earlier, previous experiments with similar endogenous attention-orienting paradigms have found that the N1 ERP component is larger when targets are presented in an attended (cued) location than when presented in an unattended location and in particular that the ERP modulation is closely tied to faster responding to the target at the cued location, a more traditional behavioral measure of attention orienting (e.g., Mangun and Hillyard 1991). Our finding of a significantly larger N1 component to targets presented at the cued location is a strong indicator that subjects were reliably shifting their attention to that location when directed to do so by the arrow cue. The fact that we, and Worden et al. (2000), found no significant cue effect on the P1 component in this paradigm does not contradict this interpreta