Vol 450 | 8 November 2007 | doi:10.1038/nature06249

ARTICLES
High-resolution structure prediction and the crystallographic phase problem
Bin Qian1*, Srivatsan Raman1*, Rhiju Das1*, Philip Bradley1, Airlie J. McCoy2, Randy J. Read2 & David Baker1
The energy-based refinement of low-resolution protein structure models to atomic-level accuracy is a major challenge for computational structural biology. Here we describe a new approach to refining protein structure models that focuses sampling in regions most likely to contain errors while allowing the whole structure to relax in a physically realistic all-atom force field. In applications to models produced using nuclear magnetic resonance data and to comparative models based on distant structural homologues, the method can significantly improve the accuracy of the structures in terms of both the backbone conformations and the placement of core side chains. Furthermore, the resulting models satisfy a particularly stringent test: they provide significantly better solutions to the X-ray crystallographic phase problem in molecular replacement trials. Finally, we show that all-atom refinement can produce de novo protein structure predictions that reach the high accuracy required for molecular replacement without any experimental phase information and in the absence of templates suitable for molecular replacement from the Protein Data Bank. These results suggest that the combination of high-resolution structure prediction with state-of-the-art phasing tools may be unexpectedly powerful in phasing crystallographic data for which molecular replacement is hindered by the absence of sufficiently accurate previous models.
High-resolution prediction of protein structures from their amino acid sequences and the refinement of low-resolution protein structure models to produce more accurate structures are long-standing challenges in computational structural biology1. The refinement problem has become particularly important in recent years, as the continued increase in the number of experimentally determined protein structures, together with the explosion of genome sequence information, has made it possible to produce comparative models of a large number of protein structures with wide utility2. Ideally, these models would consistently approach the resolution offered by X-ray crystallography, enabling precise drug design and a deeper understanding of catalysis and binding. Accurate high-resolution models can, in principle, be achieved by searching for the lowest energy structure given the sequence of the protein. However, despite progress3, the large number of degrees of freedom in a protein chain and the ruggedness of the energy landscape produced by strong atomic repulsion at short distances greatly complicate this search for sequences lacking close homologues of known structure. An important application for predicted structures is to help solve the X-ray crystallographic phase problem4,5. Converting X-ray diffraction data into electron density maps of proteins requires the inference of phases associated with each diffraction peak. Although phase estimates can be obtained through the preparation of heavy atom derivatives, the problem can be solved without additional experimental information by the technique of molecular replacement4,5 given a structure model that has high structural similarity ° (better than 1.5 A root-mean-squared (r.m.s.) deviation) to the crystallized protein over a large fraction of the molecule. As an example of the stringency of this condition, models of protein structures derived from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data typically do not give good molecular replacement models for crystallographic data on the same proteins6. Perhaps the most successful approach to molecular replacement is the use of previous crystal structures of highly sequence-similar (.40%) templates as search models. In cases of lower sequence similarity, structure prediction tools can frequently help build comparative models that give better molecular replacement solutions; however, the success rate drops rapidly as the template sequence identity falls below 30%4,5. In cases where structurally similar experimental models are not available, ab initio phasing techniques have had some success for targets with simple folds of high symmetry7,8 or with new structures that have been rationally designed from first principles9, but ab initio phasing of diffraction data for natural globular proteins remains an unsolved problem. In this study, we present a new energy-based rebuilding-andrefinement method that consistently improves models derived from NMR, from sequence-distant templates, and from de novo folding methods. The final models include high-resolution features not present in the starting models, including the packing of core side chains. Bringing together these results from all-atom structure prediction with state-of-the-art algorithms for molecular replacement and automated rebuilding10­12, we show that distant-template-based and de novo models can reach the accuracy required to solve the X-ray crystallographic phase problem.
Targeted rebuilding-and-refinement protocol We have developed a new approach for refining protein models that combines the targeting of aggressive sampling to regions most likely to be in error with powerful global optimization techniques. The new protocol is outlined in Fig. 1a. The first step of this protocol is the energy-based optimization of an input ensemble of models using the previously described Rosetta all-atom refinement method. This method combines Monte Carlo minimization with side-chain remodelling to relieve inter-atomic clashes and to optimize side-chain packing and hydrogen bonding, as encoded by an all-atom force field13,14. Briefly, in each Monte Carlo move, a random perturbation to the protein backbone torsion angles is followed by discrete

1 University of Washington, Department of Biochemistry and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Box 357350, Seattle 98195, USA. 2Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. *These authors contributed equally to this work.

259
©2007 Nature Publishing Group

ARTICLES

NATURE | Vol 450 | 8 November 2007

optimization of the side-chain conformations14,15, which allows efficient crossing of side-chain torsional barriers. Then, quasi-Newton optimization of the side-chain and backbone torsion angles is carried out before the decision on whether to accept the move. Because of the final minimization, each point on the landscape is mapped to the closest local minimum, flattening energy barriers16. Although making it possible to recognize near-native predictions based on their low energies1,13, this all-atom refinement alone does not consistently produce significant improvements in model quality (Supplementary Fig. 1). The second step in the new protocol is the identification of regions of variation in the ensemble of refined models. We have found a marked correlation between the extent of variation in the coordinates of a residue in the refined structures and the deviation of the coordinates of the residue in the refined models from the native structure. An example is shown in Fig. 1b, c: positions exhibiting small variance across the models are usually quite close to the correct structure, whereas positions for which the variance is large often deviate considerably from the native structure. This correlation arises from the relatively short range of the force field and the energy gap between the native structure and the models: because the energy of the entire system is roughly equal to the sum of its parts, for most portions of the protein, the correct conformation will be lower in energy than non-native conformations. Regions of the protein that can access the native conformation are likely to converge on this conformation and thus exhibit less variation, whereas locally incorrect conformations are likely to be spread throughout the landscape and exhibit more variation. We observe this correlation for many different proteins in both the cartesian coordinates and the internal torsion angles; a related principle has recently been used in the Pcons method for assessing protein models17. The third step in the new protocol targets aggressive sampling to the regions most likely to be in error. A fragment-based segment rebuilding method (see Supplementary Material) is used to rebuild completely regions of models with relatively high variation in the model population. Because the precise regions that are incorrect cannot be identified unambiguously, we carry out many independent

calculations in which different segments in the higher variation regions are randomly selected for complete rebuilding. The partially rebuilt models are then subjected to the Rosetta all-atom refinement protocol described above13,14. In the segment rebuilding process, side chains are initially represented as soft interaction centres and the connectivity of the chain is temporarily broken, thus permitting the traversal of much larger barriers than those crossed by all-atom refinement alone. As indicated in Fig. 1a, if the lowest energy refined structures have not converged, the rebuilding-and-refinement protocol is applied iteratively using a selection process inspired by natural evolution to guide convergence on the global minimum. At each iteration, a subset of models that are low in energy yet structurally diverse is chosen to seed the next round; the regions to be rebuilt are determined on the basis of the backbone variation in the selected population. Bringing together ideas from tabu search18 and conformational space annealing19, the selection process alternates between the propagation of a structurally diverse population into the next round (diversification) and focusing in on the lowest energy regions of the energy landscape explored thus far (intensification). The lowest energy models after ten iterations are selected as the final predictions. As illustrated in Fig. 1d, models with progressively lower energies and more nativelike structures can be obtained with increasing number of iterations; results on a number of refinement problems are summarized in Supplementary Fig. 2.
Improving NMR models As a first test of the new rebuilding-and-refinement method, we sought to improve the accuracy of protein structure models derived from moderate-resolution NMR experiments. NMR is an important method for determining structures of proteins at atomic resolution that has the advantage of not requiring crystals. In some cases, however, NMR models can contain errors due to either insufficient data or ambiguities in interpretation of the input NMR spectra20. We applied the method outlined in Fig. 1a to ten ensembles of NMR models deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) for which independently determined high-resolution X-ray crystal structures

a

b
Average per-residue C deviation to the crystal structure 6 5

c

d
­100 ­120 Energy ­140 ­160 ­180

4 3 2 1 0

Average per-residue C deviation to the structure model cluster centre

C r.m.s. deviation (Å)

Figure 1 | Overview of the rebuilding-and-refinement method. a, Schematic diagram of the rebuilding-and-refinement method applied to structures from NMR, from comparative modelling (CM) and from de novo (DN) modelling approaches. b, Strong correlation between the per-residue backbone conformation variation in the model ensemble and the deviation from the native structure for target T0199 from the sixth critical assessment of structure prediction (CASP6). c, Superposition of the native structure of CASP6 target T0199 with 50 low-energy all-atom refined models. The native structure backbone is shown as a thick line, and the models are shown as
260

thinner lines. Residues in the native structure are coloured by the average ° ° per-residue Ca r.m.s. deviation to the native from 4.5 A (red) to 0.5 A (blue). d, Iterative rebuilding and refinement yields low-energy native-like models. The energy and the Ca r.m.s. deviation of models generated during three iterations of the loop-relax protocol are displayed for iteration 1 (green), iteration 4 (red) and iteration 7 (black). The Rosetta all-atom energy includes the enthalpy plus the solvation contribution to the entropy but not the configurational entropy.

©2007 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE | Vol 450 | 8 November 2007

ARTICLES

provide tests of model accuracy21,22. Regions with high variation in initial all-atom refined ensembles were stochastically rebuilt as well as regions assessed as poorly packed (see Methods) to allow for possible over-convergence of the initial NMR ensemble in regions with incorrect constraints. In eight of the ten cases, the lowest energy refined model was closer to the crystal structure than any member of the starting NMR ensemble (typically 20 members) in terms of backbone agreement, as assessed by GDT-HA (geometric distance test (high accuracy)23). Comparison of the best of five lowest energy refined models to the NMR ensemble indicates improvement in backbone accuracy and core packing in all cases (see Table 1 and Supplementary Figs 3 and 4). In addition, the quality of the lowest energy models was consistently better than the starting NMR models in terms of clash score, number of rotamer outliers and number of backbone (Ramachandran) outliers, as assessed by the MolProbity server (Supplementary Table 2)24. Four examples of this energy-based structural improvement are shown in Fig. 2a­d. It should be noted that no NMR data were included in these rebuilding-and-refinement tests; judicious use of experimental NMR information to focus allatom refinement (for example, using inferential structure determination22) could yield still better results. As noted above, NMR structures often do not give good molecular replacement models for crystallographic data6, and we hypothesized that the all-atom refined models would yield better solutions. Indeed, we found such improvement in molecular replacement scores for all eight cases in which diffraction data were publicly available (Table 1), using the sensitive and widely used Phaser software10. Furthermore,

using phases from the molecular replacement trial with the highest translation function Z-score, electron density maps were generated and in seven of the eight cases the widely used ARP/wARP11 or RESOLVE12 automatic map tracing programs could build the majority of the residues with no human intervention (Table 1). An example of the improvement in density is shown in Fig. 3a, b. These results suggest that all-atom rebuilding and refinement may be a powerful supplement to existing strategies of trial-and-error trimming of NMR ensembles to improve molecular replacement solutions for crystallographic data6.
Improved blind predictions based on templates As a further challenging test, we used the new energy-based rebuildingand-refinement method to make blind structure predictions for 26 proteins with lengths less than 200 residues that had distant homologues (sequence identity lower than 30%) with known structure during the seventh Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP7). Ensembles of starting models based on different alignments to one or more of these distant homologues were generated as described in the Supplementary Information, and the rebuilding-and-refinement protocol was carried out with several rounds of iteration to explore more broadly conformational space (Fig. 1a). Five representative low-energy structures from the final population were submitted to the CASP organizers. For 18 of the 26 cases, at least one of these 5 models was closer to the correct structure than the closest homologous structure in the PDB, as assessed by the GDT-HA score25. Marked improvement was observed in seven cases, with a 10­30% increase in this measure of model quality (see Table 1).

Table 1 | Improvement of model accuracy and molecular replacement by a rebuilding and refinement protocol
X-ray structure Starting model* Length (n){ Sequence identity to best template (%){ GDT-HA1 Best template Refined model TFZI in molecular replacement Best template Refined model Auto-traced residues (backbone, side chain)" Best template Refined model

NMR

1hb6 1who 1gnu 1a19 1fvk 1mzl 1tvg 2snm 1agr 1abq

2abd 1bmw 1kot 1ab7 1a24 1afh 1xpw 2sob 1ezy 1awo 1ty9A 2c21C 2fhqA 1jgcB 1rqIA 1lvhB 1aco 2b2j

86 94 119 89 (2) 189 (2) 93 143 97 129 56 149 158 (6) 145 (2) 170 (2) 92 (2) 75 132 112

N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 14.5 14.8 25.4 7.8 8.8 14.1 8.4 3.6

0.58 0.59 0.64 0.63 0.49 0.60 0.63 0.45 0.49 0.58 0.49 0.57 0.58 0.62 0.52 0.51 0.45 0.22

0.79 0.68 0.73 0.78 0.69 0.66 0.74 0.48 0.76 0.83 0.58 0.67 0.69 0.69 0.67 0.65 0.52 0.64

4.1 5.7 6.6 3.7 4.5 3.4 4.3 4.6 4.3 3.8 N/A# N/Aq 5.4 6.0 4.4 4.6 5.1 5.8 N/A# N/A# N/A** 5.4

11.3 8.3 10.6 8.8 12.5 6.9 12.4 5.1 6.7 4.8

12, 0 25, 12 62, 53 31, 20 14, 0 66, 50 55, 43 36, 29 15, 6 17, 16 N/A# N/Aq

80, 80 47, 44 82, 78 48, 37 44, 35 97, 91 85, 68 58, 44 103, 86 43, 37

CM

2hhz (T0331) 2hr2 (T0368) 2hq7 (T0380) 2ib0 (T0385) 2hi0 (T0329_D2) 2hcf (T0330_D2) 2hi6 (T0357)**

8.8 5.4 6.6 14.2 7.9 15.5

28, 24 37, 37 47, 23 30, 17 63, 37 50, 2 N/A# N/A# N/A**

68, 63 20, 14 92, 83 60, 59 56, 56 52, 52

DN

2hh6 (T0283)

9.0

26, 12

112, 112

* PDB accession numbers for the closest previously known template (comparative modelling (CM) and de novo modelling (DN)) or for the NMR structure. { Length of sequence in crystal structure (number of monomers in asymmetric unit, n). ° { Number of sequence-identical residues across regions structurally aligned within 4 A34 divided by the length of the shorter sequence. 1 Fraction of residues in model superimposable on crystal structure with high accuracy (see Supplementary Information and ref. 23). This value is the average of four numbers: the numbers of ° ° ° ° residues aligned between model and experimental structure within 0.5 A, within 1 A, within 2 A and within 4 A. For the CM cases, GDT-HA was determined for the residues structurally aligned between the native structure and the closest template. For the NMR cases, the GDT-HA comparison presented for the best template is between the first member of the deposited NMR structural ensemble and the crystal structure. IZ-score of Phaser log-likelihood translation function for molecular replacement solution. For CM and DN cases, molecular replacement for the best template was carried out using a mixed-model based on the best possible structural alignment between the native structure and template structure4; no such alignment was carried out for the refined model, however. The TFZ scores for the next best model submitted by all other CASP7 predictors were 5.4 (T0331), 6.0 (T0368), 4.4 (T0380), 5.1 (T0385) and 6.9 (T0283). For NMR cases, the presented results are from molecular replacement with the full deposited NMR ensemble and from each of the lowest energy 25 refined models (see also Supplementary Table 1). In the NMR cases, the best-TFZ structure from the deposited ensemble (see Supplementary Table 1) typically gave slightly worse results in subsequent automatic tracing than using the full ensemble, as expected6. In cases with multiple monomers present in the asymmetric unit, Z-scores for each monomer are presented, except for T0368, for which decreasing TFZ scores for molecular replacement of additional monomers after the first one indicated the solutions to be ambiguous. ° " Number of automatically traced residues starting with molecular replacement phases given by Phaser that match the deposited crystal structure within 2 A. In all cases, tracing and refinement was carried out with the ARP/wARP11 and RESOLVE12 programs, with the better results from the two programs presented. # Predicted model is for the smaller of two domains present in the crystal structure and is thus not sufficient for molecular replacement. q Structure factors not deposited in the PDB. ** Solved by NMR spectroscopy.

261
©2007 Nature Publishing Group

ARTICLES

NATURE | Vol 450 | 8 November 2007

This is a particularly notable result because improving on the best template structure has been a long standing challenge for comparative modelling--owing to the high dimensionality of conformational space, there are many more ways to degrade a reasonably accurate model than to improve it. Superpositions of the closest homologous structure, the submitted refined models and the native structure for cases with the greatest improvement are shown in Fig. 2e­h. The improvement in the refined structures is evident even in core secondary structural elements. Out of the seven high-resolution predictions, there were four targets for which diffraction data were available and the modelled sequence constituted the entire crystallized construct, enabling tests of molecular replacement. In each of these cases, we found that the best previous templates in the PDB failed to produce clear-cut molecular replacement solutions (Phaser Z-scores greater than 7), even after using knowledge of structurally alignable regions and a side-chain truncation approach to trim back the search models to their most accurate atoms4. Other template-based models submitted to CASP7, based on methods that typically did not use aggressive all-atom refinement, gave similarly low molecular replacement scores (Table 1). For three of the four cases, however, the refined models that we submitted for CASP7 gave significantly better molecular replacement solutions than the best template (Table 1). For these targets, the maps produced by combining phases from the blindly predicted model with the experimental diffraction amplitudes were of sufficient quality to permit the automatic chain-tracing program RESOLVE12 to build a large fraction of each structure with high accuracy (Table 1). An example of the marked improvement in electron density on using the refined models is shown in Fig. 3c, d.
Ab initio phasing by ab initio modelling To the best of our knowledge, a de novo structure prediction for a natural protein with an asymmetric, globular fold has never been used successfully for molecular replacement. However, the accuracy

of de novo prediction methods has been improving rapidly. In particular, the use of all-atom refinement to follow low-resolution modelling by the Rosetta de novo modelling method13 led to several blind predictions in CASP7 for proteins of all-a, all-b and a1b secondary structure classes that placed most of the backbone elements and core side chains with high accuracy (see Fig. 4a­c)25. This progress in de novo modelling, along with the successes above with refined NMR and template-based models, encouraged us to attempt molecular replacement with an exceptional prediction for the 112-residue a-helical CASP7 target T0283. The best of five models for T0283 blindly predicted without the use of templates matched the subsequently released crystal structure ° (2hh626) with a Ca r.m.s. deviation of 1.4 A over 90 residues (Fig. 4c). The closest previously known fold in the PDB, identified from structure superpositions by CASP7 assessors (2b2j27), was significantly different from the T0283 crystal structure, aligning 70 residues with a Ca ° r.m.s. deviation of 3.1 A (note also the poor GDT-HA score in Table 1). After truncating the Rosetta prediction to a consensus core (residues 10 to 88, for which four of the five submitted models coincided ° to within 2.5 A Ca r.m.s. deviation), molecular replacement by Phaser showed clear features for the omitted amino- and carboxyterminal helices (see Supplementary Fig. 5 and caption). Starting from this molecular replacement solution, the ARP/wARP software was able to complete the structure automatically, tracing all 112 residues correctly. The final result (Fig. 4d) is in excellent agreement with the structure deposited in the PDB, which used phases experimentally derived by selenium single-wavelength anomalous disper° sion, with an r.m.s. deviation of 0.13 A for all 112 Ca atoms. In contrast, attempts to solve the structure by molecular replacement with the closest existing `template' 2b2j failed to produce a clear-cut phasing solution (Table 1), even when knowledge of the optimal superposition was used to trim this search model back to the 70 residues that aligned best to the actual structure. It will be of great interest to investigate whether this result can be generalized to rapidly phase diffraction data for proteins of new folds.

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

Figure 2 | Improvement in model accuracy produced by rebuilding and refinement. a­d, NMR refinement tests displaying superpositions of the crystal structure (blue), model 1 of the NMR ensemble (red) and the lowest energy all-atom refined model (green) for four NMR refinement test cases (a, acyl CoA binding protein, 2abd; b, SH3 domain of ABL tyrosine kinase, 1awo; c, guanine nucleotide binding protein, 1ezy; d, barstar, 1ab7). e­h, Blind
262

predictions produced by comparative modelling, displaying superpositions of the native structure (blue), the best template in the PDB (red) and the best of our five submitted models (green) for four CASP7 targets (e, T0380; f, T0385; g, T0330 domain 2; h, T0331). A subset of the core side chains is shown in stick representation to illustrate the accuracy of core packing. Figures were prepared in PyMOL (Delano Scientific, Palo Alto, California).

©2007 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE | Vol 450 | 8 November 2007

ARTICLES

Improving model accuracy and molecular replacement The results described here show that an all-atom rebuilding-andrefinement protocol can produce protein structure models of high accuracy. The iterative protocol outlined in Fig. 1a brings together the individually quite powerful global optimization ideas underlying Monte Carlo minimization16, tabu search18 and conformational space annealing19 while targeting aggressive sampling to regions most likely to be incorrect. The substantial improvements achieved in prediction quality--in several cases enabling molecular replacement phasing of X-ray diffraction data--suggest that structure prediction has matured considerably. Nevertheless, we emphasize that there is still considerable room for improvement: our high-resolution rebuilding-and-refinement protocol does not always improve starting models, and T0283 is the only CASP7 target predicted de novo for which the models were accurate enough for molecular replacement. We look forward to advances in both the energy function, notably the addition of configurational entropy, and in conformational sampling. The significant energy gap between the refined models and the refined crystal structure13 for most of the cases studied here suggests that sampling is still the primary bottleneck for high-accuracy all-atom structure prediction. At present, the Protein Structure Initiative lists hundreds of proteins with lengths less than 200 residues that have been crystallized but not yet solved. Publication of diffraction data sets that have not yielded to experimental phasing could catalyse the development of new hybrid prediction/phasing algorithms, much like the blind CASP trials have accelerated progress in the field of structure

prediction. With continuing advances in high-resolution structure prediction, in molecular replacement tools, and in the interface between these two fields, we expect that in silico phasing will become an increasingly important component of the crystallographer's toolkit. In the present study, aggressive all-atom refinement was carried out in the absence of any experimental information. The incorporation of experimental data into the rebuilding-and-refinement protocol could help overcome the current shortcomings in both the energy function and conformational sampling and allow more consistent high-resolution structural inference. In practical applications to molecular replacement trials, the diffraction data do not need to be set aside as a stringent post facto test of model accuracy, as was carried out in this study. Diffraction data without phases would be useful in screening larger numbers of trial structures for molecular replacement or in complementing the physical energy terms with diffraction-data-derived likelihood scores28 during rebuilding and refinement. Weak phase information, for example based on anomalous scattering from intrinsic sulphur atoms29, could also be exploited, for instance by using an initial molecular replacement model to locate the anomalous scatterer sites10. Although not used in the present study, NMR chemical shift, nuclear Overhauser effect, and residual dipolar coupling data can help to pinpoint regions of the models to rebuild and regions to constrain during all-atom refinement. On a larger scale, mass spectrometry techniques coupled with hydrogen/deuterium exchange30, chemical cross-linking31 and radical footprinting32 show great promise for providing highthroughput, residue-level information that may rapidly constrain structure prediction and, in the absence of crystallographic data, help validate models. We anticipate that the combination of highresolution modelling with limited experimental structural data will
a b

d c

Figure 3 | Improvement in electron density using models from rebuilding and refinement in molecular replacement searches. Examples are presented for the NMR structure of acyl CoA binding protein 2abd (a, b) and CASP7 comparative modelling target T0385 (c and d). Black mesh represents electron density (2mFo2DFc; 1.5s contour) using experimental structure factors and phases from molecular replacement with the starting model (a and c) or the refined model (b and d). The coordinates deposited in the PDB, determined using experimental phase information, are shown in stick representation. Note that the `refinement' applied to the models refers to the all-atom energy-based protocol (see Fig. 2 and text) and not to refinement against the diffraction data. The accurate modelling of side chains by Rosetta was critical for the illustrated map improvement; molecular replacement trials gave significantly better solutions if the Rosetta-predicted side chains were retained rather than truncated.

Figure 4 | Ab initio phasing by ab initio modelling. a­c, Superpositions of blind Rosetta de novo structure predictions (green) and the subsequently released crystal structures (blue) for CASP7 targets T0354 (a), domain 3 of T0316 (b) and T0283 (c). Buried side chains and backbone-aligned residues are displayed. d, Electron density map (2mFo2DFc; 2s contour) produced by automatic refinement of the molecular replacement solution obtained from the T0283 structure prediction (black mesh; 1s contour) agrees with the coordinates deposited in the PDB (red), solved with experimental phase information. The electron density map immediately after molecular replacement is shown in Supplementary Fig. 5.
263

©2007 Nature Publishing Group

ARTICLES

NATURE | Vol 450 | 8 November 2007

become an increasingly powerful approach for characterizing the structures of biological macromolecules and complexes in the years to come.
METHODS SUMMARY
Models produced using NMR data, comparative modelling and de novo structure prediction were refined using the targeted rebuilding-and-refinement protocol introduced in this paper. To assess accuracy, the resulting models were compared to high-resolution crystal structures by the GDT-HA (geometric distance test (high accuracy)) score24,33, the average percentage of Ca atoms ° agreeing within 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 4.0 A. As a final test of accuracy and of practical utility, models were screened for suitability in phase estimation for crystallographic diffraction data using the Phaser molecular replacement software10. The widely used ARP/wARP11 and RESOLVE12 programs were then used to refine automatically the electron density maps and build density-constrained protein coordinates.
Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature. Received 8 May; accepted 13 September 2007. Published online 14 October 2007.
1. 2. Misura, K. M. & Baker, D. Progress and challenges in high-resolution refinement of protein structure models. Proteins 59, 15­29 (2005). Pieper, U. et al. MODBASE: a database of annotated comparative protein structure models and associated resources. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D291­D295 (2006). Moult, J. A decade of CASP: progress, bottlenecks and prognosis in protein structure prediction. Curr. Opin. Struct.