The Journal of Neuroscience, October 12, 2005 · 25(41):9339 ­9346 · 9339

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Formation of a Motor Memory by Action Observation
Katja Stefan,1,3 Leonardo G. Cohen,1 Julie Duque,1 Riccardo Mazzocchio,1 Pablo Celnik,1 Lumy Sawaki,1 Leslie Ungerleider,2 and Joseph Classen3
1

Human Cortical Physiology Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke­National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 2Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health­NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, and 3Human Cortical Physiology and Motor Control Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University of Wurzburg, 97080 Wurzburg, Germany ¨ ¨

Mirror neurons discharge with both action observation and action execution. It has been proposed that the mirror neuron system is instrumental in motor learning. The human primary motor cortex (M1) displays mirror activity in response to movement observation, is capable of forming motor memories, and is involved in motor learning. However, it is not known whether movement observation can lead directly to the formation of motor memories in the M1, which is considered a likely physiological step in motor learning. Here, we used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to show that observation of another individual performing simple repetitive thumb movements gives rise to a kinematically specific memory trace of the observed motions in M1. An extended period of observation of thumb movements that were oriented oppositely to the previously determined habitual directional bias increased the probability of TMS-evoked thumb movements to fall within the observed direction. Furthermore, the acceleration of TMS-evoked thumb movements along the principal movement axis and the balance of excitability of muscle representations active in the observed movements were altered in favor of the observed movement direction. These findings support a role for the mirror neuron system in memory formation and possibly human motor learning. Key words: action observation; motor cortex; human; plasticity; mirror neuron system; memory

Introduction
Although most motor skills are acquired through physical practice, the mere observation of movements has also been shown to lead to subsequent specific performance gains (Vogt, 1995; Black and Wright, 2000; Brass et al., 2001; Heyes and Foster, 2002; Horn et al., 2002; Vinter and Perruchet, 2002; Edwards et al., 2003; Petrosini et al., 2003; Mattar and Gribble, 2005). There is strong evidence from studies involving the physical practice of movements that an important physiological component of behavioral performance gains is a lasting change of local cortical movement representations, a kind of motor memory (Karni et al., 1995; Pascual-Leone et al., 1995; Kleim et al., 1998; Sanes and Donoghue, 2000; Conner et al., 2003). However, it is unknown whether observation alone is sufficient to leave a memory trace in movement representations. A priori, the formation of local motor memories by observation of movements would appear to be a highly unlikely event, given the immense computational problem of transforming the

Received June 4, 2005; revised Aug. 9, 2005; accepted Aug. 28, 2005. This work was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke­National Institutes of Health, by a grant from the Akademie der Naturforscher LEOPOLDINA to K.S. (Germany BMBF-LPD 9901/8-50), by the Hertie-Foundation, Germany, and by the State of Bavaria, Germany. We are grateful to Steven P. Wise for helpful comments. Correspondence should be addressed to either of the following: Dr. Joseph Classen, Department of Neurology, University of Wuerzburg, Josef-Schneider Strasse 12, 97080 Wuerzburg, Germany, E-mail: Classen J@klinik.uniwuerzburg.de; or Dr. Leonardo G. Cohen, Human Cortical Physiology Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke­National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 5N226, Bethesda, MD 20817, E-mail: cohenl@ninds.nih.gov. DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2282-05.2005 Copyright © 2005 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/05/259339-08$15.00/0

visual representation of movements input into a congruent motor output. However, recently, in several brain areas of the macaque monkey, neurons have been discovered that discharge both when the monkey performs a specific action and when it observes a similar action performed by another agent (Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004). These neurons have been termed "mirror neurons" (Gallese et al., 1996). Given its astonishing properties, it has been proposed that the mirror neuron system subserves a wide variety of behaviors including social communication and motor learning (Jeannerod, 1994; Gallese and Goldman, 1998; Rizzolatti et al., 2001; Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004; Fogassi et al., 2005; Iacoboni et al., 2005). Involvement of the mirror neuron system in motor learning would be supported strongly by evidence demonstrating that observation alone leads to the formation of physiological motor memories akin to those that underlie practiceinduced changes in motor representations. Such evidence has been lacking so far. In humans, neurophysiological (Fadiga et al., 1995; Hari et al., 1998; Cochin et al., 1999; Brighina et al., 2000; Nishitani and Hari, 2000; Strafella and Paus, 2000; Sundara et al., 2001; Maeda et al., 2002) and neuroimaging (Grafton et al., 1996; Decety et al., 1997; Iacoboni et al., 1999; Grezes and Decety, 2002; Astafiev et al., 2004; Fogassi et al., 2005) studies have revealed mirror activity in several brain regions including the human primary motor cortex (M1). Previously, we developed a paradigm by which the presence of a practice-induced elementary motor memory in the M1 can be demonstrated directly (Classen et al., 1998). After the repetitive performance of unidirectional stereotyped thumb movements, the direction of thumb movements evoked subsequently by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) over the M1

9340 · J. Neurosci., October 12, 2005 · 25(41):9339 ­9346

Stefan et al. · Motor Memory by Action Observation

was changed into the direction of the training, and the excitability of muscle representations in the M1 was changed in favor of the training agonist muscle (Classen et al., 1998, 1999; Butefisch et ¨ al., 2000). Because neurons in this area are active with performance of motor actions and with observation of another individual performing the same motor task, it is conceivable that action observation could form motor memories. The present study tests this hypothesis by examining whether observation of simple finger movements alone can elicit an encoding process in the M1 similar to that induced by practice. A preliminary account of the results has been published in abstract form (Stefan et al., 2003).

Materials and Methods
Subjects
Twelve right-handed (Oldfield, 1971) subjects (seven men; five women; mean age, 34 7.6 years; range, 22­ 45 years), naive to the purpose of the experiments, participated in the study. All volunteers had normal physical and neurological examinations and gave written informed consent. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

Figure 1. Experimental design. At the beginning of each session, the direction of TMSevoked movements ("baseline before training") was determined in each individual by assessing the first-peak accelerations along the extension/flexion and abduction/adduction axes (Classen et al., 1998). Subsequently, subjects participated in three different training sessions: physical training, which consisted of performance of voluntary thumb movements in a direction opposite the baseline direction and observation of thumb movements directed opposite the baseline direction and toward the baseline direction. The encoding process was evaluated in each of the three experimental sessions using an established protocol (Classen et al., 1998; Butefisch et ¨ al., 2000). At baseline, 60 TMS stimuli were delivered at 0.1 Hz to the optimal scalp site to elicit focal thumb movements. These stimuli occasionally elicited perceptions of movement but never allowed the subjects to identify the direction of the motions. After determination of the baseline TMS-evoked thumb movement direction, subjects underwent each of the three interventions for 30 min in separate sessions. At the end of each intervention, TMS-evoked thumb movement directions were determined again as done for baseline determinations. The principal design of the experiment is shown in Figure 1. Observational practice (observational practicetoward and observational practiceopposite). Subjects were instructed to observe attentively brisk repetitive thumb movements displayed at their natural size on a computer screen 1 m in front of them. With their gaze directed straight ahead during the video presentation (see below), the subject's hand was outside their field of view. Observed motions were performed by a white male actor, cued at 1 Hz in either an extension or flexion direction (two different videos were used according to the TMS-evoked thumb movement directions determined at baseline). The actor's right hand was viewed from a frontal plane, with surface electrodes and accelerometer positioned as during physical practice (see below). Because most TMSevoked thumb movements were predominantly oriented along an extension/flexion axis, the video movements were approximately collinear to this principal direction. In the video displaying extension movements, a total of 6% (108 of a total of 1800) of all movements were directed opposite to the other 94% (i.e., in a flexion direction). These movements were interspersed randomly in between the extension movements. Similarly, in the video showing flexion movements, 6% of all movements were in the opposite direction. Total duration of the videos was 30 min each. Subjects were instructed to remain relaxed throughout the observation of the videos. Absence of voluntary activity was monitored by EMG recordings at a sensitivity of 50 V per division. If voluntary EMG activity was detected, subjects were instructed to relax. EMG activity during physical or observational practice was quantified in each subject by computing the mean area under the curve for EMG activity of the training agonist in 70 epochs of 200 ms duration sampled randomly throughout the training. In physical practice, EMG activity only related to the training motions was computed. In observational practice, EMG activity was integrated over the entire length of 200 ms epochs sampled during the observations. Therefore, the area under the curve in observational practice is a conservative measure of unwanted EMG activity during these conditions. Observational practice was implemented in two different sessions. For observational practicetoward (ObsPracttoward), subjects were shown the video displaying thumb movements in the same principal direction as the baseline direction, as determined during the 60 magnetic stimulations beforehand. For example, if the principal direction of TMS-evoked thumb movements was extensor, then thumb extension movements

Recording and stimulation procedures
Subjects sat comfortably in an armchair with the right arm immobilized in a semipronated position in a molded armrest with the four long fingers supported in a slightly extended position and the thumb left entirely free. Electromyographic recordings (EMGs) were obtained from surface electrodes placed over the belly of the right extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) and right flexor pollicis brevis (FPB) muscles. EMG activity was amplified using a Dantec (Skovlunde, Denmark) Counterpoint electromyograph, bandpass filtered between 10 and 3000 Hz, and fed into a laboratory computer for later off-line analysis. Kinematic measures were obtained with a two-dimensional accelerometer that detected motions in the horizontal (adduction and abduction) and vertical (extension and flexion) axes (Kistler Instrument, Amherst, NY) mounted on the distal phalanx of the thumb. The direction of TMS-evoked and voluntary thumb movements was calculated from the first-peak acceleration vectors in the horizontal and vertical axes in the principal movement plane (Classen et al., 1998). Acceleration signals were digitized at 3000 Hz. Data were analyzed using a data collection-analysis program written in LabView (National Instruments, Austin, TX). TMS was delivered from a custom-built magnetoelectric stimulator (Cadwell Laboratories, Kennewick, WA) through a figure-eight-shaped magnetic coil (wing diameter, 7.0 cm) with the subject at rest. The subject's head was kept in an upright position and immobilized by a custom-built aluminum frame. The magnetic coil was connected firmly to the frame so that it remained in a constant position with respect to the head during the experiment. Head and coil stability were monitored with a three-dimensional laser system, as described previously (Butefisch et al., 2000). Muscle relaxation ¨ was monitored by auditory and visual feedback by EMG recording at a sensitivity of 50 V per division. The magnetic coil was placed tangentially to the skull and rotated 45° away from the midline, approximately perpendicular to the central sulcus, which is the optimal position to activate the corticospinal tract transsynaptically (Werhahn et al., 1994). The optimal scalp position for eliciting isolated thumb movements was identified using a slightly suprathreshold stimulus intensity and marked directly on the scalp with a soft-tip pen. Resting motor threshold (RMT) for the FPB and EPB was defined at this position as the minimum TMS intensity that evoked a motor evoked potential (MEP) of 50 V in at least 5 of 10 trials in the resting target muscle (Rossini et al., 1994). TMS was then adjusted and applied to this position to elicit isolated and directionally consistent thumb movements.

Experimental design
Ten subjects participated in three randomly ordered and counterbalanced sessions separated by at least 48 h, which tested the ability of motor practice and observation of another individual performing the practice task on encoding of an elementary motor memory.

Stefan et al. · Motor Memory by Action Observation

J. Neurosci., October 12, 2005 · 25(41):9339 ­9346 · 9341

Table 1. Behavioral characteristics Alertness (arbitrary units, visual analog scale) 5.6 6.6 5.5 1.0 0.8 1.2 Attention (arbitrary units, visual analog scale) 6.9 6.6 7.9 0.8 0.6 0.8 Number of missed directionally deviant movements (of 108) n.a. 6.0 4.2 2.3 0.8 Area under the curve of voluntary (PhysPract) or involuntary (ObsPract) EMG activity (training agonist, mV ms) 134.0 0.9 0.9 26.8 0.1 0.2

Training condition PhysPract ObsPractopposite ObsPracttowards
n.a., Not applicable.

were shown. For observational practiceopposite (ObsPractopposite), the video showed movements opposite to the baseline direction. For example, if the principal baseline direction was extension, then the video showing flexor movements was presented to the subject. To maintain similar attention and motivation during the 30 min of the video presentation, subjects were instructed to count silently the number of interspersed directionally deviant thumb movements (6%). Error rate was defined as the absolute difference of the number of interspersed deviant movements as identified by the subject and the correct number. Subjects were instructed that they would be financially rewarded according to their performance in the counting task. At the end of each session, subjective assessments of alertness during the experiments and attention to the observation were scored by the subjects using a visual analog scale ranging from 10 to 10. Additionally, the subjects were asked the question, "Did you imagine yourself performing the thumb movements you have watched?" to determine whether or not they had experienced imagery during the video presentations. Physical practice. Subjects were instructed to perform voluntary brisk thumb movements visually paced by a light-emitting diode blinking at 1 Hz in a direction approximately opposite to the baseline direction (Classen et al., 1998; Butefisch et al., 2000). For example, if the principal ¨ baseline direction was extension, then the subjects were instructed to perform repetitive flexion movements. Thus, physical practice (PhysPract) and ObsPractopposite were similar in that the intervention was directed away from the baseline of TMS-evoked movements determined beforehand. After each single training movement, the thumb returned to the original position by relaxation. The total duration of practice was 30 min. Practiced thumb movements were monitored closely on-line with respect to directional consistency of training movements by the experimenter. In addition to the TMS-evoked movements, all practiced movements were recorded during training for later off-line analysis. All interventions were each organized in three blocks of 10 min, separated by 2.5 min of rest. In between any two blocks, 12 thumb movements were evoked by delivering TMS at a frequency of 0.1 Hz. Acceleration and EMG signals related to TMS-evoked movements were recorded as described above. Four subjects participated in additional experiments to determine the influence of observational practice displaying (1) 50% thumb movements in each of the two different directions (flexion­ extension; ObsPract50/50) and (2) focusing attention on the frequently (94%) or infrequently (6%) observed motions (ObsPractopposite 94% and ObsPractopposite 6%, respectively).

direction of the thumb movements displayed to the subject. The measure for direction was the probability of a TMS-evoked thumb movement to fall into the TTZ, a measure consistent, reproducible, and capable of identifying training-dependent changes in the organization of the M1 (Butefisch et al., 2000). This probability was estimated by the percentage ¨ of TMS-evoked thumb movements falling into the TTZ (PTTZ) relative to the number of all TMS-evoked thumb movements, according to the following equation (Butefisch et al., 2000): PTTZ NTTZ/Ntotal 100, ¨ where NTTZ is the number of all TMS-evoked thumb movements falling into the TTZ, and Ntotal is the number of all TMS-evoked thumb movements elicited within a given time period. Intervention effects across conditions were compared by computing PTTZ according to the following equation: PTTZ PTTZ_after PTTZ_before. Compound acceleration vector. The effect of training was also determined by comparing the mean magnitude of the first-peak acceleration in the extension/flexion direction before and after training. Intervention effects on the magnitude of first-peak acceleration of TMS-evoked thumb movements were calculated by normalizing all baseline vectors to the same hemispheric direction (extension). Corticomuscular excitability. MEP amplitudes were measured peak to peak in each individual trial. MEPagonist and MEPantagonist refer to MEPs recorded from muscles acting either as agonist or antagonist of the trained (either by physical practice or by observation) movement direction in each subject. For example, with practice or observation of extension movements, the EPB was designated as the agonist muscle, and the FPB was designated as the antagonist muscle. MEPagonist and MEPantagonist were each normalized to baseline. To describe the net effects of training on corticomuscular excitability, the ratio E between MEPagonist and MEPantagonist was determined both before and after training, according to the following equation: Eratio MEPagonist/ MEPantagonist. Unless stated otherwise, intervention effects on movement kinematics and corticomuscular excitability were analyzed by repeated-measures ANOVA (ANOVARM). Two-tailed paired t tests were applied for exploratory and post hoc analyses, as appropriate. The false discovery rate procedure was used for correction for multiple comparisons (CurranEverett, 2000). Data were expressed as mean SEM. Effects were considered significant if p 0.05.

Data analysis
Encoding of a motor memory: movement direction. Directions of TMSevoked movements and of voluntary movements were derived from the first-peak accelerations in the two orthogonal axes in the principal movement plane (Classen et al., 1998) determined independently by two investigators, one of them blind to the intervention. The baseline direction of thumb movements was defined as the direction of the mean vector of all vectors recorded during baseline. To describe intervention effects on TMS-evoked thumb movement directions, we defined a training target zone (TTZ) as a window of 20° centered on the direction of the performed (PhysPract) (Butefisch et al., 2000) and observed (ObsPract) ¨ training motions. In the PhysPract session, the target direction was determined as the direction of the mean vector of 360 vectors representing every fifth movement performed during the training. In the ObsPract (ObsPractopposite and ObsPracttoward) sessions, the target direction was either vertical up (90°) or vertical down (270°), corresponding to the

Results
Subjects' rating of alertness (ANOVARM; F 0.9; NS) and attention to the task (ANOVARM; F 1.2; NS) did not differ across training conditions (Table 1). Error rates in detection of deviant movements during observation were similar in ObsPractopposite and ObsPracttoward (NS; paired t test). Background EMG activity, minimal during observational practice, was comparable between ObsPractopposite and ObsPracttoward and also comparable between agonist and antagonist muscles (Table 1). All subjects denied imagining themselves performing the observed movements. Effects on movement direction Determination of movement direction by the two investigators were highly consistent (r 0.985; p 0.05). Training direction differed from the baseline direction by 152.7 5.2° in PhysPract,

9342 · J. Neurosci., October 12, 2005 · 25(41):9339 ­9346

Stefan et al. · Motor Memory by Action Observation

Figure 2. Effect of different training interventions on TMS-evoked movement direction. A, Example of one subject. First-peak acceleration vectors of TMS-evoked thumb movements before (left) and after (right) each of the three interventions (PhysPract, ObsPractopposite, and ObsPracttoward). For better comparability, all examples are aligned to the training direction indicated by the arrow. The TTZ is shown in gray. PhysPract and ObsPractopposite, but not ObsPracttoward, led to substantial changes in the direction of TMS-evoked movements. B, Group data (n 10) showing the PTTZ before and after PhysPract, ObsPractopposite, and ObsPracttoward. Before the training interventions, the percentage of TMS-evoked movements in TTZ was similar in PhysPract and ObsPractopposite. PhysPract and ObsPractopposite, but not ObsPracttoward, led to a significant increase in the percentage of TMS-evoked movements falling into TTZ. Data show means SEM. *p 0.005. n.s., Not significant. C, Time course of changes of PTTZ as a function of training intervention. To compare between conditions, PTTZ was computed as the baselinenormalized, intervention-dependent change in percentage of TMS-evoked thumb movements falling into the TTZ (see Materials and Methods). At the end of 30 min, the percentage change of TMS-evoked movements in TTZ was larger in PhysPract than in ObsPractopposite or ObsPracttoward and with ObsPractopposite than with ObsPracttoward. Rhombi, PhysPract; circles, ObsPractopposite; triangles, ObsPracttoward. Filled symbols, Time points significantly different from baseline; two-tailed t tests; false discovery rate correction. *p 0.05. D, Duration of changes of PTTZ as a function of training intervention. Symbols as in C. Error bars represent SEM.

baseline-normalized percentage of TMS-evoked movements falling within the TTZ (see Materials and Methods), was larger in PhysPract than in ObsPractopposite ( p 0.02; two-tailed t test) and ObsPracttoward ( p 0.01) and larger in ObsPractopposite than in ObsPracttoward ( p 0.05; two-tailed t test; false discovery rate correction) (Fig. 2C). To analyze the duration of observationinduced changes of PTTZ, the data were binned in epochs of 2 min for a total of 10 min after the end of training. For each training type, each epoch was compared with baseline using two-tailed t tests. After false discovery rate correction, PTTZ was significantly different from baseline for PhysPract in all five bins (0 ­10 min) and for ObsPractopposite in the first four bins, except epoch 2 (0 ­ 8 min), in the absence of changes with ObsPracttoward in any of the five bins (Fig. 2 D). These findings suggested that the effect induced by ObsPractopposite was less pronounced and, possibly, shorter lasting that that induce by PhysPract. To examine the possibility that the increase of PTTZ in ObsPractopposite was unrelated to the direction of the observed thumb movements, in four subjects, ObsPractopposite was compared with observation of a video displaying an equal number of flexion and extension thumb movements (ObsPract50/50). In this session, a *TTZ*, directed oppositely to the baseline direction, was operationally defined in analogy to the TTZ in the ObsPractopposite condition (as outlined above). Observing directionally balanced thumb movements did not increase P*TTZ*. Importantly, in the same subjects, two additional experiments demonstrated that ObsPractopposite effectively increased PTTZ. In these experiments, ObsPractopposite elicited an increase in the percentage of TMS-evoked movements falling into the TTZ regardless of whether the frequent target movements or the infrequent directionally deviant movements were counted by the subject. PTTZ did not differ statistically significantly between the two ObsPract conditions (ObsPractopposite 96%: PTTZ, 4.5 2.0%; ObsPractopposite 6%: PTTZ, 8.9 2.6%) but was different between any of the ObsPractopposite conditions and ObsPract50/50 ( P*TTZ*, 0.5 1.3%; NS). Effects on compound acceleration vector We considered the net first-peak acceleration along the extension/flexion axis of the entire population of acceleration vectors of the TMS-evoked thumb movements. This was termed the compound acceleration vector. The compound acceleration vector is sensitive to the magnitude of acceleration and to changes in the acceleration of movements falling outside of the TTZ and, thus, complements the analysis of the percentage of movements falling within TTZ. At baseline, the mean absolute magnitude of first-peak acceleration was comparable across experimental conditions (Table 2). Practicing thumb movements in the training direction caused the mean first-peak acceleration vector to change into the training direction, in agreement with previous findings (Classen et al., 1998). With ObsPractopposite, the compound acceleration vector length decreased, whereas it did not change appreciably with ObsPracttoward. ANOVARM revealed significant effects of training type (PhysPract, ObsPractopposite, ObsPracttoward) (F 8.4; p 0.01), time (before, after) (F 15.3; p 0.01), and of the interaction training type-by-time (F 10.0; p 0.01) (Fig. 3A). With PhysPract, the first-peak acceleration changed from 0.5 0.1 to 0.3 0.2 m/s 2 ( p 0.01; paired two-tailed t test), with ObsPractopposite from 0.4 0.0 to 0.1 0.1 m/s 2 ( p 0.01), and with ObsPracttoward from 0.6 0.1 to 0.6 0.1 m/s 2 (NS). This finding suggests that with ObsPractopposite, the total acceleration along the axis of the observed movements had

by 152.6 7.4° in ObsPractopposite, and by 26.1 5.3° in ObsPracttoward. PhysPract and ObsPractopposite resulted in an increase in PTTZ (see Materials and Methods), more prominent with the former than with the latter, in the absence of changes with ObsPracttoward. An example of the findings is shown in Figure 2A. Group data showed significant effects of time (before, after) (ANOVARM; F 20.7; p 0.005), training type (PhysPract, ObsPractopposite, ObsPracttoward) (F 3.6; p 0.05), and of the interaction term time-by-training type (F 11.0; p 0.005) on PTTZ (Fig. 2 B). PTTZ increased significantly with PhysPract (from 2.4 1.0 to 26.6 6.9%; p 0.005) and with ObsPractopposite (from 2.6 0.8 to 9.1 1.5%; p 0.005) but not with ObsPracttoward (from 13.6 2.7 to 16.1 2.3%; NS). The increase in PTTZ with ObsPractopposite was evident in every single individual tested. The time course of the build-up and decay, respectively, of training-dependent directional changes was assessed separately for each training type. PhysPract required no less training blocks than ObsPractopposite to result in a significant increase of PTTZ [three blocks (i.e., 30 min); two-tailed t tests; false discovery rate correction]. However, the magnitude of the effect was different between the two effective training types. After 30 min, PTTZ, the

Stefan et al. · Motor Memory by Action Observation

J. Neurosci., October 12, 2005 · 25(41):9339 ­9346 · 9343

Table 2. Baseline measures in each of the three training sessions Training condition PhysPract ObsPractopposite ObsPracttowards
a

RMT MEPagonist (%) 58 58 58 3 2 2

TMS stimulus intensity (%)a 68 68 67 2 2 2

Peak acceleration of TMSevoked movements (m/s2) 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.3

MEPagonist amplitude (mV) 1.4 1.2 1.7 0.2 0.2 0.2

MEPantagonist amplitude (mV) 2.1 1.7 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.2

TMS stimulus intensity required to elicit isolated thumb movements at baseline (percentage of maximal stimulator output).

Figure 4. Effect of different training interventions on corticomuscular excitability. A, Changes in MEP amplitudes (relative to baseline) recorded from training agonist muscle (MEPagonist; circles) and antagonist muscle (MEPantagonist; triangles). PhysPract led to a significant increase in MEPagonist compared with baseline. B, The ratio between the MEPagonist and MEPantagonist increased both after PhysPract and ObsPractopposite but not after ObsPracttoward. Open bars, Before training; filled bars, after training. *p 0.05. Error bars represent SEM.

training type. PhysPract required no less training blocks than ObsPractopposite to result in a significant decrease of first-peak acceleration [three blocks (i.e., 30 min); two-tailed t tests; false discovery rate correction]. In fact, first-peak acceleration differed from baseline in ObsPractopposite already after the first training block. After 30 min of training, first-peak acceleration was smaller (indicating a larger training effect) in PhysPract than that in ObsPracttoward ( p 0.005; two-tailed paired t test) and in ObsPractopposite than that in ObsPracttoward ( p 0.005) (Fig. 3B), whereas the difference between PhysPract and ObsPractopposite was not statistically significant. Similar results emerged when only movements outside the TTZ were considered (data not shown).
Figure 3. Effect of different training interventions on compound acceleration vector. A, Group data (n 10) showing the mean compound acceleration vector for the extension/flexion direction before and after training. Before training, the compound acceleration vector of each subject was aligned such that all vectors pointed into the extension direction. After PhysPract, the mean compound acceleration vector came to point into the flexion direction, corresponding to the practiced direction. ObsPractopposite decreased the length of the mean compound acceleration vector, whereas ObsPracttoward did not change the mean compound acceleration vector. *p 0.01. Open bars, Before training; filled bars, after training. B, Time course of changes of the mean compound acceleration vector as a function of training intervention. At the end of 30 min, the mean compound acceleration vector was smaller in PhysPract than in ObsPractopposite or ObsPracttoward and with ObsPractopposite than with ObsPracttoward. Error bars represent SEM. pre, Before training; B1, B2, and B3, results obtained after the first, second, and third training block, respectively.

changed in favor of movements directed away from the baseline direction. The time course of the build-up of training-dependent changes of first-peak acceleration was assessed separately for each

Effects on corticomuscular excitability The size of the TMS-evoked motor potentials in the EPB and FPB was determined. MEP size was stratified according to the role of the muscle in the training. At baseline, measures of corticomuscular excitability (RMT, MEP amplitudes) were comparable across experimental conditions (Table 2). ANOVARM revealed significant effects of training type (PhysPract, ObsPractopposite, ObsPracttoward) (F 4.7; p 0.05) and of training act