Reverse Engineering of Biological Complexity Marie E. Csete, et al. Science 295, 1664 (2002); DOI: 10.1126/science.1069981

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of May 7, 2008 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/295/5560/1664 Supporting Online Material can be found at: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/295/5560/1664/DC1 This article cites 21 articles, 10 of which can be accessed for free: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/295/5560/1664#otherarticles This article has been cited by 214 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science. This article has been cited by 48 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/295/5560/1664#otherarticles This article appears in the following subject collections: Cell Biology http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/cell_biol Information about obtaining reprints of this article or about obtaining permission to reproduce this article in whole or in part can be found at: http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2002 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on May 7, 2008

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: THE GENOME, LEGOME, AND BEYOND
readable model definition that enables models to be exchanged between software tools. Systems Biology Workbench (SBW) is built on SBML and provides a framework of modular open-source software for systems biology research. Both SBML and SBW are collective efforts of a number of research institutions sharing the same vision (25). How does the idea of systems biology impact pharmaceutical industries and medical practice? The most feasible application of systems biology research is to create a detailed model of cell regulation, focused on particular signal-transduction cascades and molecules to provide system-level insights into mechanismbased drug discovery (26­28). Such models may help to identify feedback mechanisms that offset the effects of drugs and predict systemic side effects. It may even be possible to use a multiple drug system to guide the state of malfunctioning cells to the desired state with minimal side effects. Such a systemic response cannot be rationally predicted without a model of intracellular biochemical and genetic interactions. It is not inconceivable that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration may one day mandate simulation-based screening of therapeutic agents, just as plans for all highrise building are required to undergo structural dynamics analysis to confirm earthquake resistance. Although systems biology is in its infancy, its potential benefits are enormous in both scientific and practical terms. A transition is occurring in biology from the molecular level to the system level that promises to revolutionize our understanding of complex biological regulatory systems and to provide major new opportunities for practical application of such knowledge.
1. N. Weiner, Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1948). 2. H. Kitano, Foundations of Systems Biology (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001). 3. E. H. Davidson et al., Science 295, 1669 (2002). 4. Examples of such databases are: Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment (STKE http://www.stke.org/); KEGG (http://www.genome.ad.jp/); EcoCyc (http:// ecocyc.org/). 5. M. Eisen et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 14863 (1998). 6. S. Chu et al., Science 282, 699 (2000). 7. S. Onami et al., in Foundations of Systems Biology, H. Kitano, Ed. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001), pp. 59­75. 8. S. Imoto et al., Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2002 (World Scientific, Singapore, 2002), pp. 175­ 186. 9. C. Yoo et al., Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2002 (World Scientific, Singapore, 2002), pp. 498 ­509. 10. T. Ideker et al., Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (World Scientific, Singapore, 2000), pp. 302­313. 11. J. Edwards et al., Nature Biotechnol. 19, 125 (2001). 12. M. Borisuk et al., J. Theor. Biol. 195, 69 (1998). 13. K. Chen et al., Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 369 (2000). 14. M. E. Csete, J. C. Doyle, Science 295, 1664 (2002). 15. N. Barkai et al., Nature 387, 913 (1997). 16. U. Alon et al., Nature 397, 168 (1999). 17. T.-M. Yi et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 4649 (2000). 18. V. Dassaw et al., Nature 406, 188 (2000). 19. G. Weng et al., Science 284, 92 (1999). 20. Alliance for Cellular Signaling (http://www.cellularsignaling.org/). 21. M. Burns et al., Science 282, 484 (1998). 22. R. Anderson et al., Nucleic Acids Res. 28, e60 (2000). 23. P. Simpson et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 2256 (1998). 24. P. Gilles et al., Nature Biotechnol. 17, 365 (1999). 25. Additional information can be obtained at http:// www.cds.caltech.edu/erato/ or http://www.sbml.org. 26. J. Gibbs, Science 287, 1969 (2000). 27. C. Sander, Science 287, 1977 (2000). 28. D. Noble, Science 295, 1678 (2002). 29. I thank J. Doyle, M. Simon, and members of ERATO Kitano project for fruitful discussions. Supported by the ERATO and BIRD program of the Japan Science and Technology Corporation, and the Rice Genome and Simulation Project of the Ministry of Agriculture, Japan.

References and Notes

REVIEW

Reverse Engineering of Biological Complexity
Marie E. Csete1 and John C. Doyle2*
Advanced technologies and biology have extremely different physical implementations, but they are far more alike in systems-level organization than is widely appreciated. Convergent evolution in both domains produces modular architectures that are composed of elaborate hierarchies of protocols and layers of feedback regulation, are driven by demand for robustness to uncertain environments, and use often imprecise components. This complexity may be largely hidden in idealized laboratory settings and in normal operation, becoming conspicuous only when contributing to rare cascading failures. These puzzling and paradoxical features are neither accidental nor artificial, but derive from a deep and necessary interplay between complexity and robustness, modularity, feedback, and fragility. This review describes insights from engineering theory and practice that can shed some light on biological complexity.
The theory and practice of complex engineering systems have progressed so radically that they often embody Arthur C. Clarke's dictum, "Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic." Systems-level
Departments of Anesthesiology and Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 2Control and Dynamical Systems, Electrical Engineering, and Bioengineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
1

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: doyle@cds.caltech.edu

approaches in biology have a long history (1, 2) but are just now receiving renewed mainstream attention (3­13), whereas systems-level design has consistently been at the core of modern engineering, motivating its most sophisticated theories in controls, information, and computation. The hidden nature of complexity ("magic") and discipline fragmentation within engineering have been barriers to a dialog with biology. A key starting point in developing a conceptual and theoretical bridge to biology is robustness, the preservation of particular characteristics despite uncertain-

ty in components or the environment (14). Biologists and biophysicists new to studying complex networks often express surprise at a biological network's apparent robustness (15). They find that "perfect adaptation" and homeostatic regulation are robust properties of networks (16, 17), despite "exploratory mechanisms" that can seem gratuitously uncertain (18 ­20). Some even conclude that these mechanisms and their resulting features seem absent in engineering (20, 21). However, ironically, it is in the nature of their robustness and complexity that biology and advanced engineering are most alike (22). Good design in both cases (e.g., cells and bodies, cars and airplanes) means that users are largely unaware of hidden complexities, except through system failures. Furthermore, the robustness and fragility features of complex systems are both shared and necessary. Although the need for universal principles of complexity and corresponding mathematical tools is widely recognized (23), sharp differences arise as to what is fundamental about complexity and what mathematics is needed (24). This article sketches one possible view, using experience and theoretical insights from engineering complexity that are relevant to biology.

1664

1 MARCH 2002 VOL 295 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on May 7, 2008

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: THE GENOME, LEGOME, AND BEYOND
We hope to dispel some common misconceptions and to renew a dialog between engineering theorists and their biologist and clinician colleagues. speed, and thus (from an allometric scaling viewpoint) would exhibit no deleterious laboratory "phenotype." Redundancy does not explain this finding (30). Rather, the mutant has lost control systems and robustness required for real flight outside the lab. Allometric scaling emphasizes the essential similarities between these 777 variants and a toy scale model (and a fruit fly), whereas our interest is their huge differences in complexity. Similarly, minimal cellular life requires a few hundred genes (31), yet even Escherichia coli have 4000 genes, less than 300 of which have been classified as "essential" (32). The likely reason for this "excess" complexity is also the presence of complex regulatory networks for robustness. In technology as well as in organisms, such robustness tradeoffs drive the evolution of spiraling complexity. As an example of spiraling complexity to battle fragility, consider our use of O2 as a nutrient (electron acceptor), which obligates us to use complex feedback control mechanisms to ensure both sufficient O2 and protection from O2 toxicity. Distributed, multiscaled networks maintain precise internal, local O2 concentrations throughout the body, both acutely and chronically. Dependency on such regulation makes its failure lethal, of course, but an additional fragility created by this exquisitely controlled environment is that it creates an attractive ecosystem for parasites, whose systems can thus be more streamlined. Host robustness to parasites then requires a separate complex immune control system. In the developing immune system, T cells are educated to recognize self from nonself in the thymus. They are then selected to proceed on to the periphery ( positive selection) or, if they are inaccurate sensors, they self-destruct. A fragility of this exceedingly complex immune system is autoimmune disease, an example being primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) in which self-reactive lymphocytes slip through the immunity education program. Autoimmune injury to bile ducts causes toxic bile acids to accumulate. Injured hepatocytes fail to clear hormones, contributing to increased pressures in the liver circulation and even to rupture of connected venous systems. Pressure-induced distortion of blood vessels in the spleen traps platelets, and damaged hepatocytes undersynthesize bloodclotting proteins, both exaggerating blood loss after trauma. Unable to capitalize on the usual homeostatic feedback interactions with the liver, virtually every organ--including brain and kidney--can fail, all initiated by superficially minuscule autoimmune damage. Medical interventions for PBC (i.e., drugs and transplantation) are further control systems adding to spiraling complexity, robustness, and fragility. Genetic variation in the P450 enzyme family leads to considerable interindividual variation in drug handling and side effects. Imbalance of the P450 network can lead to accumulation of toxins, including carcinogens. Polypharmacy--a common necessity--results in even more unpredictable interactions because drugs modulate P450 activity. Liver transplantation is now standard therapy for PBC. Immunosuppression must be sufficient to quash the immune mechanism that recognizes a foreign invader, but too much immunosuppression allows infection and tumors to go unchecked. Hence, the fragilities of transplantation are infection and tumors.

Complexity, Optimality, and Convergent Evolution
The differences between biology and technology (and between organisms) are obvious, particularly at the molecular and device level. Nevertheless, convergent evolution, a wellestablished concept in both engineering and evolutionary biology, yields remarkable similarities at higher levels of organization. Recently, engineering systems have begun to have almost biological levels of complexity. For example, a Boeing 777 is fully "fly-bywire" with 150,000 different subsystem modules, organized via elaborate protocols into complex control systems and networks, including roughly 1000 computers that can automate all vehicle functions. In terms of cost and complexity, the 777 is essentially a vast control system and computer network that just happens to fly. The consequence of good design is that its regulatory complexity is hidden from passengers (except when they use entertainment systems). The internal activity level is staggering, however (e.g., the data rate recorded on the internal state during final production testing is nearly equivalent to one human genome every minute). Commercial aircraft are not the only systems undergoing such explosions in complexity as a result of advanced controls and embedded networking; virtually all technologies are evolving similarly (25). We claim that this technological evolution of complexity is convergent with that of biology. A striking example of convergent evolution is Fig. 1, comparing cruise speed to mass M over 12 orders of magnitude, from the 747 and 777 to fruit flies (26). The essential assumption in allometric scaling theory is that convergent evolution leads to nearly optimal systems with similar gross characteristics. It follows that simple arguments based on optimal design can explain functional relations between variables across many scales (27, 28). Here, a wellknown elementary argument (29) shows good correspondence with the data and yields explanations for deviations. The popular allometric scaling theories (connecting, say, efficiency and geometry) are appealing: They are simple, accessible, suggestive evidence confirming convergent evolution and engineering optimality. Such theories are largely irrelevant to complexity directly, but an understanding of them leads to what is relevant. The scaling theory described by Fig. 1 does not distinguish between flight in the atmosphere and in a laboratory wind tunnel. In the latter context, a much simpler "mutant" 777 with nearly all of its 150,000-count "aeronome" knocked out would have roughly the same lift, mass, and cruise

Modularity and Protocols
What emerges from these examples is that spiraling complexity, feedback regulation, robustness, fragility, and cascading failures are heavily intertwined, as is well known to biologists and engineers alike. Equally important and well known is the obvious role that modularity plays at every level, from base pairs and amino acids to genes and proteins, from organelles and membranes to pathways and networks, and finally to organs and organ axes (4 ­ 8)--and in every complex process, from development (11) to evolution (18). Although their meaning varies, modules generally are components, parts, or subsystems of a larger system that contain some or all of the following features: (i) identifiable interfaces (usually involving protocols) to other modules, (ii) can be modified and evolved somewhat independently, (iii) facilitate simplified or abstract modeling, (iv) maintain some identity when isolated or rearranged, yet (v) derive additional identity from the rest of the system. The organization and design of advanced technologies suggest universal principles, relevant to biology, linking modularity with the robust yet fragile nature of complex systems. Truly universal principles should manifest

Fig. 1. Optimal cruise speed at sea level versus mass (log-log) for organisms and airplanes. Line is theoretical prediction (12) with V cM and 1/6 (29). Shorter wings for speed and maneuverability (triangles) yield higher cruise speeds than those optimized for soaring (diamonds). Most systems (circles) are compromises. Humans are not selected for powering flight and are far from optimal (square). Data and theory are from (26).

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 295 1 MARCH 2002

1665

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on May 7, 2008

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: THE GENOME, LEGOME, AND BEYOND
themselves in at least limited ways in scalemodel (toy) systems, just as allometric scaling does. Consider the ubiquitous Lego toy system (33, 34). The signature feature of Lego is the patented snap connection for easy but stable assembly of components. The snap is the basic Lego protocol, and Lego bricks are its basic modules. We claim that protocols are far more important to biologic complexity than are modules. They are complementary and intertwined but are important to distinguish. In everyday usage, protocols are rules designed to manage relationships and processes smoothly and effectively. If modules are ingredients, parts, components, subsystems, and players, then protocols describe the corresponding recipes, architectures, rules, interfaces, etiquettes, and codes of conduct (35). Protocols here are rules that prescribe allowed interfaces between modules, permitting system functions that could not be achieved by isolated modules. Protocols also facilitate the addition of new protocols and organization into collections of mutually supportive protocol suites. Like modules, they simplify modeling and abstraction, and as such may often be largely "in the eye of the beholder." A good protocol is one that supplies both robustness and evolvability. Lego exhibits multilayer robustness, from components and toys to the product line. Lego bricks and toys are reusable and robust to trauma, and the snap is versatile, permitting endless varieties of toys from an array of components. This makes both a given Lego collection and the entire toy system evolvable to changes in what one chooses to build, to the addition of new Lego-compatible parts, and to novel toy designs. Evolution here is simply robustness to (possibly large) changes on long time scales. The low cost of modules and the popularity of the system confer other forms of robustness and evolvability; lost parts are easily replaced, and enthusiasts constantly design new modules and toys. The Lego protocol also creates fragilities at every level. Superficially minuscule damage to the snap at a key interface may cause an entire toy to fail, yet noninterfacing parts of bricks may be heavily damaged with minimal impact. The success of Lego means that any new snap, even a superior one, would not be easily adopted. Selection pressures thus preserve a protocol in two ways: Protocols facilitate evolution and are difficult to change. It is instructive to compare the robustness properties (basic performance, ability to withstand trauma, versatility of allowed interconnections, reusability of modules, cost of parts and labor, and evolvability) of the standard Lego snap protocol (called the wild type, WT) with those of other hypothetical protocols (denoted Smooth, Glue, and Mold). Smooth bricks without snaps have unconstrained interconnections, but the results are much less robust to trauma, severely limiting the range of toys. Glue, in addition to the WT snap, increases ability to withstand trauma but sharply decreases component reusability. Injection Molding entire toys goes even further. Thus, each "mutation" offers advantages, with both different robustness and fragility, but none uniformly improves on WT's overall robustness. WT is "fine-tuned" for robustness. We claim that this kind of optimality and robustness is most important to biological complexity. As systems become more complex, protocols facilitate the layering of additional protocols, particularly involving feedback and signaling. Suppose we want to make a Lego structure incrementally more useful and versatile by "evolving" it to be (i) mobile, then (ii) motorized, then (iii) able to avoid collisions in a maze of obstacles. The first increment is easy to achieve, with Lego protocol­ compatible axles and wheels. Motorizing toys involves a second increment in complexity, requiring protocols for motor and battery interconnection as well as a separate protocol for gears. All can be integrated into a motorized protocol suite to make modular subassemblies of batteries, motors, gears, axles, and wheels. These are available, inexpensive additions. The third increment increases cost and complexity by orders of magnitude, requiring layers of protocols and modules for sensing, actuation, and feedback controls plus subsidiary but essential ones for communications and computing (34 ). All are available, but it is here that we begin to see the true complexity of advanced technologies. Unfortunately, we also start to lose the easily described, intuitive story of the basic protocols. Minimal descriptions of advanced Lego features enabling sensing and feedback control literally fill books, but the protocols also facilitate the building of elaborate, robust toys, precisely because this complexity is largely hidden from users. This is consistent with the claim that biological complexity too is dominated not by minimal function, but by the protocols and regulatory feedback loops that provide robustness and evolvability. This added complexity also creates new and often extreme fragilities. Removing a toy's control system might cause reversion to mere mobility, but a small change in an otherwise intact control system could cause wild, catastrophic behavior. For example, a small software bug might easily lead to collision seeking, a fragility absent in simpler toys. Similarly, large multicellular organisms are unaffected by the death of a single cell, but failure of one cell's control system can lead to fatal autoimmune diseases or cancer. The snap protocol is concretely instantiated only in Lego modules, but it is also easy to identify the protocol itself as a useful and informative abstraction. The snap protocol is more fundamental to Lego than are any individual modules. Similarly, we have no trouble distinguishing the many higher level protocols that organize sensing and feedback from the hardware modules themselves. In biology, the identification of protocols is easiest when shared by many different modules, as in Lego. Thus, abstractions such as gene regulation (11), covalent modification, membrane potentials, metabolic and signal transduction pathways, action potentials, and even transcription-translation, the cell cycle, and DNA replication could all be reasonably described as protocols (36 ), with their attendant modular implementations in various activators and repressors, kinases and phosphatases, ion channels, receptors, heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins), and so on. The cardiovascular system has protocols for gas and nutrient exchange and transport, implemented in heart, lung, vascular networks, and blood modules. The immune system involves elaborate protocols for complement and cell-mediated activation, implemented in modules such as T cells, natural killer cells, major histocompatibility complex molecules, and antibodies. Metazoan development has highly conserved protocols (18). Appropriate temporal and spatial expression during development (11) is regulated by enormous numbers of feedback strategies (9). These and many other protocols facilitate robust development and function in ways similar to Lego protocols, and they produce similar fragilities (9). Thinking in terms of protocols, in addition to genes, organisms, and populations, as foci of natural selection, may be a useful abstraction for understanding the evolution of complexity (37). Good protocols allow new functions to be built from existing components and allow new components to be added or to evolve from existing ones, powerfully enhancing both engineering and evolutionary "tinkering." Protocols enable modularity and robustness but are in turn sources of fragility. Successful protocols become highly conserved because they both facilitate evolution and are difficult to change. Lego has a perfectly complete "legome" of all parts, including full structure and function. A similar compendium is far from available for even simple organisms. Yet understanding a collision-avoiding, software-intensive, feedback-regulated Lego robot would require extensive reverse engineering of additional layers of protocols and modules beyond the legome. That the legome would not be sufficient is no surprise, but for reverse engineering such details may not be entirely necessary (see below). Imagine that such a Lego robot was a prototype for a single toy that dispensed entirely with the Lego modules in favor of custom implementation. Similar to Mold, this toy could easily have much more robustness to trauma, be faster, and navigate more complex obstacles, but at the

1666

1 MARCH 2002 VOL 295 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on May 7, 2008

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: THE GENOME, LEGOME, AND BEYOND
expense of limited part reuse. The modules and lower level protocols--most of the legome-- would be completely different, yet we might claim that the essence of the toy, and what the prototype aimed to capture, remained. That essence involves the protocols that organized the sensors, actuators, and feedback control system that enables the obstacle avoidance and contributes almost the entire cost and complexity. These too are governed by protocols, but also by entirely new laws. certainties. Defining fragility as logS, note that F 0 iff S 1 iff logS 0 (39). F 0 makes logS 0, amplifying d and uncertainty in A, and F 3 1 makes logS 3 (40). Unfortunately, this story is incomplete and even misleading without dynamics. The simplest possibility is for A and C to be first-order differential equations C: A: x a k 1y gu k 2x y u d r a x (2) vary widely with minimal effect (44). Integral feedback is used ubiquitously in engineering (45) and is likely to be ubiquitous in biology as well, to achieve everything from homeostatic regulation to "perfect adaptation," and preliminary investigations confirm this impression (46 ­ 48). One reason is that integral feedback is both sufficient and necessary for perfect and robust steady-state tracking. Intuitively, necessity follows from the fact that in steady state, a y ­ d must perfectly cancel any constant (step in) d, whereas the input u to A cannot depend on this d, because y does not. Thus, A (or C) must contain an internal model of the dynamics of d, which for step changes is a pure integrator (49), which produces unbounded outputs to constant inputs. Thus, open-loop hypersensitivity is necessary for closed-loop robustness, and Fig. 3B is not an accident. Fragility enters in the transient response. When g is increased, the response is faster but oscillatory (Fig. 3, A and B). Figure 3D plots fragility logS( ) versus where Y( ) and D( ) are Fourier transforms of y and d, and logS  log Y D (3)

Elementary Feedback Concepts
Protocols are the most important aspect of modularity, and the most complex and critical protocols are for feedback control and the sensing, computing, communication, and actuation that implement it. Feedback control is both a powerful and dangerous strategy for creating robustness to external disturbances and internal component variations. Properly balanced, it delivers such a huge benefit that both engineers and evolution capitalize extensively on feedback to build and support complex systems (4, 9). Detailed elaboration of the nature of regulatory feedback underlying complexity is beyond the scope of this article, but an elementary "toy" model illustrates the necessity of feedback to the function of complex systems as well as feedback's "conservation of fragility" law. This is arguably the most critical and rigorously established robustness tradeoff in complex systems. In most technologies as well as in biochemistry, it is relatively easy to build either uncertain, high-gain components or precise, low-gain ones; but the precise, high-gain systems essential to both biology and technology are impossible or prohibitively expensive to make unless a feedback strategy like that in Fig. 2 is used. The simplest case is steadystate gain where, after some transient, r and d are held constant, and y too approaches a constant y Rr Sd (38), where R and S are responses of y to s and d, respectively. Solving y d ACy Ar gives y ASr Sd 1 S C 1 r Sd

C is a low-pass filter with internal state x and 0 and k2 0. A is a pure parameters k1 integrator with state a and gain g 0 (41). This type of control is called "integral feedback." The parameters g, k1, and k2 might typically be functions of underlying physical quantities such as temperature, binding affinities, concentrations, etc., and thus might vary widely. The response y(t) to steps in r and d are shown in Fig. 3 over two orders of magnitude in g and k1. This simple protocol of integral feedback produces extremely robust external behavior even from wildly varying components (the blue solid versus red dashed lines in Fig. 3B). It is easily shown that this system is stable iff gk1 0 and k2 0, and converges to the steady state y (k2/k1)r independently of arbitrarily large variations k1, in gain g and disturbance d (42). If k2 y (k2/k1)r is a high-gain amplifier as well (43). The individual values of g, k1, and k2 influence the rate of convergence to steady state, but only the ratio k2/k1 determines its value. Thus, robust high steady-state gain can be achieved with uncertain and small parameters with the right feedback protocol. Figure 3C shows that variations in both g and k2 of orders of magnitude have modest impact, and only on early transient behavior. The protocol here is the structure of the equations, including the integral feedback and the signs of the parameters. Modules are the implementations of the actuator and controller. As with Lego, the protocol must be "finetuned" (because rewiring components or flipping signs typically creates exponentially growing instabilities), but this allows the modules to

1 F ­ AC (1) 1 F where F is the feedback gain. Ideally, perfect control would have S 0, because that gives y ­r/C (R ­1/C) completely independent of arbitrary variations in A and d. If A 3 and ­1/C 1, then F 3 ­ , S 3 0, and y 3 r/C. Then R amplifies r and is perfectly robust to external disturbance d and to variations in A. Choosing C small and precise, with A sufficiently large and even sloppy, is one effective, efficient, and robust way to make y a high-gain function of r. S measures the deviation from perfect control, and feedback can attenuate or greatly amplify the effects of unS­

Fig. 2. Minimal feedback system with actuator A and controller/sensor C. The goal is for response y to amplify reference r, independent of external disturbance d and variations in A. The signals u and a are the input and output of the actuator A, and x is the output of C.

Fig. 3. Closed (k1 0.01, blue) versus open 0, red) loop response y(t) to step (k1 changes at t 0 in (A) d(t) (r 0) and (B) r(t) (d 0) for g 0.1, 1, and 10; k1 0.01; and k2 10k1. Note the extreme divergence (k1 0) versus convergence (k1 0.01) as t 3 . (C) is a zoom of (A) with k1 0.01, 0.1, 10k1 added for each value of g. and 1; k2 (D) logS( ) versus for responses in (A). The peaks in logS( ) correspond to the oscillations in (A) and (B). Note the equal areas under the curves for logS( ).

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 295 1 MARCH 2002

1667

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on May 7, 2008

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: THE GENOME, LEGOME, AND BEYOND
For increasing g, low-frequency robustness (logS( ) 0) is improved, but at the expense of increased fragility (logS( ) 0) at higher frequencies (50). Indeed, it can be proven that for all g d plex structures dominate con