The Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure
Michael Lynch
Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington Most of the phenotypic diversity that we perceive in the natural world is directly attributable to the peculiar structure of the eukaryotic gene, which harbors numerous embellishments relative to the situation in prokaryotes. The most profound changes include introns that must be spliced out of precursor mRNAs, transcribed but untranslated leader and trailer sequences (untranslated regions), modular regulatory elements that drive patterns of gene expression, and expansive intergenic regions that harbor additional diffuse control mechanisms. Explaining the origins of these features is difficult because they each impose an intrinsic disadvantage by increasing the genic mutation rate to defective alleles. To address these issues, a general hypothesis for the emergence of eukaryotic gene structure is provided here. Extensive information on absolute population sizes, recombination rates, and mutation rates strongly supports the view that eukaryotes have reduced genetic effective population sizes relative to prokaryotes, with especially extreme reductions being the rule in multicellular lineages. The resultant increase in the power of random genetic drift appears to be sufficient to overwhelm the weak mutational disadvantages associated with most novel aspects of the eukaryotic gene, supporting the idea that most such changes are simple outcomes of semi-neutral processes rather than direct products of natural selection. However, by establishing an essentially permanent change in the population-genetic environment permissive to the genome-wide repatterning of gene structure, the eukaryotic condition also promoted a reliable resource from which natural selection could secondarily build novel forms of organismal complexity. Under this hypothesis, arguments based on molecular, cellular, and/or physiological constraints are insufficient to explain the disparities in gene, genomic, and phenotypic complexity between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

Introduction Although full-genome sequencing has revealed numerous patterns of variation in genomic architecture among major taxonomic groups, a formidable, remaining challenge is to transform the descriptive field of comparative genomics into a more mechanistic theory of evolutionary genomics. Such an enterprise does not have to start from scratch. Nearly a century of mathematical derivation has resulted in a formal theory for evolution based on the expected dynamics of gene-frequency changes. Initially dubbed the Modern Synthesis by Huxley in 1942 and having experienced further enhancements since then, this theory has survived so much empirical scrutiny that the credibility of any proposed scenario for genome evolution must remain in doubt until shown to be consistent with basic population-genetic principles. In turn, if a mechanistic understanding of genome evolution is to be achieved, population-genetic theory will need to go beyond its reliance on algebraic formulations involving selection, mutation, recombination, and random genetic drift to incorporate the DNA-level constraints that are now known to define the evolutionary playing field. Ever since Darwin, the vast majority of biologists have invoked natural selection as the primary, and in many cases the only, explanation for observed patterns of variation at most levels of organization. This greatly oversimplifies the evolutionary process. For example, Kimura, Ohta, and several contemporaries showed why numerous aspects of DNA sequence evolution cannot be explained entirely in terms of adaptive processes (reviewed in Kimura 1983; Ohta 1997). The neutral (or nearly neutral) theory that emerged from
Key words: complexity, gene networks, gene regulation, gene structure, genome evolution, genetic draft, introns, modularity, mutation, natural selection, population size, pleiotropy, random genetic drift, recombination, subfunctionalization, transcription factors, UTR. E-mail: milynch@indiana.edu.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 23(2):450­468. 2006 doi:10.1093/molbev/msj050 Advance Access publication November 9, 2005 Ó The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

this work still enjoys a central place in the field of molecular evolution and has been applied to some aspects of evolutionary genomics (Force et al. 1999, 2005; Lynch et al. 2001, Lynch 2002; Lynch and Conery 2003; Lynch, Scofield, and Hong 2005b). The goal of this paper is to expand on these previous results to demonstrate the plausibility of the hypothesis that many of the unique complexities of the eukaryotic gene arose by semi-neutral processes with little, if any, direct involvement of positive selection. Although eukaryotes share many basic aspects of transcription, translation, and replication with their prokaryotic ancestors, there are profound differences at the level of gene architecture. Prokaryotic genes are often organized into operons that are transcribed into polycistronic units, whereas with few exceptions, eukaryotic genes are transcribed as single-gene units. Unlike prokaryotic genes, eukaryotic genes often have complex regulatory regions, and in multicellular species such regions often have a modular structure that helps facilitate tissue-specific expression. Eukaryotic protein-coding genes also often contain introns, whereas prokaryotic genes do not, and eukaryotic transcripts generally contain longer untranslated leader and terminal sequences (untranslated regions [UTRs]) than do those of prokaryotes. Three general observations have encouraged the view that that these kinds of increases in gene complexity were necessary prerequisites to the origin of organisms with multiple cell types: (i) most aspects of gene architecture are much more elaborate in multicellular than unicellular eukaryotes; (ii) similar forms of genomic architecture are found in the two major and independently evolved multicellular lineages, animals and land plants; and (iii) more complex genes can often carry out more complex sets of tasks (Raff 1996; Gerhart and Kirschner 1997; Davidson 2001; Carroll, Grenier, and Weatherbee 2001). However, despite these clear associations, the direction of causality in the link between genome and organismal complexity is far from certain. There is no direct evidence that

Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure 451

multicellularity itself was promoted by adaptive processes, and the fact that many prokaryotes are capable of cell differentiation reminds us that the evolution of multicellularity need not have awaited the emergence of eukaryotes. The key point to be made below is that the types of genomic evolution that can occur within a species are not so much dependent on aspects of cell biology as on the constraints imposed by population-level processes, most notably by population size itself. The arguments underlying this hypothesis will be laid out in three sections. First, I will review the role that chance plays in evolution and why this depends on population size. Second, I will summarize several sets of empirical data that show that the efficiency of natural selection declines dramatically between prokaryotes, unicellular eukaryotes, and multicellular eukaryotes. Third, I will demonstrate that theory and empirical observations are mutually consistent in pointing to a central role for nonadaptive processes in the origins of many of aspects of eukaryotic gene structure. The Role of Chance in Evolution Evolution is an inherently stochastic process, starting from the chance events that produce single mutations and proceeding through a series of fortuitous steps that gradually lead to the spread of some mutations to every member of the descendant population. The usual conceptual point of departure here is the classic Wright-Fisher model, which assumes a population of diploid individuals, each contributing equally and synchronously to an effectively infinite gamete pool. The idealized mating system consists of randomly mating hermaphrodites and ignores complexities associated with overlapping generations, separate sexes, spatial structure, nonrandom variation in family sizes, and so on. However, most of these complications can be dealt with by equating the genetic ``effective'' size of a population (Ne) to the size of an ideal Wright-Fisher population yielding equivalent gene-frequency dynamics. The effective size of a population is a fundamental determinant of nearly all aspects of evolution as it determines the probability of (and times to) fixation or removal of mutant alleles. Most deviations from the assumptions of the WrightFisher model cause Ne to be less than the total number of adult individuals (N) (Caballero 1994; Whitlock and Barton 1997; Rousset 2003). For example, if adults differ in the number of gametes produced, either because of selection or chance ecological events, Ne will be reduced simply because some individuals contribute little or nothing to the following generation. A sex ratio that deviates from 1:1 reduces Ne because the rarer sex (which necessarily contributes half of the genes to the next generation) acts as a population bottleneck. Population-size fluctuations reduce long-term Ne relative to the arithmetic average because the losses of variation during population bottlenecks exceed the preservational effects of equal population-size expansions. A number of procedures have been developed to estimate Ne from pedigree data or by relating temporal fluctuations in allele frequencies to the expectations from sampling 2Ne gametes. Studies of this sort, mostly confined to vertebrates, suggest an average Ne/N of ;0.1 (Frankham 1995).

To see how population size influences the long-term rate of evolution, consider a newly arisen mutation in a diploid population containing 2N gene copies at each locus. If the mutation is neutral, with no external forces favoring one allele over another, the probability of eventual fixation is always equal to the initial frequency, p0 5 1/(2N). Because this fraction is inversely proportional to N, one might expect neutral changes to accumulate more slowly in larger populations. However, the expected number of new mutations arising at a locus per generation is 2Nl, where l is the rate of origin of neutral mutations per gene, and the long-term rate of evolution is equal to the product of the rate of origin of mutations and their probability of fixation. Thus, the rate of neutral evolution reduces to the genic mutation rate l, which is entirely independent of the effective and absolute population size (Kimura 1983). Intuition suggests that the fixation probability of a beneficial allele must exceed the neutral expectation 1/(2N), whereas that of a detrimental allele must be ,1/(2N), but how much so? To see that a beneficial mutation is never guaranteed to go to fixation, no matter how favorable, consider a new mutation that improves the fitness of its initial carrier by a fraction s (the selection coefficient). Such an allele has expected frequency p0 5 (1 1 s)/(2N) in the gamete pool leading to the next generation, and the probability that it is not successfully inherited by at least one offspring, (1 ÿ p0)2N, is closely approximated by (1 ÿ s)eÿ1 for small s. Thus, relative to the situation for a neutral allele (s 5 0), selection only reduces the probability of a rapid initial exit for a beneficial allele by a fraction s. This shows that until a favorable mutation has avoided chance elimination in the first few generations and increased its frequency in doing so, there is little assurance that it will successfully go to fixation. For mutations with additive effects on fitness (increasing homozygote fitness by 2s), the probability of fixation is pf 'ð2sNe =NÞ=ð1 ÿ eÿ4Ne s Þ (Kimura 1962). Thus, even in very large populations (Ne / N), the high degree of stochasticity in the early phase of mutation establishment still restricts the probability of fixation to an upper limit of 2sNe/N. Given the arguments presented above, this means that the probability of fixation of a favorable mutation is almost always ,2s. Letting lb be the beneficial-mutation rate per gene and 2Nlb be the rate at the population level, the above results imply that the upper limit to the rate of incorporation of beneficial mutations is 4Nelbs, which unlike the situation for neutral mutations increases with Ne. In contrast, because detrimental mutations with ÿ0.3 , Nes , 0.0 have fixation probabilities at least half as great as the neutral expectation, if the rate of origin of mutations in this range of effects is sufficiently high, a considerable load of mildly deleterious mutations can accumulate in populations of sufficiently small size (Ohta 1973, 1974). Modifications to this theory for situations in which populations are subdivided or changing in size do not change these basic scaling properties (Otto and Whitlock 1997; Whitlock 2003). These results yield the robust prediction that the ability of a population to incorporate beneficial mutations and to purge deleterious mutations should scale positively with population size, assuming that Ne scales positively with N. However, something beyond the demographic features

452 Lynch

of a population, the physical structure of the genome itself, will generally limit the growth of Ne with N in the largest of populations. Because tightly linked nucleotide sites are transmitted across generations as a unit, to a degree that depends on the rate of recombination, the fate of any new mutation depends on the selective forces operating on all linked loci. On average, this causes the fixation rates of beneficial mutations to be lower and detrimental mutations to be higher than the single-locus predictions suggested above (Hill and Robertson 1966). For example, a beneficial mutation that rapidly sweeps through a population will necessarily drag along any deleterious alleles at tightly linked loci with which it is associated at the time of origin, whereas the selective removal of deleterious alleles can impede adaptive evolution at linked loci. Even mutually advantageous alleles will interfere with each other's fixation when linked. Consider a beneficial allele A segregating at one locus, with a second beneficial mutation B arising at a tightly linked locus on an a-bearing chromosome. If the advantages of each mutation were the same, then the Ab and aB linkage groups would compete with each other in the fixation process, with one eventually excluding the other. Linkage need not be absolute for these effects to be important, but the stronger the degree of linkage the greater the degree of selective interference. Gillespie (2000) presented an elegant argument relating the influence of linkage to the effective population size of a chromosomal region. The key issue is that the effective size of a population defines the variance of allele-frequency change from generation to generation, which for a neutral locus is p(1 ÿ p)/(2Ne), where p is the current allele frequency, and 2Ne is the effective number of genes sampled per locus. Now imagine a neutrally evolving site completely linked to another site that is experiencing selective sweeps at rate d. On average, selective sweeps do not influence which alleles go to fixation at linked neutral sites because the probability that a beneficial mutation destined to fixation will arise in association with a particular allele is simply equal to that allele's frequency. However, selective sweeps do magnify the fluctuations of allele frequencies at linked neutral sites. Assuming as a first approximation that sweeps cleanse a population of linked variation essentially instantaneously, then conditional on a sweep occurring, the variance in allele-frequency change at the neutral locus is p(1 ÿ p). Thus, for a neutral locus in an ideal randomly mating population, the average variance of allele-frequency change is approximately p(1 ÿ p)f[(1 ÿ d)/(2Ne)] 1 dg. Equating the right-hand quantity to 1/(2Nl), the long-term effective population size is Nl ' Ne/(1 1 2Ned), where Ne is now defined to be the short-term effective size during phases free of selective sweeps. (Maruyama and Birky [1991] obtained essentially the same result by a different method.) Recombination reduces the likelihood that a selective sweep will completely purge the variation at a linked locus, but Gillespie (2000) showed that this simply modifies the preceding expression to Nl ' Ne/(1 1 2NeCd), where C is the average squared frequency of the neutral hitchhiking allele after the completion of a sweep (previously assumed to be equal to one). An unresolved issue is the way in which the rate of selective sweeps in a tightly linked region, Cd, scales with

population size. If Cd were completely independent of population size, then Nl would increase with Ne at a decreasing rate, eventually reaching an upper limit of 1/(2Cd). Because larger populations contain more targets for rare beneficial mutations and also experience more recombination events, the rate of sweeps (d) is expected to increase and the breadth of sweeps (C) to decrease with increasing Ne, so in principle, these opposite patterns of scaling might fortuitously balance such that the product Cd is indeed independent of Ne. However, in the absence of any direct observations on this matter, a more general approximation is to treat Cd as a power function of Ne, yielding a relationship of the form Nl 5 Ne/(1 1 aNeb). Here, b 5 1 describes the case in which Cd is independent of Ne, whereas with b 5 2 the rate of selective sweeps is proportional to Ne, as in the single-locus result described above. The latter condition is clearly too high to be biologically realistic as the rate of selective sweeps per locus eventually exceeds one per generation at large Ne. Thus, b is likely to fall in the range of 1­2, although this remains to be formally demonstrated. Assuming that short-term Ne scales linearly with absolute population size (N), these qualitative arguments suggest that long-term Nl will also scale linearly with N for small to moderate N where random genetic drift is the predominant stochastic force. However, the degree of scaling is expected to be progressively reduced at larger N, with an asymptotic limit to Nl possibly being reached at very large N where stochastic fluctuations in allele frequencies are primarily a function of the chromosomal nature of the genome (Gillespie's genetic draft). To gain an appreciation of the power of random genetic drift and draft to compromise the efficiency of natural selection, it is useful to consider the ratio of the single-locus fixation probability, pf, and the neutral expectation, 1/(2N). This is a simple function of 4Nl s; hf ffi 4Nl s=ð1 ÿ eÿNl s Þ; where Nl is defined by the function in the preceding paragraph (fig. 1). If the strength of selection is sufficiently large relative to the power of random genetic drift (4Nls . 1), the fixation probability for an advantageous allele is inflated by a factor of 4Nls relative to the neutral expectation, whereas the fixation probability of a deleterious allele asymptotically approaches zero as 4Nls / ÿN. However, if j4Nlsj , 0.2, the probability of fixation is within 10% of the neutral expectation, and if j4Nlsj , 0.02, the deviation from neutrality is no more than 1%. Thus, for any long-term effective population size, there exists a range of deleterious mutations whose selective disadvantages are overwhelmed by stochastic forces. Such alleles are said to be effectively neutral. The Three Genomic Perils of Increased Organism Size A central premise of this paper is that there is a general reduction in the efficiency of selection between prokaryotes, unicellular eukaryotes, and multicellular species. We now take a more empirical look at this issue, showing that all three major factors responsible for reductions in Nl--small population size, tight linkage, and high background mutational activity--are jointly exacerbated as organisms increase in size, producing a synergism that causes substantial reductions in the efficiency of natural selection.

Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure 453

FIG. 1.--The probability of fixation of a new mutant allele relative to the neutral expectation of 1/(2N), given as a function of the product of the short-term (drift determining) effective population size (Ne) and the selection coefficient (s). For the dashed and dotted curves, the long-term effective population size (Nl) is defined by the function in the text with a 5 10ÿ9, whereas the solid line denotes Nl 5 Ne, which assumes an absence of selective sweeps (a 5 0). The horizontal dotted line denotes the neutral expectation. Negative values of Nes denote deleterious mutations.

FIG. 2.--The negative relationship between recombination rate per physical distance (c) and total genome size (G) in eukaryotes, scaling as c 5 0.0019Gÿ0.71 for animals and land plants, with the exponent having a standard error (SE) of 0.06, and as c 5 0.045Gÿ1.32 for fungi and other unicellular/oligocellular species, with the exponent having a SE of 0.12. In the two respective cases, genome size accounts for 70% and 80% of the variance in recombination rate. (For further details, see Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Material online).

Body Size and Population Size A typical prokaryote is five to seven orders of magnitude smaller than the average single-celled eukaryote, with a similar disparity existing between unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes (Bonner 1988). Such massive differences in size impose numerous ecological and physiological constraints and opportunities, but the implications for the population-genetic environment are equally pronounced. All other things being equal, the genetic effective size of a population should generally increase with the actual number of breeding adults (N), and one of the few wellestablished laws in ecology is that a primary determinant of N is the average size of members of the population. Eukaryotes generally show an inverse relationship between population density per unit area and average individual body mass within a species, with the extreme values ranging from ;10ÿ7 individuals/M2 for the largest vertebrates to ;1011 individuals/M2 for the smallest unicellular eukaryotes (Damuth 1981; Schmid, Tokeshi, and Schmid-Araya 2000; Enquist and Niklas 2001; Carbone and Gittleman 2002; Finlay 2002). Ecological factors unique to individual species can cause local deviations around this pattern, and an inverse scaling between population density and organism size need not reflect the pattern for total population size as it does not account for total species ranges. However, the geographic area occupied by vertebrate species is negligibly to weakly positively correlated with average body size (Gaston and Blackburn 1996; Diniz and Torres 2002; Housworth, Martins, and Lynch 2003), and the geographic ranges of unicellular species appear to be substantially greater than those for multicellular taxa (Finlay et al. 2001; Finlay,

Monaghan, and Maberly 2002; Green et al. 2004; HornerDevine et al. 2004). Thus, in a broad phylogenetic sense, there is little doubt that the total number of individuals within a species declines with increasing organism size, and the total range in N over all species certainly exceeds 20 orders of magnitude. Assuming ;1030 prokaryotic cells inhabiting the earth (Whitman, Coleman, and Wiebe 1998) and 107 being an upper-bound estimate for the number of prokaryotic species (Hammond 1995), N for an average prokaryote would be ;1023. Reduced Recombination in Large Genomes High-density genetic maps allow the estimation of the average amount of meiotic crossing over for numerous eukaryotes. The magnitude of recombination per physical distance scales negatively with genome size, ranging from 3 3 10ÿ10/bp/generation in Pinus sylvestris to 3 3 10ÿ6/bp/ generation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (fig. 2). Such scaling is due mostly to the simple fact that most species experience between one and two meiotic crossover events per chromosome. Because chromosome number is uncorrelated with genome size, the intensity of recombination per nucleotide position naturally increases in smaller genomes (with smaller average chromosome lengths). Less clear is why the recombination rate declines with increasing genome size twice as rapidly in unicellular as in multicellular species (fig. 2). In any event, because genome size increases with organism size, these results imply that increases in organism size are accompanied by decreases in the intensity of recombination. Not only can a selective sweep in a multicellular eukaryote drag along up to 10,000-fold more linked nucleotide sites than is likely in

454 Lynch

a unicellular species, but species with small genomes also experience increased levels of recombination on a per-gene basis. For example, the rate of recombination over the entire physical distance associated with an average gene (including intergenic DNA) is ;0.007 in S. cerevisiae versus ;0.001 in Homo sapiens, and the discrepancy is greater if one considers just coding exons and introns, 0.005 versus 0.0005. The consequences of reduced recombination rates are particularly clear in the human population, which harbors numerous haplotype blocks, tens to hundreds of kilobases in length, with little evidence of internal recombination (Daly et al. 2001; Reich et al. 2001; Dawson et al. 2002; Gabriel et al. 2002; Greenwood, Rana, and Schork 2004; McVean et al. 2004). The Rate of Mutation Because of the rarity of mutations at individual nucleotides sites, there are enormous challenges to estimating the rate at which mutations arise at the molecular level. Most estimates are derived either from surveys of visible mutations at reporter loci or of dominant genetic disorders, followed by sequence analysis of individuals exhibiting a phenotype. These approaches are not without problems, as corrections must be made for the incidence of undetectable mutations. More indirect attempts to estimate the mutation rate are based on comparisons of distantly related species, using DNA sequences thought to be free of natural selection and making assumptions about times of interspecific divergence and species-specific generation times (e.g., Keightley and Eyre-Walker 2000; Kumar and Subramanian 2002). Only a single attempt has been made to estimate the per-nucleotide mutation directly by brute-force assays of random sequences in unselected lines (Denver et al. 2004). To minimize the assumptions involved, the following survey largely relies on data derived from the more direct approaches. Across a phylogenetically diverse set of a species, there is a strong correlation between the mutation rate per generation and genome size (fig. 3). The range for the base-substitution mutation rate is approximately two orders of magnitude, and again exhibits a gradient with organism size, the extremes being 5.0 3 10ÿ10 and 5.4 3 10ÿ8/bp/generation for prokaryotes and vertebrates, respectively. Despite the uncertainties in each estimate contributing to this pattern, the validity of the overall relationship is supported by two observations. First, the estimate for the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans obtained by direct sequence analysis (highest red point in the plot) is consistent with the remaining data obtained via reporter constructs. Second, estimates of the human mutation rate obtained from observations on dominant genetic disorders (Kondrashov 2003) are very similar to those obtained from comparisons of pseudogene sequences in humans and chimpanzees (Nachman and Crowell 2000), 2.6 3 10ÿ8 and 2.2 3 10ÿ8/bp/generation, respectively. Based on more limited data, Drake (1991) concluded that the mutation rate per nucleotide per generation is inversely related with genome size in microbial species, but the results in figure 3 suggest the opposite pattern, even within the subset of unicellular species.

FIG. 3.--The relationship between the mutation rate for base substitutions per nucleotide site per generation (u) and genome size (G) scales as u 5 0.14G0.78 (310ÿ9), with the exponent having a SE of 0.10 and genome size accounting for 79% of the variance in the mutation rate. (For further details, see Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Material online).

The Global Effective Population Sizes of Species The preceding results show that three factors (low population sizes, low recombination rates, and high mutation rates) conspire to reduce the efficiency of natural selection with increasing organism size, although it is difficult to predict the magnitude of decline in Nl from these three factors alone. For example, fluctuations in population size can result in a substantial depression of Nl below average N, and it is unclear whether the magnitude of such fluctuations varies with organism size. In addition, as discussed above, hitchhiking effects should depress the Nl/N ratio much more in large populations, but because the recombination rate (per meiosis) is substantially greater and the mutation rate is substantially lower in species with large N, this decline could be weaker than otherwise expected. Given the many additional factors that can influence Nl, the degree to which Nl varies with organism size is best resolved by direct empirical observation. One way to accomplish this task is to consider the amount of nucleotide-sequence variation at silent sites in protein-coding genes within natural populations. Under the assumption that mutations at such sites escape the eyes of natural selection, the amount of silent-site variation has a simple interpretation. The rate of introduction of new variation per nucleotide site in two randomly compared alleles is 2u (twice the base-substitution mutation rate per nucleotide), while the expected rate of loss of variation by genetic drift is 1/(2Nl). At equilibrium, the average number of nucleotide substitutions separating individual neutral sites in two randomly sampled alleles is the ratio of these two rates, 4Nlu. For a haploid species, the rate of random genetic drift is 1/Nl, and the equilibrium divergence among neutral nucleotide sites becomes 2Nlu. Both results have the same meaning--at mutation-drift equilibrium, the amount of within-species nucleotide variation at silent sites is equal

Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure 455

FIG. 4.--Average levels of within-species nucleotide variation (measured as the number of substitutions per site) for silent sites in proteincoding genes from a phylogenetically diverse assemblage of eukaryotic and prokaryotic species. The sampling unit is the average estimate for members of a genus, where information for multiple species was available. Means, standard deviations, and number of genera are given in parentheses; horizontal bars provide estimates of the observed ranges of values, using 5% and 95% limits to reduce the effects of outliers resulting from sampling error. Almost all data are derived from geographically wide surveys of multiple protein-coding genes. (For further details, see Supplementary Tables 3 and 4, Supplementary Material online).

to twice the effective number of gene copies at the locus times the per nucleotide mutation rate. An estimate of this composite parameter is provided by the observed level of silent-site variation within a species (hereafter ps). Although the complex nature of the definition of Nl introduces some interpretive issues with ps (Laporte and Charlesworth 2002), a fully general definition can be described in terms of allelic ancestry. ps is equal to the average age of random pairs of sequences times twice the base-substitutional mutation rate per nucleotide site. As will be seen below, the fact that ps is a function of the product of Nl and u is very useful because many aspects of genome evolution depend directly on this product. Information on ps now exists for a wide enough phylogenetic range of species that some general statements can be made. Drawing from a substantially larger database than presented in the earlier survey of Lynch and Conery (2003), there is a striking inverse relationship between organism size and silent-site variation (fig. 4). For prokaryotes, ps lies in the broad range of 0.0071­0.3881, with an average value of 0.1044. This is nearly twice the average value for unicellular eukaryotes (0.0573), although the range of values among the latter taxa is again very high (0.0103­0.2522). For the s