PERSPECTIVES
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

A New RNA Dimension to Genome Control
Richard W. Carthew icroRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are 21- to 25nucleotide RNA molecules that influence their much bigger relatives, the messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Over the past few years, these small RNA species have captivated the study of gene regulation and modified our notions about how gene expression is controlled. A recent clutch of papers describe for the first time a class of small RNA cousins that are distinct from miRNAs and siRNAs (1­6). They promise to yield fascinating new insights into genome control. The genesis of the discovery of a third type of small RNAs is linked to the Argonaute family of proteins. Certain Argonaute proteins such as Ago1 and Ago2 associate with miRNAs and siRNAs to form ribonucleoprotein complexes that associate and repress the expression of target mRNAs. Sometimes, mRNA targets are cleaved by a mechanism that is catalyzed by the particular associated Ago protein. However, a subclade of Argonaute proteins are phylogenetically distinct from the Ago1/Ago2 subclade and do not appear to associate with siRNAs or miRNAs (7). Led by its founding member, the Piwi protein of Drosophila melanogaster, this subfamily appears to play an important role in germline development. For example, genetic analysis of Piwi and its mouse orthologs (Miwi, Mili, Miwi2) indicates that they are essential for spermatogenesis (7­9). How the Piwi subfamily regulates the germline has remained for the most part elusive. A recent breakthrough regarding this question has emerged from the identification of the small RNA partners that associate with Piwi proteins. In research reported on page 363 of this issue, Lau et al. (1) partially purified a ribonucleoprotein complex from extracts of rat testis and found testis-specific RNAs of 25 to 31 nucleotides, with a dominant subpopulation of 29- to 30-nucleotide RNAs. These RNAs are distinct in size from miRNAs and are associated with distinct protein complexes. Lau et al. purified the RNA-protein complex by conventional chromatography and identified the rat homologs to Piwi (Riwi) and the human RecQ1 protein as subunits of the complex. On this basis, the RNAs have been named Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and the complex is called the Piwiinteracting RNA complex (piRC).

The discovery of small RNAs, microRNA and siRNA, has revolutionized thinking about the control of gene expression. Now a third new species of small RNA is shown to control gene expression in germline cells.

M

piRC exhibits adenosine triphosphate­ dependent DNA helicase activity, which is likely attributable to RecQ1. Interestingly, the RecQ1 homolog in Neurospora crassa has been implicated in gene silencing (10). Lau et al. (1) also found that piRC will cleave RNA targets in a manner dependent on piRNA complementarity, much like Ago2 cleavage of siRNA targets. This might imply that piRC has some posttranscriptional role in gene silencing. Indeed, piRNAs are associated with polysomes fractionated from mouse testis extract (4). However, genetic studies have implicated Piwi proteins in transcriptional gene silencing by altering chromatin conforma-

erates piRNAs from both strands, but plus-strand piRNAs are segregated from minus-strand piRNAs into distinct regions that are separated by a gap of a few hundred base pairs (see the figure). The paucity of evidence for overlapping complementary RNAs or potential foldback RNA precursors suggests that piRNAs are not derived from double-stranded RNA precursors. This would suggest a biogenesis mechanism distinct from that of siRNA and miRNA, both of which are derived from dsRNA through enzymatic cleavage by Dicer. piRNAs and piRC complexes are not restricted to rats; they have been detected in testes

DNA

RNA polymerase

Transcriptional regulation of piRNA clusters

mRNA

Histone

mRNA piRC assembly

Mechanism of piRC action: at DNA or histones or RNA? piRNA biogenesis

piRC Piwi RecQ1 piRNA

The known and unknown features of piRNAs. Shown is a genomic region that generates a cluster of piRNAs. The left side of the region generates antisense RNA transcripts (blue) and the right side generates sense transcripts (green); a short gap in between likely acts as the promoter for transcription of both sides (divergent red arrows). An RNA polymerase of unknown identity is shown in active transcription. These transcripts are processed into 25- to 31-nucleotide piRNAs by an unknown mechanism. piRNAs then associate with Piwi and RecQ1 homologs to form piRC complexes. These complexes might regulate the genome at the level of DNA or histones, or at a posttranscriptional level. The events that are under direct control of the piRC mechanism within developing sperm cells are currently unknown.

The author is in the Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. E-mail: r-carthew@northwestern.edu

tion (7). Consistent with the idea that piRC plays a role in transcriptional silencing, RNAs that are longer than 24 nucleotides (such as piRNAs) have been associated with this mode of gene silencing in a wide variety of species (11). One of the real surprises has been the nature of piRNAs themselves. Deep sequencing of complementary DNAs derived from piRNAs revealed that they correspond to regions of the genome previously thought not to be transcribed (1­3). These regions are limited in number to about 100 clusters ranging in size from 1 to 100 kilobases and are distributed across the genome. Very few clusters contain repetitive DNA; in fact, repetitive DNA is underrepresented. A greater surprise is that piRNAs in a typical cluster exclusively map to either one or the other strand of genomic DNA (1­5). A minority of clusters genSCIENCE VOL 313

of other mammals, including mouse and human (1­5). The organization of piRNA genomic clusters is conserved in other mammalian species as well. Most clusters in the rat, mouse, and human are homologous or syntenic, even extending to strand specificity. Nonetheless, piRNA sequences are not conserved between species. Sequence heterogeneity is consistent with the idea that the genomic clusters are subject to neutral selection pressure. What testis cells express piRNAs? In the mouse, Mili is expressed in male germ cells from primordial to pachytene stages, whereas Miwi is expressed from pachytene to spermatid stages (8, 9). Both Mili and Miwi associate with piRNAs, which suggests that piRNAs are produced within the developing male germ cells. Consistent with a germline-specific expression

www.sciencemag.org

21 JULY 2006

305

Published by AAAS

PERSPECTIVES
pattern, piRNAs are not detectable in W V mutant mice, which are missing differentiating germ cells (2, 5), and piRNAs are reduced in Miwi mutants (4). piRNAs are detected throughout sperm development but appear to peak in abundance at the round-spermatid stage (1­5). The abundance of piRNAs in spermatids is staggering; about 1 million molecules are estimated per round-spermatid cell (3). Although mammalian piRNAs are not associated with repetitive DNA, the situation might be different in Drosophila. On page 320 of this issue, Vagin et al. (6) describe repeat-associated siRNAs (rasiRNAs) in the fly germline as 24- to 29-nucleotide species that arise primarily from the antisense strand of repetitive sequences such as retrotransposons. These RNAs are associated with Piwi and another member of the Piwi subclade, and mutations in the Piwi class of genes cause derepressed retrotransposon silencing coupled with altered levels of rasiRNA abundance. Interestingly, these effects are not restricted to the male germline but also apply to the female germline. Perhaps rasiRNAs in Drosophila use a molecular mechanism similar to that of mammalian piRNAs to silence portions of the genome. Many questions ensue from these studies. Are testis-specific piRNAs found in species other than mammals? Does piRC regulate male meiosis by regulating genome organization, or is it a surveillance mechanism to ensure genome integrity during germ cell maturation, including suppression of selfish elements? Is piRC male-specific, or are other classes of RNAs associated with Piwi in the female germline? How are piRNAs produced? Their structures might suggest a ribonuclease III­independent origin. Indeed, neither of the two Dicers from Drosophila is essential for rasiRNA biogenesis and repeat DNA silencing (6), although it is possible that each is redundant for the other or that a third enzyme, Drosha, carries out processing. Further investigation should reveal how piRCs regulate the genome.
References
1. N. C. Lau et al., Science 313, 363 (2006); published online 15 June 2006 (10.1126/science. 1130164). 2. A. Girard, R. Sachidanandam, G. J. Hannon, M. A. Carmell, Nature 10.1038/nature04917 (4 June 2006). 3. A. Aravin et al., Nature 10.1038/nature 04916 (4 June 2006). 4. S. T. Grivna, E. Beyret, Z. Wang, H. Lin, Genes Dev. 10.1101/gad.1434406 (9 June 2006). 5. T. Watanabe et al., Genes Dev. 10.1101/gad.1425706 (9 June 2006). 6. V. V. Vagin et al., Science 313, 320 (2006); published online 29 June 2006 (10.1126/science.1129333). 7. M. A. Carmell, Z. Xuan, M. Q. Zhang, G. J. Hannon, Genes Dev. 16, 2733 (2002). 8. W. Deng, H. Lin, Dev. Cell 2, 819 (2002). 9. S. Kuramochi-Miyagawa et al., Development 131, 839 (2004). 10. C. Cogoni, G. Macino, Science 286, 2342 (1999). 11. M. A. Matzke, J. A. Birchler, Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 24 (2005). 10.1126/science.1131186

EVOLUTION

Darwin for All Seasons
Eörs Szathmáry any regard the Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection as one of the most important and powerful theories of our times, in the good company of the general theory of relativity and quantum theory. What will be Darwin's legacy in the 21st century? Will new work be mainly confirmatory, or can we expect new breakthroughs? What constitutes a Darwinian way of thinking in biology, or more broadly in science? Is it still timely to think in a genuine Darwinian way, or should we resort only to some basic Darwinian principles? These questions were discussed by researchers at a recent conference at Trinity College, Cambridge, UK (1), which was hosted by the president of the Royal Society, Martin Rees. There was fair agreement among the participants that Darwin's way of approaching problems remains valid and should be encouraged if possible. A feel for the organism, theoretical ideas guiding and aided by keen observations of meticulous details, excellent knowledge of natural history: These traits were characteristic of Darwin (as discussed by Randal Keynes), and there is little hope for biology in this century if at least some people will not walk in Darwin's footsteps. It seems mandatory that "professional generalists," when they rarely surface,

A recent conference featured discussions of Darwin's approach to science in the 19th century and how his methods may apply to 21st-century research. ability lies in chemistry, and the origin of replicators and life may be (one of) the greatest challenges for that field. We do not know how RNA originated. We do not know how the first cells got organized, and there is no full scenario for the origin of the genetic code either. Chemistry has helped biology enormously: The development of biochemistry and molecular biology, and their contributions to our understanding of some fundamental features of life, have been profound. This may be the era when biology pays back its debt: Many fields within chemistry are more and more adopting evolutionary approaches. The triumph of in vitro genetics in producing catalytic RNA molecules (ribozymes) is a success story beyond doubt. An evolutionary approach toward nanotechnology may bear further fruits. Mathematical modeling has contributed considerably to the foundations of modern evolutionary theory. Sometimes even the questions cannot be properly formulated without at least some elementary algebra or population dynamics. The problem of the evolutionary maintenance of sex in eukaryotes (consisting of cells much more complex than bacteria) is a good case in point. If an asexual female produces, on average, twice as many female progeny as a sexual one, then other things being equal, it is a miracle why the latter (with the necessary males) are still around. Many models have been put forward to solve this conundrum; some people would say far too many. What we need is more data. But relevant data are hard to arrive at. There is the

M

The author is at the Institute of Biology, Eötvös University Budapest, and Collegium Budapest (Institute for Advanced Study), 2 Szentháromság utca, H-1014 Budapest, Hungary. E-mail: szathmary@colbud.hu

should be cultivated and encouraged. Presumably such individuals arise by nature rather than nurture, but a mechanism to identify and support such rare people is badly needed. As Darwin said: "My mind seems to have become a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections of facts" (2). We should facilitate the emergence of this mindset in able people. At the beginning of the 21st century, we are well equipped with the knowledge of two disciplines that were practically closed books to Darwin: classical and molecular genetics, and mathematical modeling. Units of evolution must multiply, have heredity, and possess variability; and among the heritable traits, some must affect survival and/or reproduction. If these criteria are met, evolution by natural selection is possible in a population of such entities. There are at least three remarkable features of this short description. First, it is extremely short, but very powerful [this is why philosopher Daniel Dennett speaks about "Darwin's dangerous idea" (3)]. Second, it is not restricted to living organisms, and if the criteria are met, Darwinian evolution may unfold in the realm of chemistry and culture as well. Third, although we have learned a lot since Darwin's times, Darwin would have presumably agreed with this telegraphic description. There are still enormous challenges ahead of us in areas where a Darwinian way of thinking could turn out to be fruitful. The origin of evolvVOL 313 SCIENCE

306

21 JULY 2006

www.sciencemag.org

Published by AAAS

