REVIEWS

Genetics of global gene expression
Matthew V. Rockman and Leonid Kruglyak

Abstract | A new field of genetic analysis of global gene expression has emerged in recent years, driven by the realization that traditional techniques of linkage and association analysis can be applied to thousands of transcript levels measured by microarrays. Genetic dissection of transcript abundance has shed light on the architecture of quantitative traits, provided a new approach for connecting DNA sequence variation with phenotypic variation, and improved our understanding of transcriptional regulation and regulatory variation.
Complex and quantitative traits
Phenotypes that are shaped by multiple and possibly interacting genetic and environmental factors. Quantitative traits (as distinguished from discrete traits) are measured on continuous scales.

Effect size
The magnitude of contribution of a locus to variation in a phenotype.

Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. Correspondence to L.K. e-mail: leonid@genomics. princeton.edu doi:10.1038/nrg1964

More than a century after the rediscovery of Mendel, the genetic basis of complex and quantitative traits resists generalization. Basic questions remain unanswered, including the number of loci that underlie variation in heritable phenotypes, the distribution of their effect sizes, their molecular natures and mechanisms of action and interaction, and their dependence on environmental variables. These questions are at the centre of pressing issues in medical and agricultural genetics, as well as in basic evolutionary biology, in which the outstanding unresolved question concerns the forces that create, maintain and sort heritable phenotypic variation. Now, an emerging approach, genetic mapping of genome-wide gene expression (BOX 1), is beginning to provide the requisite empirical data to address these questions. Since the first empirical linkage study of global transcript levels was published in 2002 (REF. 1), many general principles have been established and represent solid ground on which further work can build. Although small-scale studies of the genetics of gene expression have a long and rich history (BOX 2), modern large-scale studies owe their existence to the development of microarray technology in the mid-1990s. Microarrays were first applied to the study of genetic variation in 2000. They revealed that gene expression differs between strains in both yeast and mice2,3 and that such differences segregate in crosses4,5. Subsequent studies documented abundant heritable variation in gene expression in Drosophila melanogaster 6 and killifish7. By the time Jansen and Nap8 proposed genetic mapping of genome-wide gene expression, such work was well underway in several research groups, and the first empirical study mapping global gene expression in a yeast cross appeared early the following year1. Since then, further studies have documented heritable variation in genome-wide gene expression in more than a dozen species and have mapped the loci for many expression

traits in yeast, mice, maize, humans, rats, Eucalyptus and Arabidopsis thaliana9­21. This diversity of model systems promises to reveal important connections between genome-wide gene expression and features of population biology -- population sizes, breeding systems, demographic histories and patterns of natural selection. Differences can already be seen among species: most species show ubiquitous heritable variation in expression, whereas the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum shows remarkably little22. The abundance of a transcript is a quantitative trait and, like all such traits, its inheritance can be described using the classical methods of biometrical genetics and its genetic basis can be discovered using linkage and association mapping. However, transcript abundance is in many ways an extraordinary phenotype, with special attributes that confer particular importance on an understanding of its genetics. The primary transformative potential of genome-wide gene expression genetics is the sheer number of traits -- thousands -- that can be assayed simultaneously. Whereas studies of one or a few traits offer only anecdotal examples of the underlying genetic architectures, studying thousands of traits allows a detailed description of the distribution over the landscape of all possible architectures. Individual traits are typically preselected on the basis of their phenotypic divergence or biological interest, whereas genome-wide expression studies provide data on a large and unbiased set of traits. The radical increase in the number of traits accessible to study has raised new challenges to analysis and interpretation, and genome-wide genetic mapping of gene expression has consequently become a central proving ground for new statistical genetics techniques23. Another special feature of transcript abundance as a phenotype is that it represents the phenotype most immediately connected to DNA sequence variation

862 | NOVEMBER 2006 | VOLUME 7

www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
Box 1 | Genetics of global gene expression: a primer
A study of the genetics of global gene expression begins with a mapping population. Several choices are available and have been used: progeny from a cross between two parent strains, recombinant inbred lines, collections of pedigrees and samples of unrelated individuals. The study population is then genotyped for a set of polymorphic markers that cover the genome. RNA is extracted from each individual or strain, and the abundance of each transcript is measured, typically by hybridization to microarrays (panel a illustrates the experimental design for a cross between two yeast strains1). High levels of measurement replication are built into the design, because each allele at each QTL will be present in a large number of samples; the effect of the QTL on gene expression will therefore be measured many times. The resulting data set is then analysed to find genetic loci that affect transcript abundance. The simple approach is to treat the abundance of each transcript as a separate quantitative trait, and to carry out conventional linkage or association analysis with all the markers tested either individually or using multipoint methods. Panel b shows how, at a given genomic location, the samples are separated according to the inherited marker alleles, and linkage (or association) is declared if the groups differ significantly in expression level (in this case of the gene at the centre of the small array section). An example of an actual linkage from a yeast cross is shown in panel c. Because millions of statistical tests are carried out (thousands of transcripts are each tested against hundreds or thousands of markers in linkage studies and up to a million markers in association studies), careful control of false positives through multiple testing correction is essential. Empirical significance levels obtained through permutation tests40,96 should be used whenever possible to account for the complex correlations in the data. Approaches that are based on the falsediscovery rate (FDR) are very useful97. Methods are available to search for multiple loci that affect a given trait either additively or through interactions, but even greater statistical care is required23,38,39,98. Methods that use dimensional reduction (for example, clustering or principal component analysis) can lower the number of tests and can potentially improve mapping power by combining multiple transcripts that behave similarly into single traits9,99. Depending on the study design and sample size, loci are identified for anywhere from a few transcripts to thousands of transcripts, with up to half of all transcripts showing linkage in some studies29. Following locus identification, the studies take several paths. The genetic architectures of the traits can be assessed by examining heritabilities, detection rates, numbers of loci identified and their effect sizes29. Loci can be classified according to whether they affect transcripts encoded at the same genomic location or elsewhere in the genome, and whether they affect many transcripts or few1,10. Bioinformatic approaches can be used to identify functional relationships among the transcripts affected by common loci and to investigate the structure of the underlying regulatory networks1,13,76,100,101. Finally, the causative polymorphisms responsible for variation in transcript abundance can be pursued using molecular genetics tools (panel d). (B@marker, R@marker, the allele carried by the segregant at the marker is the BY allele (B) or the RM allele (R), respectively; chr, chromosome; seg, segregants.)
Panel b and c reproduced with permission from REF. 1 © (2002) American Association for the Advancement of Sciences.

a
... Laboratory (BY) Wine (RM) Determine genome segregation

Profile gene expression

Correlate genotype with transcript abundance

b

Seg 1 Seg 2 Seg 3 Seg 4 Seg 5

Linkage
Seg 1 Seg 2 Seg 5 Seg 3 Seg 4

No linkage

Inherit BY

Inherit RM

c
Fold change (log2)

0.4 0.2 0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 -0.8 -1.0 -1.2 -1.4 -1.6

All seg

BY parent

RM parent

Seg inherit B@marker

Seg inherit R@marker

d
BUD9 DSE3 CST13 ISR1 YKL132C DSE2 DSE1 SCW11 PRY3 SUN4 EGT2 DSE4

16

Chr 2 locus: inherit RM

Chr 2 locus: inherit BY

14 ­log10(p) linkage 12 10 8 6 4 2 0

Daughter-cell specificity
RM BY

(II)

Genome location

Saccharomyces paradoxus Saccharomyces mikatae Saccharomyces bayanus Saccharomyces servazzii Zygosaccharomyces rouxii Kluyveromyces lactis Pichia angusta

DNFLLRLSQS IPNLKHLDLR ACDNVSDSGV VCIALNCPKL KTFNIGRHRR DNFLLRLSQS IPNLKHLVLR ACDNVSDSGV VCIALNCPKL KTFNIGRHRR D D D D D D D

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS

VOLUME 7 | NOVEMBER 2006 | 863

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
Box 2 | Foundational work in the genetics of natural variation in gene expression
Dramatic recent progress in understanding genetic variation in gene expression builds on a rich history, dating at least to Haldane's prescient treatment of variation in the timing of gene activity102. Decades before the discovery of the molecular gene, Haldane recognized that genetic variation in a gene's activity could be due to variation in the gene itself or to variation at an unlinked locus. Thinking in terms of physiological genetics, he pointed to membrane-spanning ion channels as candidate sites for mutations that could act on other genes in trans by altering cellular pH. The earliest genetic mapping of natural variation in gene expression appeared immediately after Jacob and Monod103 introduced a mechanism for gene regulation. Schwartz104 showed that variation in the time of activity of an esterase gene in maize depends on variation that is tightly linked to the structural locus. Linkage disequilibrium between the regulatory locus and electrophoretically distinguishable alleles of the enzyme showed that the regulatory variation acted in cis. Jacob and Monod's model inspired much speculation about variation in gene regulation and its importance to evolution105,106, but empirical research really took off only after King and Wilson's analysis refocused attention on the subject24. Using amylase genes as models, drosophilists documented distant linking, trans-acting regulatory variation affecting spatial regulation107,108, heritable variation in enzyme inducibility109 and fitness differences attributable to regulatory variation110. Parallel results for other enzymes and taxa rapidly accumulated111­113. Genetic analysis of gene expression variation entered a new era with the precocious introduction of genomic approaches by Damerval et al.61 Scoring spot intensities on two-dimensional gels as measures of abundance of 72 proteins in the F2 progeny of a maize line cross, Damerval et al. mapped QTLs that underlie the observed variation, including epistatic interactions among the loci. Because the two-dimensional gels allow allele-specific protein quantification, the study could distinguish between cis-acting and trans-acting variation. In the past several years, genome-wide genetic analyses of gene expression have far surpassed Damerval et al. in the number of traits examined and in the number and precision of the QTLs discovered, but much of the conceptual model for these studies is present in their classic paper.

Recombinant inbred lines
Panels of genetically mosaic but homozygous strains generated by crossing parental strains and inbreeding the progeny.

False-discovery rate
The fraction of results declared significant at a given threshold that are expected to be false positives.

Dimensional reduction
A class of mathematical techniques for summarizing the main characteristics of multivariate data with fewer variables.

QTL
Quantitative trait locus; a region of the genome that contributes to variation in a quantitative trait.

Beavis effect
A statistical artefact that is due to the deviation of estimates from true values by random error. In a mapping experiment, the loci that are deemed significant are enriched for those in which the estimated effects benefit from random error that happens to fall in the right direction. Therefore, significant QTLs are disproportionately those in which the effect sizes are inflated by chance.

-- the road from genotype to phenotype runs through gene expression. Regulatory sequence variation, including both variation in a regulatory region of a gene that affects its own expression and variation in the coding region of a gene that affects expression of other genes, is probably the main mediator of phenotypic divergence in evolution24­27. Moreover, the intermediate position of gene expression between genotype and organismal phenotype makes it ideally suited to serve as a bridge between the two in mapping studies. Genetic correlations between expression phenotypes and organismal phenotypes point to the molecular pathways that underlie the organismal phenotypes, whereas colocalization of QTLs for expression and organismal phenotypes speeds up the identification of causal mutations. Gene expression also provides a universal subphenotype for complex and heterogeneous organismal phenotypes10. In this review, we first discuss what the genetics of global gene expression has taught us about the genetic architecture of quantitative traits. We then describe the features of the two types of regulatory sequence variation that underlie differences in gene expression: local variation, which maps close to the physical location of the affected gene, and distant variation, which maps elsewhere in the genome. We quantify the prevalence of each type, and delineate the difference between the local and distant distinction, which is based on location, and the mechanistic distinctions (such as cis-acting and transacting, or cis-regulatory and protein-coding), which are based on the function altered by the variants. Having discussed the insights provided by studies of global gene expression, we look at the future of the genetics of global molecular phenotypes.

loci and with environmental variables. A key finding from multiple studies of the genetics of gene expression in different species is that complex inheritance is also consistently observed for the thousands of transcript-level traits. Despite their close connection to DNA sequence, transcript abundances exhibit substantial genetic complexity. QTL number and effect size. Two important and seemingly simple questions are: how many QTLs underlie a quantitative trait, and how much of the heritable variation in the trait does each QTL explain? These questions turn out to be surprisingly difficult to answer because of the following methodological problem. Unless a study samples a very large number of individuals, which has not been practical when the phenotype is genome-wide gene expression, only QTLs with the largest effect on the trait can be detected. Therefore, the observed number of loci is usually an extreme underestimate of the actual number, and the observed effect sizes represent the high end of the overall distribution of effect sizes. Moreover, a common statistical artefact, known as the Beavis effect, causes the overestimation of effect sizes of the detected loci28. Nevertheless, useful estimates can be made. The genetic architecture of most expression traits involves multiple QTLs, and most of these QTLs explain a minority of trait variation. Because all mapping studies until now have detected only a single locus for most traits, this conclusion is based primarily on what has not been detected. The argument runs as follows. For a trait with measurable heritability, it is straightforward to calculate the probability that a QTL that explains a certain fraction of trait variation will be detected in a study with a given sample size. For a single trait, a QTL is either detected or not, but when many traits are examined simultaneously, as in the case of genome-wide expression, we can ask whether the fraction with detected QTLs is as expected from the detection probability. If the detected fraction is

Genetic complexity of transcript levels Historically, most quantitative phenotypes have proved to be genetically complex, explicable only by multiple underlying loci and possibly interactions among the

864 | NOVEMBER 2006 | VOLUME 7

www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
0.30 0.25

Fraction of loci

0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Fraction of genetic variance

Low (10%)
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 ­0.2 ­0.4 ­0.6 ­0.8 Seg BY RM Seg BY Seg RM

Average (29%)
0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 ­0.1 ­0.2 ­0.3 ­0.4 ­0.5 Seg BY RM Seg BY Seg RM

High (94%)
1.5 1.0 0.5 0 ­0.5 ­1.0 ­1.5 ­2.0 ­2.5 Seg BY RM Seg BY Seg RM

Figure 1 | Most gene expression traits are affected by multiple loci. Each bar represents the fraction of QTLs that explain a percentage of genetic variance in the range on the x axis. For each trait with significant linkage(s), only the single most significant QTL is included. Data are derived from the first table in REF. 29. The panels below the plot show examples of QTLs that explain, from left to right, low, average and high percentages of genetic variance. In each panel, the left-most column shows the relative expression of the corresponding gene in all 112 segregants (seg), the next two columns show the expression in replicates of the two parent strains, and the last two columns show the expression in the segregants that inherit the QTL allele from the first and second parent strains.

Heritability
The fraction of total phenotypic variance that is attributable to additive genetic effects. Estimators with different technical definitions and biological meanings abound. This is not an inherent property of a trait; heritability depends on the nature of the genetic sample (for example, intercross, inbred lines, twins and random populations) and the space of environments surveyed.

Transgressive segregation
A distribution of trait values for a segregating population that extends significantly beyond the range defined by the progenitor strains.

lower, typical QTLs must be weaker than assumed in the calculation, and because no individual QTL can explain most of the genetic variation, there must be multiple QTLs. Such arguments have been used to estimate that in a yeast cross only 3% of expression traits are consistent with single-locus inheritance, that most traits require more than two additive QTLs, and that segregation of many traits can only be explained by very complex genetics29. In an F2 cross of 111 mice, QTLs were detected for only 27% of genes with significant genetic differences in expression, implying considerable genetic complexity given the study's high power to detect QTLs for traits with relatively simple inheritance10. A combination of genetic complexity and low statistical power probably explains the low detection rates in the human studies carried out so far16­19. Direct evidence of genetic complexity comes from detecting multiple QTLs for at least some expression traits. Moreover, even the detected QTLs typically explain only a minority of trait variation. In yeast, the median phenotypic effect of a detected QTL was 27% of genetic (heritable) variance explained, and only 23% of traits had a QTL that explained >50% of genetic variance29 (FIG. 1). Similarly, in mice10, mapped QTLs explained on average 25% of the variance in expression of the corresponding genes. In humans, effect-size

estimates averaging 27­29% have been reported for loci near the affected genes17,19. Therefore, even the strongest QTLs that underlie variation in gene expression typically explain a quarter or less of the variation. Nevertheless, routine observation of QTLs that explain a substantial fraction of phenotypic variance contradicts the infinitesimal theory of Fisher30, in which quantitative traits are determined by a very large number of loci with very small effects. QTLs with appreciable effects are also reported in studies of non-expression phenotypes31 and cannot all be explained away by the Beavis effect. The empirical results are better described by the exponential model developed by Orr32, in which large-effect mutations represent the expected initial steps in adaptation, as discussed by Farrall31 and by Barton and Keightley 33; one implication is that strong QTLs might be observed because of natural selection, and not despite it. The many forms of genetic complexity. The correspondence between genes, alleles and environments on the one hand, and phenotypes on the other, can be complex in many ways, with a parallel proliferation in terminology. Studies of the genetics of global gene expression have illuminated the prevalence of each type of complexity (FIG. 2). In yeast, most heritable transcripts show transgressive segregation29, which is consistent with the accumulation

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS

VOLUME 7 | NOVEMBER 2006 | 865

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
a Directional genetics
2.0 1.5

b Transgressive segregation
3.0 2.5

c Interacting loci
0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

log2(sample/reference)

2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0

1.0 0.5 0

­0.2 ­0.4 ­0.6 ­0.8 ­1.0 All seg BY parent RM parent All seg BY parent RM parent

­0.5 ­1.0 ­1.5

­0.5 ­1.0 All seg BY parent RM parent

­2.0

Most segregants fall between parent means

Most segregants fall outside parent means

Segregant mean differs from mid-parent mean

Figure 2 | Types of complex inheritance of transcript levels. a | Directional genetics with most segregants (seg) showing expression between the two parent values. b | Transgressive segregation with most segregants showing expression outside the two parent values. c | Genetic interaction with the segregant average expression differing from the mid-parent mean expression. In each panel, the first column shows the relative expression of the corresponding gene in all 112 segregants, and the next two columns show the expression in replicates of the two parent strains. Modified with permission from REF. 29 © (2005) National Academy of Sciences, USA.

Directional genetics
A distribution of trait values for a segregating population that is significantly concentrated within the range defined by the progenitor strains.

Non-additivity
A property of alleles at a locus, such that the trait value of heterozygous individuals is not the average of the trait values of homozygotes for each allele.

Genetic interaction
A property of alleles at different loci, such that their combined effect on a phenotype deviates from the sum of their individual effects (this is often called epistasis).

Allelic heterogeneity
The phenomenon in which a genetically diverse population harbours many different alleles at a QTL.

Gene-by-environment interaction
The effect of a locus on a trait depends on the environment, and the effect of the environment on the trait depends on the locus.

Pleiotropy
The capacity of a single mutation to affect multiple traits.

in the parental strains of a large number of alleles of modest effect. A smaller fraction of traits show directional genetics29, which is suggestive of directional selection that drives the phenotypic divergence of the parental strains. Several studies34­37 have investigated the prevalence of non-additivity, where gene expression in F1 heterozygotes differs from the mid-value of the homozygous parental strains. Questions of additivity depend on the measurement scale -- values can be additive on some scales but non-additive on others. Moreover, microarrays yield linear measures of gene expression only within certain ranges. Despite these caveats, experimental follow-up has validated the finding from microarrays that nonadditivity is common in D. melanogaster, A. thaliana and maize, and that its extreme forms, overdominance and underdominance, are not rare34­37. Genetic interactions have been observed in several studies, and a systematic scan for interacting QTLs found non-additive interactions among loci for roughly half of all transcripts38. The detection of interacting QTLs will be aided by methodological advances 39, as well as by future studies with much larger sample sizes40. The detection of population association at only a minority of loci previously identified by linkage in families18 indicates that many individual QTLs which underlie expression traits display considerable allelic heterogeneity. The effects of genetic variation on gene expression are condition-dependent, and such geneby-environment interactions have been documented in comparisons of inbred strains across conditions6,41­43. In multicellular organisms, the local conditions differ in each tissue, and genetic variation with a cell-typedependent influence on gene expression represents a special case of gene-by-environment interaction. Studies of gene expression in mouse brain13, haematopoietic

stem cells12, fat44 and liver10,44, and in rat kidney and fat11, have found that the genetic basis of variation in a gene's expression is sometimes shared between different tissues but is often unique to each tissue45. Studies in flies and mice have also shown extensive sex dependence of gene expression6,21. Finally, the existence of loci that affect the expression of many genes (see below), or individual genes across many conditions, establishes pleiotropy as a common feature of the genetics of gene expression.

Local versus distant QTLs Transcript levels differ from other phenotypes in that each transcript has a corresponding encoding gene with a known position in the genome. Therefore, because mapping studies reveal the locations of QTLs, an expression QTL can be immediately classified as `local' (near the genomic location of the gene encoding the transcript) or `distant' (elsewhere in the genome). Because mapping studies do not reveal the underlying molecular nature of QTLs, we prefer the strictly positional terms local and distant to the commonly used terms cis- and trans-linking, which have implicit mechanistic connotations. In fact, both local and distant QTLs can include polymorphisms in cis-acting and trans-acting factors, under the classic definition of the terms46­48. The casual conflation of different usages of cis and trans has resulted in a significant amount of confusion. Some uses describe the pattern of co-inheritance of trait and locus (-linking), whereas others describe the mechanism of action of a locus with respect to a trait (-acting). Neither distinction captures any information about the molecular nature of the loci, that is, whether the mutation alters a protein or a functional RNA or acts at the level of DNA in cis-regulation.

866 | NOVEMBER 2006 | VOLUME 7

www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
a Local regulatory variation
Neighbouring gene Cis-regulatory (allele-specific) Autoregulatory Feedback ?

b Distant regulatory variation

Figure 3 | Local and distant regulatory variation. a | Local regulatory variation. From left to right, regulation by a neighbouring gene, cis-regulatory variation, autoregulatory variation and feedback variation. The red star denotes the regulatory variant, the bar with arrow denotes the coding region of the gene (dark green), the expression of which is affected by the variant, and the circle denotes the protein product of the gene. The blue rectangle to the left of the coding region represents an upstream regulatory element. b | Distant regulatory variation. Arrows are drawn from a gene with regulatory variation to the gene or genes it regulates. On the left, each regulatory variant affects expression of a different gene. On the right, a regulatory variant affects expression of many genes. Such a variant would show up as a linkage hot spot (FIG. 4).

Some arbitrariness is introduced by the definition of a marker being local or distant. Local is most commonly defined as being within some physical distance of a chosen point in the gene. Statistical arguments can be used to choose this distance so that the probability that a linked marker will fall that close to the gene by chance is small1. More sophisticated definitions can include considerations of whether the gene is close to the linkage peak: for example, does it fall within the confidence region for the linkage localization49? Local linkage can arise as a result of several scenarios (FIG. 3a). First, the linkage might be due to a polymorphism in a nearby gene that regulates the gene for which expression is being measured. This can occur either by chance or owing to a nonrandom close location in the genome of regulators and their targets. Statistical arguments can be used to ensure that there is only a small probability of a chance occurrence. Second, and more typically, local linkage will be due to a polymorphism (or polymorphisms) in the gene itself. Such polymorphisms might act in cis by altering classic cis-acting regulatory elements and consequently changing transcription; they could also act in cis posttranscriptionally, by altering message stability or by altering sites that are targets for messenger RNA processing and decay. Polymorphisms in the gene might also act in trans (that is, affecting the expression of both alleles in a heterozygous diploid) by triggering

feedback loops either directly through changes in the coding sequence of an autoregulatory gene or indirectly by changing the coding sequence or message levels that are sensed and responded to by the cell. Classic cis/trans tests of allele-specific expression in a diploid hybrid can be used to distinguish among these possibilities49,50. Distant regulatory variation typically acts in trans through the downstream effects of coding or cis-regulatory polymorphisms in different types of genes, with transcription factors being the most obvious example. But distant regulation can occur with many degrees of indirectness, including non-cell-autonomous effects and beyond (for example, a polymorphism that influences diet choice would affect the expression of genes that respond to specific nutrients and exogenous molecules). Moreover, the existence of regulatory elements that are located far from the genes they regulate 51­53 means that distant loci can act in cis. Even more complications arise from DNA elements that act directly to regulate distant genes through physical contact; interchromosomal interactions can result in `cis-regulatory' DNA that acts on a different chromosome54. A genetically diffuse version of this phenomenon is due to variation in the total genome-wide number of binding motifs for a transcription factor; the binding of the factor to non-functional `cis-regulatory' DNA titrates the proteins out of the nucleoplasm, decreasing their availability with effects in trans55.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS

VOLUME 7 | NOVEMBER 2006 | 867

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS
Box 3 | Units of measure influence contributions to variation in gene expression
An explicit statistical model is central to any attempt to address the relative contributions of different kinds of QTLs to phenotypic variation. But apart from the problem of what qualifies as significant is the problem of what units are being counted. We might want to count the number of gene expression traits that show each kind of genetic basis, or we might want to count the number of genetic loci that underlie the inferred linkages; a major source of confusion is that both traits and loci are often called `genes'. In other contexts, the quantity of interest might be the number of linkages, in which case 