An audio file tagging mobile game mTagATune
﻿ mTagATune[1] is a mobile game based on TagATune[2]. 
mTagATune implements the concept of  GWAP[3] and seizes the capabilities 
and wide acceptance of current smartphones[4]. GWAP promotes the creation 
of computer games that encourage people to do voluntary work. mTagATune 
implements a game that collects information on audio files to facilitate future 
searches on them. By means of a collaborative game, mTagATune enables an 
ubiquitous collection of information on audio files that can later be used in 
search results. 
Keywords:  TagATune, GWAP, Ericsson, Mobile Applications, JAVA, 
1 Introduction 
Despite technological advances, computers still do not have the creativity or 
perception human beings have by nature. Due to this fact, computers today cannot 
subjectively classify certain sets of elements such as audio files, image files, etc. 
Currently, data bases exist that contain thousands of audio files, although searching 
these repositories with subjective criteria is not possible due to the fact that each 
audio file would have to be tagged first with words that necessarily convey subjective 
meanings. 
One solution to this problem is using the technique known as Human Computation 
[5]. This technique views the human brain as a processor inside a distributed system, 
where each can process a small part of a much larger computation. 
Currently, there are millions of people around the world who use digital games as a 
form of entertainment. Many of these games can be accessed through the Internet. 
The massive expansion of mobile telephones allows users to play games where they 
could not play before: during trips or while queuing at the bank. The first games 
launched for mobile telephones were very simple due to physical limitations, but with 
the new generation of cellphones, the so-called smartphones, games are becoming 
more and more complex, with better performance, even using resources such as 
global positioning systems and the Internet. 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1244
One branch of Human Computation, called Games with a Purpose (GWAP) 
promotes the idea of creating games in which the activity people engage in forms part 
of a processing that produces information, which can later be used in other successive 
processings.  
GWAP encourages people to do voluntary work, but not with the intention of 
obtaining income, as is the case of employment. If we think about the task of tagging 
music fragments, the amount of elements requiring processing is enormous which 
would require a tremendous workforce to complete it, yielding the task impractical 
due to cost. 
Smartphones, with their many advantages, allow for the implementation of GWAP 
on mobile telephones, providing permanent access to the games and increasing the 
amount of players (and, as a result, the amount of hours dedicated to each game as 
well). This increases the data processed, which gives better use to the time players 
spend on each game. 
2 Bases 
As we have mentioned before, Human Computation posits the theory that the brain 
can be seen as a small processor inside a distributed system, where each brain can 
process a small part of a much larger computation. Human Computation is a 
technique in which a computation executes its function by delegating certain steps to 
humans. In traditional computation, humans use a computer to solve a problem: the 
human provides the computer with a formalized description of the problem and 
receives a solution they must interpret. Human Computation reverts the roles; the 
computer asks a human or group of humans to solve a problem and collects, interprets 
and integrates their solutions. 
GWAP is a combination of the Human Computation technique and the billions of 
people around the world willing to invest time playing online. The concept of GWAP 
could be defined as games in which each participant processes a part of a larger 
computation, which is solved by combining the processings contributed by each 
player. In this context, “processing” makes reference to the mental exercise the player 
engages in to solve the part of the computation they are assigned. Some examples of 
GWAP can be found in work by Luis von Ahn[6]; the Google engine has an 
experimental version of a GWAP for the classification of images, called Google 
Image Labeler[7]. The goal of the Google Image Labeler game is to generate tags 
associated to images that can be used to improve image search results. The 
mechanism of the game consists of showing two users an image, and for every match, 
both users get points. These points motivate users to input a large amount of tags. 
Afterwards, when a word has been entered many times for the same image, it is 
assumed that it describes the image correctly and fit to be used in the search engine. 
Note that in this mechanism, players have no knowledge of who is their team mate 
during the game and have no way to communicate, thus it is impossible for users to 
cheat by agreeing on the words they will use.  
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1245
3 Description of mTagATune 
mTagATune[1], mobile TagATune[2], is a GWAP application for mobile devices, 
smartphones specifically, based on TagATune.  
The growing trend in the use of mobile devices and the advantages they offer 
encourages an environment adequate for the application of GWAP in mobile phones, 
making it possible for people to play in more places, thus increasing the amount of 
data published.  
3.1 How the Game Works 
mTagATune is a mobile application that implements the concept of GWAP and 
allows for audio file tagging. The goal of mTagATune is to collect semantic 
information to be used in search results and further indexation. 
When a user enters the game, after registering, they are assigned a partner. Because 
this type of application cannot ensure that the user is paying attention, once the 
partner is selected, both are asked to confirm that they are ready to begin the game. In 
case one of the users takes longer than stipulated to confirm presence, both users will 
be informed that the game has been canceled.  
When the game begins, each participant is given an audio entry and both have to 
contribute words that describe it. Based on the descriptions entered by both 
participants, each must determine individually whether they are both listening to the 
same piece or not. If both participants choose the right answer, they obtain points. The 
goal of the game is to obtain as many points as possible. 
3.2 Pair Selection 
Participants pairs are selected at the beginning of each game without the users 
knowing who is paired with them. Following is an explanation of the mechanism 
implemented for this purpose.  
Players are picked together on the basis of similar amounts of points. For this 
purpose, it is necessary to limit scoring differences, for example, if a user obtains 500 
points and the limit for a game is 100 points, this user will be able to play with others 
that have between 400 and 600 points. The main disadvantage of this system is the 
delay in finding a suitable match for a certain player, which is greater the more 
reduced the amount of users. To solve this problem, it was decided that the limit 
increased with time, which allows for a greater range and increases the possibility of 
forming pairs. A waiting time limit was also introduced – if the limit is reached and 
there are no matches, the player is assigned a partner no matter their score. If there are 
no other players waiting, a game is created exclusively for the user. To avoid pairing 
new users, which might discourage them because both might enter a small amount of 
tags, it was determined that inexperienced users should be paired with players that 
have a long history of games. This way, the chances of winning games, and therefore 
gaining interest in the game, are greatly increased. 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1246
3.3 Description of a Game 
First, the game waits for both users to download the audio file to their devices for two 
reasons: because both must discover whether they are listening to the same file at the 
same time, and because the length of the track determines the time the user is given to 
enter tags and decide whether it is the same fragment as their partner's. Once each 
user has their file, the round begins. During the round, the player must enter words 
that represent what they hear. As they do, the words are sent to their partner and 
shown in a fraction of the screen, so both players have real-time access to the words 
entered by each. When the track ends, no more words can be added.  
Once the file has ended, players are given a few seconds to determine whether their 
fragment was the same as their partner's. Players will receive points each time both 
pick the right option. 
Thus, if one or both get the wrong answer, non of them will receive points during 
that round. Figure 1 shows the screen players see during each round, which shows the 
tags both entered together with the file data and options. 
It was decided that the player who got the right answer even though their partner 
did not would not receive points either because the goal of the game is to achieve 
cooperation and not competitiveness. This way, each player would have to 
concentrate on getting the right answer and in describing their file as well as possible 
to increase their chances of the other player getting the right answer as well.  
A player might decide whether they are listening to the same file before the file 
ends, which may block out data entry and reduce the possibility of getting the same 
answer for both players. Although this option may make the player enter less words, 
notice that these cases add a new piece of information: the instant in which the choice 
was made.  
In some cases, one player will enter tags that are completely opposite to the tags 
the other generates, in which case they will need no further proof to decide. 
Therefore, a later processing of the information could determine which words 
potentially express the opposite to the way in which the file is classified. At all times 
during the round, both players know whether their partner has decided. 
Once both players have made their choice, the score they get this round is show on 
screen, as well as whether the answer each player gave was correct or incorrect. If one 
of the players chooses not provide an answer, the system will assume that they gave 
an incorrect answer and none of them will obtain points. 
 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1247
 Fig. 1. Game in progress 
mTagATune is a collaborative, non-competitive game in which players only 
receive points if both get the right answer. mTagATune gives a natural incentive for 
players to enter data that correctly describes the audio file. If it were a competitive 
game by, for example, granting points to the player who gets the right answer even if 
their partner does not, players would be motivated to win by harming their partner. 
This would cause them to enter wrong and malicious data to confuse their partner and 
make them pick the wrong answer, which would result in wrong data due to the 
implicit competitive nature of the game. 
3.4 Scoring System 
Players are given points in the following manner:  
When both players answer correctly for the first time, each player gets 60 points. 
The second time, they get 70 points each and 80 if they answer correctly a third time. 
This way, two players that answer correctly three times during a game will obtain 210 
points each. These correct answers do not necessarily have to be consecutive, that is, 
if a pair gets the first fragment right (and receives 60 points), fails to provide a correct 
answer for the second fragment and does so for the third one, both players will 
receive 70 points for the second correct answer in the game, earning a total of 130 
points each.  
The aim of this scoring system is to stimulate the attention of the user throughout 
the game, as a user that answers correctly in the three rounds of a game will receive 
more points than a user who answers correctly in three rounds from different games. 
In the first case, they will receive 210 points, while in the second, they will obtain 180 
points. In this way, users to maintain a good performance throughout the game obtain 
more benefits.  
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1248
3.5 Bonus Round 
Another way of playing is what is known as bonus round. The bonus round is 
activated during a common game, when both players get the three rounds right, thus 
obtaining the maximum score for a game. 
This round does not generate tags on the files given, but serves to create a 
relationship between them. When both players get the three rounds of a common 
game rights, they are automatically notified that they can take part in a bonus round 
(they can turn down the offer). 
If both players agree to participate in the bonus round, the system will select three 
audio files that will be played for the users. When the files end, the users have 10 
seconds to decide which of the three fragments is the most dissimilar, if both coincide 
in their choice, they get 50 points. Figure 2 shows a screen in the bonus round, which 
shows the controls players can use to select answer. 
 
Fig. 2.  Screen of a bonus round  
3.6 Single-Player Mode 
mTagATune has a single-player mode for when a player enters the game when there 
are no other players to pair them with, or the total number of players is even, making 
it impossible for the system to assign a partner for the player. 
The single-player mode allows for a single user to start a game at any time, 
independently from the amount of users connected at the time. This mode is 
transparent to the user, as the place of the other player is occupied by a bot that 
reproduces a series of rounds that have already been played by real users. The bot is 
an algorithm that reproduces a player's behavior in a previous round.  
If there is no available partner for the player upon entering the game, the player 
selects a saved game depending on the level of experience of the user. For rounds to 
be reproduced, it is a fundamental prerequisite that they resulted in a positive 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1249
outcome, i.e., both players coincided in their choices for each round and that their 
choices were right. There has to have been a bonus round in the game as well. This is 
necessary for the system to be able to assume that the entered tags can be considered 
valid. 
Once the the rounds are assigned, the user is notified that they have a partner, a bot 
(the user will never know that they are actually playing with a bot). During the course 
of each round, the bot enters the tags in the same sequence in which they were entered 
by the emulated user. Once the audio fragment has been reproduced in its entirety, the 
game evaluates the tags entered by the real user and determines whether it is the same 
track in both. To do this, the bot analyzes the percentage of matches between the set 
of tags entered by their partner and the set of tags for the audio fragment they have.  
The bonus round in a single-player game is also based on a game that was stored 
beforehand. The game will select a saved bonus round and the bot will choose the 
same options the original player chose. 
An important advantage is that the result of a game of this modality is just as 
productive as the results of ordinary games. The player will choose whether they are 
listening to the same fragment as their partner based on the tags entered by the bot, 
which is in turn based on the actions of a real user. On the other hand, the bot will 
take their decision based on a comparison of the tags entered by a real user and those 
provided earlier by another real user. 
3.7 Technologies  
mTagATune is a mobile application written in Java for Android phones that consists 
of a client and a server. The full development is based on open, free use technologies. 
mTagATune uses Tomcat to contain the Java servlets in charge of handling the logic 
and data storage. PostgreSQL was used to store data and Hibernate was used to map 
objects to the relational database.  
For the purpose of communication between the server and its clients, mTagATune 
uses a Server Push mechanism called Comet [10] that allows for information to be 
sent asynchronously from the server to the clients. The Comet implementation was 
CometD, developed by the Dojo Foundation, which implements the Comet 
mechanism with Jetty Continuations. To handle the messages, CometD uses the 
Bayeux protocol, which sends the messages through named channels. These messages 
can be sent from the server to the client, from the client to the server or among 
servers, using these channels. 
For the serialization of the Bayeux messages and the domain objects, mTagATune 
uses JSON. This is a light data exchange format, easy to read and write for humans, 
and easy to interpret and generate for machines. 
The client was developed using Java for the Android operating system for many 
reasons, the first being its free license as well as that of the tools used for the 
development, and also because of the wide acceptance it has gained during the past 
year. The architecture used allows for the development of clients for other operating 
systems, such as iOS, and for users of different devices and operating systems to 
interact in a game. 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1250
4 Adapting TagATune for Mobile Devices 
mTagATune is an adaptation of TagATune for mobile devices. mTagATune 
introduces some modifications to TagATune that allow it to improve the gaming 
experience and its performance in mobile devices. Following, we will describe the 
aspects of TagATune that were modified for mTagATune. 
Given that the quality of Internet access in mobile devices can vary greatly, we 
decided that the audio files should be downloaded separately before each round starts, 
and each round should begin only after each file has been successfully downloaded. 
Although this characteristic introduces waiting time at the beginning of the rounds, it 
allows us to be sure that the file has been successfully downloaded and is available for 
full reproduction throughout the round. This also releases the connection for sending 
information about the round itself, so that, if the quality of the connection is low, it 
can be played correctly. Because mobile device screens are smaller and of lower 
resolution as compared to those of desktop computers, it was necessary to redesing 
the screens to accommodate all the elements of the user interface, eliminating 
unnecesary ones. Figure 3 shows a screen of a TagATune game. 
 
Fig. 3. Pantalla de una partida en TagATune 
If we compare the TagATune screen to that of mTagATune, we can clearly see 
many changes that go beyond aesthetics. The daily high scores list was deleted 
together with the play and volume controls. This simplification was aimed at focusing 
the attention of the player on producing tags only. The warning saying that the partner 
has already chosen was replaced with a pop-up, and in its place we put the voting 
buttons. Lastly, the remaining time, score and progress bar were located in a single 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1251
line to reduce the space they took up. Similar changes were introduced in the 
remaining screens, such as the bonus screen and the previous games screen. Another 
problem with mobile devices are keyboards. Firstly, the average typing speed is 
significantly lower than that attained with desktop computers. To mitigate this issue, 
we modified a feature in the original game–in TagATune, players were supposed to 
make up their minds during the audio reproduction, while in mTagATune, we decided 
to add 5 seconds of extra time before this action is allowed, so that during the game 
the players can focus on writing, using the extra time to analyze their partner's input 
and make the right choice. Secondly, many devices do not have physical keyboards, 
but virtual ones inside the screen itself. This is a setback for the player, which is why 
we have considered a redesign of the interface to integrate this kind of devices. 
Because it is to be expected that players will receive incoming calls or text 
messages during a game, we decided to add a confirmation related to the user paying 
attention to the game right before each round starts. This confirmation has a timeout 
and, if it's reached without confirmation from the player, the game is cancelled and 
the partner is notified, so that they are not stalled waiting for the game to resume and 
can begin a new game.  
The great popularity of the Android mobile operating system, its user community 
the proposed open development model and the agile application distribution 
mechanism through its online store, “Android Market”, provides an optimal media for 
the development and validation of the results. This was the hypothesis upon which we 
based our decision to choose Android [8] over iOS[9], another leader in the mobile 
device market. 
5 Conclusiones 
This work shows a way to obtain information about audio files that is automatically 
validated by the very agreement of the players on the subject, a concept that 
constitutes a step towards simplicity and improvement over the manual mechanisms 
that are currently used for tasks such as labelling music. 
With mTagATune, we demonstrate that the concept of GWAP, particularly that of 
TagATune, is applicable to mobile devices, so long as they have the characteristics of 
a smartphone, although in this particular case we have only used those with Android 
as their operating system. 
It was also shown that this adaptation has no negative impact in quality or 
playability. Although changes were made in the application architecture, in some 
playability aspects and in the user interface, none of these changes has a negative 
impact on the player or represents a problem for the normal development of a game. 
This adaptation for mobile devices takes the concept of GWAP to a completely 
accepted environment in countries with wide access to mobile technology, something 
that will soon come to developing countries such as our own. This will increase the 
amount of time users can spend on the game. The fact that these games are available 
for mobile devices makes it possible to play them during free time, something that 
was unthinkable a few years ago because they were only available for conventional 
computers. 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1252
We are currently planning to test the usability of mTagATune to test its 
performance in other mobile devices, together with an evaluation of other mobile 
applications such as AvatarFacedget, a widget that allows users to publish single 
avatars or avatar galleries in social networking sites. 
References 
1. Díaz J., Queiruga C., Ferraresso A., Larghi J.: “mTagATune: mobile TagATune”. In 
Proceedings of ICMB 2011, 10th International Conference on Mobile Business, Como, 
Italia, June 2011. http://www.mbusiness2011.org/ 
2. Law E., Von Ahn L, Dannenberg R. and Crawford M: "Tagatune: a game for music and 
sound annotation". In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Music Information 
Retreival, Vienna, Austria, 2007. 
3. Von Ahn L.: "Games with a purpose". In IEEE Computer Magazine, June 2006. Pages 9698. 
4. Smartphones: http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smartphone 
5. Von Ahn L.: “Human computation”. In K-CAP '07, Proceedings of the 4th international 
conference on Knowledge capture, 2007.  
6. Von Ahn L.:. http://www.cs.cmu.edu//biglou/ 
7. Google Image Labeler, http://images.google.com/imagelabeler/ 
8. Android. http://developer.android.com 
9. iPhone OS. http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPhone_OS 
10.Gravelle, Rob. "Comet Programming: Using Ajax to Simulate Server Push",   
http://www.webreference.com/programming/javascript/rg28/. 
 
 
 
 
CACIC 2011 - XVII CONGRESO  ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN 1253
