Non Ionizing Radiation development of fixed stations that allow their monitoring through the Internet Network Monitors
﻿ The present work aims to describe the development of a fixed station 
to monitor NIR. Using Internet access, this monitoring detection service enables 
public display of the location of the station, the radiation level, and its evolution 
throughout the day. The design takes into account availability, accessibility, and 
feasibility of the technological and human resources in our country. 
 
Key Words: NIR, Microcontroller, Current Legislation, Probe, GPS. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
An electromagnetic signal transports energy from one point to another in space, as a 
result of a composition between the magnetic and electric field. Transmitting devices 
of this type of energy can be artificial, whenever its presence is the product of human 
intervention, or natural, whenever human action does not take place. 
 
Natural fields originate from atmospheric discharges and from cosmic and solar noise. 
Their levels are normally less than those from artificial fields. Living organisms can 
tolerate them perfectly because, since the beginning of life, their evolution has taken 
place in the presence of such fields. 
 
In recent decades, as a result of technological development in communication and 
electronics, the emission of electromagnetic radiation has increased considerably.  
 
These emissions originate mainly from transmitters used in radio electric 
communications, tools and machinery which produces sparks or can generate electric 
signals, starter systems in engines, and devices used in industry, science, and 
medicine, as well as in our homes. 
 
Receivers may be communication or navigations systems, different types of devices 
(industrial, scientific or medical), computers, or engines. In addition, living organisms 
(animals or plants) can also behave as a receptor antenna, depending on their 
geometry (size) and the elements in their composition. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 752
With IONIZING RADIATION (IR), the most important effect is the ionization of 
matter molecules; for instance: X-Rays, Gamma radiation, and cosmic radiation. 
Risks associated with the use of X-Rays and Gamma radiation has been thoroughly 
studied in medical, nuclear, and industrial applications. Their effects are widely 
known, possibly leading to severe consequences. 
 
Therefore, IR has been the focus of special consideration, developing safety 
regulations and establishing exposure limits to protect people who suffer from 
exposition in their daily labor, as well as the public in general [1]. 
 
The term NON IONIZING RADIATION (NIR) is applied to a group of radiation 
which shares the electromagnetic spectrum with IR. NIR, as opposed to IR, does not 
have enough energy associated to alter molecular structures or break chemical bonds, 
and hence to originate the process of cellular ionization.  
 
NIR comprise a large part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Such radiation cannot be 
perceived by human senses unless its intensity reaches values large enough to 
manifest itself through thermal effects. The exception corresponds to a very narrow 
band within the spectrum, visible light, which is detected by the eye. 
 
In recent years, research has focused attention on the possible non thermal or 
biological effects of NIR generated at low levels and under prolonged exposure [2]. 
The results obtained so far do not permit neither assure nor deny damaging effects on 
human health. Thus, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends the use of 
the Principle of Caution. 
 
The principle, of difficult application, has been somewhat quantified by Swiss 
authorities with the development of Installation Limit Values (ILV) [3]. These values 
were implemented in Switzerland in the year 2000 and cover different bandwidths, 
ranging from the electric network to cellular phones, AM and FM stations, TV 
signals, and even radar. 
 
General exposure to artificial sources of radiofrequencies and microwaves has 
increased exponentially in the last decades. Among the most common sources, the 
following are worth noting: the wide range of telecommunications, Internet use (WIFi, Wi-Max), radio and TV stations, electric energy generation and distribution, 
industry, medicine, research, education, and home appliances. 
 
NIR exposure and its possible effects concern not only authorities, but also workers 
suffering from exposure, as well as the general public. 
 
When dealing with radio electric emissions, such as those originated in 
communication systems, public and private concerns meet on the same ground, 
coming from such different fields like health, the environment, urbanism, and 
economics. Thus, appropriate regulation becomes necessary to reduce uncertainty and 
to allow, at the same time, the adequate development of the interests and the 
protection of the rights of the parties involved. 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 753
 
The unification of criteria for NIR measurement and the interpretation of the results 
have become necessary. Currently, great concern in the international community on 
these parameters has given place to the development of a set of standards called 
Standard Harmonization or Regulation Harmonization. 
 
2. State of the Matter 
 
2.1 Standards Organizations and their Measurements. 
 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has taken great effort in this issue. The 
International Commission for Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) is part of 
the WHO system devoted to assess and inform international organizations, national 
governments, local communities, and society in general. It develops recommendations 
regarding NIR and health, including optic radiation, ultrasound, and infrasound.  
 
Vecchia in the year 2008 in a lecture at the COPITEC commented that the process of 
electromagnetic energy absorption depends on the frequency, height, and mass of the 
person acting as a receiving antenna, as well as on the energy involved. Thus, specific 
absorption rates (SAR) have been defined and they have been established at 0.4 W/kg 
for workers and 0.08 W/kg for the general public [2]. 
 
In this framework, defining parameters to measure and establish the concept of risk or 
radiation threshold becomes relevant. 
 
In the case of thermal effects, threshold values are based on the SAR, which is the 
potency absorption capacity per unit of mass. Considering the difficulties in 
measuring this parameter in practice, values are stated in units of electric and 
magnetic fields and the potency density equivalent to the plane wave. 
 
Under low frequency rates, the magnetic field becomes significant because the 
electric field attenuates rapidly. The variable magnetic field, due to the Law of 
Faraday, induces currents in the human body which may affect the person. For 
instance, the magnetic field at 30 meters from a high voltage tower is 0.8 µT1, while a 
hair drier ranges from 0.01 to 7 µT at a distance of 30 centimeters. A microwave oven 
ranges from 4 to 8 µT. 
 
In the case of cellular communications, working at high frequencies, the electric 
and/or magnetic field is measured, expressing it as potency density equivalent to the 
plane wave. For example, an FM station emits from 10 to 100 times more potency 
than a cellular communications station. 
 
                                                 
1 µT : micro Tesla: Tesla = weber/m2, Unit of Magnetic Induction or Magnetic Flux Density 
(Vector B) 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 754
In our country, standards are based on Resolution 202/95 from the Ministry of Health, 
resulting from studies dated back to 1988 [4, 5]. These standards also follow the 
recommendations of the ICNIRP [2], except for those in the frequency range lower 
than 10 MHz.  
 
The SAR is proportionate to the square of the intensity of the internal electric field 
and is measured in watts per kilogram for the body. Thermal imaging is used to 
determine distribution. Local measurements are carried out with probes. 
 
With these methods, the energy absorbed can be determined, as well as the time of 
exposure and the internal distribution of energy. It depends on: a) the parameters of 
the field; b) the characteristics of the body exposed; and c) the effects of the land and 
the reflection of other objects. 
 
The response to exposure depends on the average SAR in the entire body and its 
distribution. This response varies in different species and, within the same species, 
with the genetic variability of each individual. Same SAR values in animals and 
humans do not necessarily produce the same biological responses. 
 
The following graph shows maximum threshold levels in potency density equivalent 
to the plane wave for Argentine general population (Curve C) and work related 
exposure (Curve A). 
 
Note that of the three curves in the general population (B, C, and D), even when C 
was selected and is currently the standard, curve D is the one that matches ICNIRP 
recommendations. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Threshold Limit Values – Potency Density [4, 5] 
 
 
 
 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 755
2.2 Standards 
 
Setting standards can be tackled from different viewpoints, which are not necessarily 
incompatible: 
 
1. From the standpoint of the general public who dreads the consequences of 
the lack of control. 
2. From the point of view of service providing companies that aim to provide a 
service at a profit, but avoiding environmental conflicts. 
3. From local government concerns in which the state needs to play social and 
auditing roles without entering into additional costs. 
4. From the professional point of view, requiring clear, simple, uniform, and 
appropriate regulations. 
 
2.3 Comments on Resolution Number 3690  
 
In 1995, with Resolution 202/95 [6], the Ministry of Health and Social Action agreed 
“to approve the National Safety Standard for radio frequency exposure in the range of 
100 KHz and 300 GHz, according to the safety standards manual for radio frequency 
exposure.” [4, 5].  
 
Later, in the year 2000, the Secretary of Communications, with Resolution N° 530 
[7], ratified the standard and established that “…the National Communications 
Commission (CNC) shall report in its due time the findings of new research which 
may require updating to what is established hereinto, to ensure the wellbeing of the 
population subject to such radiation exposure.” 
 
Finally, the CNC, with Resolution 3690 in 2004 [8], set the norms that regulated sites 
emitting radio frequencies and determined the application of such regulation, 
requiring the intervention of a professional certified by the Professional Council of 
Telecommunication Engineering, Electronics and Computer Science (COPITEC), 
with national jurisdiction. 
 
2.4  NIR Measurements  
 
Growing social concern has forced local governments to carry out radiation 
measurement on their own, purchasing imported devices without the services of 
specialized professionals, and, commonly, without following the periodical protocols 
to calibrate the equipment. In other cases, local governments have required service 
providers to record radiation measurements occasionally (once or twice a year). 
 
Regularly, the results of such measurements are not clearly presented to the 
population; hence, an increase of social concern has resulted.  
 
Experiences in other countries regarding this problem reveal the joint actions taken by 
the public and private sector. In our country, a Code of Good Practice is under 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 756
development between the Argentine Federation of Local Governments and the 
companies which operate cellular communications. 
 
In addition, the Foundation for the Development of Telecommunications, Electronics 
and Computer Science (FUNDETEC), under the wing of COPITEC and working with 
a consulting organization from FAM, has developed a NIR fixed monitoring device 
whose results are published at http://rni.copitec.org.ar.  
 
Thus, using Internet, anybody can access remotely and review the existing levels of 
NIR (compared to the maximum threshold) in the area where the measuring device is 
set, upon request from a local government. The equipment has been developed by 
Argentine professionals, and their performance match imported equipment at a cost 
significantly lower and with additional features.  
 
 
2.5  Comparison of Standards 
 
Given the diversity of criteria regarding our regulation when dealing with NIR at the 
high frequency range, i.e. cellular communication, FM, AM, open TV, a suitable 
approach is perform a comparative analysis with other standards such as those 
recommended by the ICNIRP [2] (in use in the European Community) and those 
adopted in other countries. 
 
The following graph compares the Argentine standards to the ICNIRP 
recommendation and the regulation standards of Canada and the United States, for the 
general population. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Threshold Limit Values – Electric Field 
 
The graph shows that our standards, for frequencies higher to 10 MHz are equivalent 
to the ICNIRP recommendation and similar to Canada; while the United States begins 
to match Argentina at 30 MHz. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 757
Hence, Argentina has a regulatory framework more rigorous than its equivalent in the 
United States in the range below 30 MHz, but less than the recommended ICNIRP 
standard. Furthermore, the standards are practically equivalent to the case of Canada. 
 
Note that standards are based only on energy and thermal issues and not on biological 
effects. 
 
 
3. Development of a NIR Remote Measuring Unit. 
 
3.1 Conceptual Diagram of the Measuring Process 
 
Conceptually, the system can be visualized as follows: 
 
 
Figure 3: Conceptual Diagram 
 
For our system, it developed into the following electric diagram: 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Electric Diagram 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 758
The measuring device is a calibrated PROBE (antenna) which translates into electrical 
values the intensity of electromagnetic radiation interacting with it. 
 
Such values are registered by a MICRO block (microcontroller), establishing 
communications and operating the whole system. 
 
A GPS device can determine the geographical location of the system with great 
precision, as well as the location registered by the MICRO. 
 
For GPS outgoing messages, a protocol NMEA [9] is used, filtering through software 
only the GGA output. Considering that this event occurs once every second 
synchronized with UTC time, it was used as time set. In other words, MICRO obtains 
time, latitude, longitude, and bit data, validating the recorded data every time the GPS 
delivers it. 
 
For example, the following GGA chain might be delivered by the GPS: 
 
$GPGGA,002153.000,3342.6618,N,11751.3858,W,1,10,1.2,27.0,M,-4.2,M,,0000*5E 
 
The location, along with the PROBE data, is sent to the MODEM block. Based on the 
GPRS/GSM standard for cellular communications, the device connects to a remote 
server wirelessly, via Internet. The server stores the measurements and presents the 
recorded values of all remote devices on a webpage, available to the general public. 
 
The PROBE is an active device which generally includes a display and is battery 
operated. It may have an RS232 interface for initialization and operates under a 
licensed protocol. The prototype includes a battery charger. The device charges from 
00:00 a.m. to 06:00 a.m. to avoid interference; during this period the equipment 
remains inactive. 
 
The MODEM, with TCP/IP protocol included, solves any access conflict between the 
remote units and the server. A Motorola G24 MODEM is used in this case, based on 
an AT licensed command set [10]. 
 
The battery permits operation during power shortages. It lasts for 24 hours. 
 
The prototype is set up on a 10 x 20 centimeter base and has five RS232 interfaces: 
for the MODEM, the GPS, and the PROBE (with galvanic insulation to avoid errors), 
and two interfaces for general use and future applications. 
 
The equipment is set up with a 12V 7AH battery of free maintenance in a plastic 
waterproof cabinet. 
 
3.2 A few Considerations about Design 
 
An Atmel microcontroller was chosen for this system: the ATmega 162 [11, 12], 
programmed in “C” Language with a third part IDE, on a PC with Atmels kit 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 759
STK500. However, similar software could have been used, such as Microchip or 
Freescale.  
 
The size of executable code is approximately 5 KB. Special attention was paid to 
situations that could freeze the system; for instance when waiting for a MODEM 
response that never reaches the server due to a malfunction or excessive delay (non 
operative network), or other problems with the service. 
 
 
The basic steps for a successful link are: 
 
a) Modem initialization and logging into the GSM network. 
b) ISP connection request. The network assigns a dynamic IP. 
c) Server remote port access. 
d) Data transmission, when the previous steps have been successfully fulfilled. 
e) Port closed and MODEM turned off. 
 
During this procedure, PROBE measurements are not recorded, because the intense 
and proximate signal from the MODEM could interfere with them. Measurement 
registration resumes once the MODEM is turned off. In addition, the PROBE does not 
have a galvanic connection with the rest of the equipment to avoid altering the results. 
 
Measurement criteria are based on recommendations requiring a series of samples – 
in this case 36 values are taken at 10 seconds intervals – during 6 minutes. Later the 
average is calculated and the maximum is recorded. This method yields results which 
represent the effects on human exposure to NIR. 
 
Given the type of PROBE selected, which is wide bandwidth, the Argentine norm 
determines that the maximum threshold levels shall not exceed 200 µW/cm2, either on 
average nor maximum levels.  
 
The equivalence relationship between units is: 
 
2
0
2
m
W
Z
m
V







  
22 100 cm
W
m
W 
 
Where Zo: vacuum impedance = 120 PI   377 ohms 
 
3.3 Operation 
 
The remote station sends information of radio frequency electric field and location 
determined by the GPS with the GPRS module. Then, it logs into a web server at the 
processing center, storing the data in an SQL database. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 760
Stored data is then inputted to the graphing software to locate the remote station on a 
city map. Google Maps are used to locate the monitoring station, as shown in the 
following graph: 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Map with station locations 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Daily Records 
 
The software shows, on a webpage, the last average value measured with an icon 
indicating the monitoring station. It also displays the maximum peak registered 
(MPR) and the limit established by regulation.  
 
When clicking over See Days, the daily evolution of electromagnetic radiation is 
shown. In this case, a window opens with daily records, allowing the user to select the 
desired days. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 761
By selecting a day on the open table and clicking on See, a new window opens with a 
graph displaying the daily record of electromagnetic radiation, showing the evolution 
of the average value of potency density equivalent to the flat wave (averaged every 6 
minutes) and the peak value, registered 24 hours a day. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Evolution of the radiation level 
 
 
4. Preliminary Conclusions 
 
A significant strength of this system is its local design, components, and associated 
services which are easily found in the domestic market at a reduced cost 
 
On the other hand, the imported sensor or probe might constitute a weakness of the 
system. Its value could turn the system expensive, depending on the bandwidth to 
cover. For the range used by cellular communications only, the cost is moderate. In 
the case that a wider range is desired, for instance from 0,5 to 5 GHz, the cost 
increases significantly. 
 
Consequently, agreements have been pursued with technological development 
organizations with transference capabilities to assess the implementation. The model 
in use currently is loaned to the “Environmental Protection Agency” of Buenos Aires. 
 
5. Acknowledgements 
 
The financial support provided by Consejo Profesional en Telecomunicaciones, 
Electrónica y Computación - COPITEC through its Foundation – FUNDETEC, is 
gratefully acknowledged and the contribution of Doctor Dr. Vecchia, President of 
International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection – ICNIRP. 
 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 762
References 
 
1. ICRP, 1991b. 1990 Recommendations of the International Commission on 
Radiological Protection. ICRP Publication 60, Ann. ICRP 21 (1–3). 
2. International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). 
Guidelines for Limiting Exposure to Time-Varying Electric, Magnetic and 
Electromagnetic Fields (up to 300 GHz). Health Physics, Vol. 74, No. 4, pp. 
494-522, April 1998. 
3. Swiss Agency for the Environment, Forests and Landscape (SAELF) 
“Regulation for Protection of the General Population in Switzerland”, Suiza 
2000.  
4. A. Portela, J.J. Skvarca, E.B. Matute Bravo and L.A. Loureiro, “Prospección de 
radiación electromagnética ambiental no ionizante”. Volume I: “Manual de 
estándares de seguridad para la exposición a radiofrecuencias comprendidas 
entre 100 kHz y 300 GHz”   Ministerio de Salud y Acción Social de la Nación. 
República Argentina, 1988 
5. A. Portela, J.J. Skvarca, E.B. Matute Bravo and L.A. Loureiro, “Prospección de 
radiación electromagnética ambiental no ionizante”. Volumen I: “Radiación de 
radiofrecuencias, consideraciones biofísicas, biomédicas y criterios para el 
establecimiento de estándares de exposición”, Ministerio de Salud y Acción 
Social de la Nación. República Argentina, 1988 
6. Resolución N° 202/95 – Ministerio de Salud y Acción Social de la Nación, 
República Argentina, 1995. 
7. Resolución N° 530/00 – Secretaria de Comunicaciones de la Nación, República 
Argentina, 2000. 
8. Resolución N° 3690/04 – Comisión Nacional de Comunicaciones, República 
Argentina, 2004. 
9. Protocolo de salida para GPS: NMEA Reference Manual Rev. 2.1, December 
2007. 
10. Motorola G24 Developer Guide, AT Commands Reference Manual, May 31, 
2007. www.motorola.com 
11. Atmel AVR Microcontroller ATmega162 Datasheet, 2513I-AVR02/07. 
12. Atmel AVR Application Notes. www.atmel.com. 
 
 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 763
