Design of a Trans Horizon radio link for ultra high and super high frequencies
﻿ Cost considerations and availability of frequencies condition the 
feasibility of links at distances in which there is no line of sight between antennas. 
These trans-horizon links require precise design procedures to determine whether 
the intensity of the signal and its noise ratio allow reception with reasonable quality. 
The present work describes a procedure for radio electric link calculation to transmit 
voice and data signals through bandwidth at ultra high and super high frequencies. 
Keywords: UHF, SHF, VoIP, IP/TCP, Links. 
1 Introduction 
In the framework of the Project Communitarian Private Networks [1] different 
technologies [2], [3], [4] to provide links to small and isolated communities have been 
analyzed and compared. These communities, with low population densities, hold no 
commercial interest to service providers. In addition, research focuses on links with a 
distance between antennas of about 70 km [5], [6] with the use of Radio Mobile, a 
freeware [7] developed by Roger Coudé. (Download address in the reference section.) 
 
The present work aims to generalize the calculation of this type of links in a simple and 
practical way. 
2 Trans-horizon Radio Link 
At ultra-high and super-high frequencies, wave propagation takes the form of a direct 
wave. This type of propagation travels directly in a straight line from the transmitting 
antenna to the receiver hitting neither the ground nor the ionosphere. The height of the 
antennas and the distance between them is of core importance to establish the quality of 
the transmission and the possibility to establish an efficient link [8]. 
 
The following formula provides a simple way to calculate the distance to the horizon 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 883
given the height of an antenna at one endpoint: 
 
Dmax [in km]  (1) 
 
where: Dmax is the maximum distance of the link to the horizon (in km) and H is the 
Antenna height in m.  
 
Figure 1 shows an example of a link over the horizon limit in which both antennas have 
the same height H and establish a link at 2 Dmax distance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Horizon radio link at maximum distance 
 
In practice, however, the real value for the maximum line of sight distance is greater 
than the value the formula yields, because of wave diffraction from the curvature of the 
Earth. 
 
The phenomenon originates from the structure of the atmosphere. In areas close to the 
surface of the Earth, the beam curves slightly downward, increasing the distance and 
following the expression: 
Dmax [in km]                                          (2) 
 
for values such that the distance between the two endpoints is, 
 
                                                                                                            (3) 
 
Such link is called a trans-horizon link. Note that there is no direct line of sight 
between antennas. Figure 2 depicts two antennas of height H where both are at a distance 
greater than 2 Dmax. 
 
The present work aims to analyze this problem and to determine the values that can be 
obtained at these distances as a function of the electromagnetic field generated in the 
transmitting antenna and the effects that the atmosphere produces on the signal. 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 884
 
 
Figure 2. Trans-horizon radio link 
3 Fresnel Zone 
In Optics, as well as in radio electric communication systems, a Fresnel zone is the 
zone of additional clearance that needs to be considered in the calculation of these types 
of links, in addition to the direct line of sight between the antennas. 
 
The Fresnel Zone generates an additional element derived from the theory of 
electromagnetic waves when signals are transmitted in free space. The expansion results 
from reflections and phase changes when travelling through an obstacle. The result is an 
increase or decrease in the intensity level of the received signal. In this sense, the 
curvature of the Earth (K) has to be taken into account, which generally take the values of 
K=2/3 (worst case scenario) and K=4/3 (best case). 
 
A Fresnel zone is an ellipsoid of concentric revolution, infinite in theory, defining 
volumes in the pattern of radiation in the circular aperture (generally). The cross section 
of the first Fresnel zone is circular. The subsequent zones take a ring-like form in the 
cross section, and are concentric to the previous zones. 
 
The concept of Fresnel zone can also be applied to the analysis of interference from 
obstacles near the trajectory of a radio antenna. This zone needs to be determined to keep 
it obstruction free. The maximum tolerable obstruction to consider it negligible is 40% in 
the first Fresnel zone. The maximum recommended obstruction is 20%. 
 
In the case of radio communications, the values depend on K (the curvature of the 
Earth), considering that for K=4/3 the first Fresnel Zone should be clear in 100%, while 
with K=2/3 60% should be clear in the first Fresnel zone. 
 
To establish a Fresnel zone, the link line of sight needs to be determined, i.e., the 
straight line between the transmitter and the receiver antenna. Once the line of sight is 
established, the Fresnel zone becomes the area surrounding it. The cross section radius of 
the first Fresnel zone has a maximum in the center of the link.  
In this point, radius r is: 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 885
                                                     (4) 
where [r] = Radius in [m]; [d] = Distance in [km]; [f] = Transmission frequency in [MHz]. 
 
The generic formula of the Fresnel zones is: 
 
                                                           (5) 
 
 
where: [rn] = Radius of the n
th Fresnel zone[m]; [d1]  = Distance from the transmitter to 
the object in [km]; [d2] = Distance between the object and the receiver in [km]; [d] = Total 
distance of the link [km]; [f] = Frequency in [MHz]. 
4 General Calculation of a Trans-Horizon Radio Link.  
4.1 General Link Calculation 
The general case to solve is to establish a trans-horizon link of approximately 60 km 
using low cost technologies1. Wireless communication links are chosen; in particular 
those in the unlicensed ranges of 2.4 GHz or 5.7 GHz. Microwave links are dismissed due 
to cost considerations. Section 4.2 establishes link requirements and Section 4.3 analyzes 
operative options for the 2.4 GHz and 5.7 GHz frequencies. 
4.2 General Conditions 
A link design between the towns of Bowen, the base, and Ovejería, the link endpoint 
and slave, is presented as an example of the model. Both cities are located in the south of 
the Province of Mendoza, in Argentina. 
 
The design suggests the construction of two 30 meter high antennas on both endpoints. 
Note that the town of Bowen has broadband internet and telephone access. Hence, the link 
will also provide VoIP technology. The town infrastructure consists of merely a rural 
school and a primary health care facility. 
 
Equation (2) yields a distance to the optical horizon to be 22.6 km. Thus, total link 
distance for a line of sight link is 45.3 km. 
 
The distance obtained from the coordinates of both cities is 54.13 km. The distance 
between the link endpoints does not render possible a line of sight link. In addition, 
potential frequencies are selected under the criteria that this type of link is feasible if 
refraction of the wave front in the atmosphere is taken into account. 
                                                          
1 Any other distance meeting the requirements of a trans-horizon link could have been chosen. 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 886
 
An alternative to enhance the link is to use one or several relay stations. 
 
In this particular case, the area is a desert without electrical power which does not meet 
minimum safety requirements. Hence, relay stations are not considered even with the use 
of solar energy devices. This option increases costs and, hence, the low cost objective is 
not met. 
 
On the other hand, 2.4 GHz and 2.5 GHz bands, called S-Band ISM and C-Band ISM 
respectively, provide a feasible solution. Both are unlicensed frequencies. 
 
The coordinates of the station locations are found using Google Earth [9], determining 
the altitude of the link endpoints as well. (See Table 1) 
 
 
Table 1: Coordinates of the link endpoints. 
 
ENDPOINT Latitude Longitude Height 
Bowen 35º 00 4´ S 67º 30 38´ O 460,50 
Ovejeria 34º 32 56´ S 67º 25 11´ O 459,78 
 
To calculate link values, the following elements are taken into account: 1) 
electromagnetic field generated in the transmission antenna propagated perpendicularly to 
the link direction; 2) vacuum propagation; 3) atmospheric effects on the signal. All these 
elements have a strong influence on the quality of the received signal. 
 
Propagation conditions of electromagnetic waves are determined using simple concepts 
and simplified models, given the complexity of their behavior. 
 
These conditions are: 
 
 The electromagnetic field has electrical field vectors E and magnetic field vectors 
H which are perpendicular to each other. When E and H fields meet far enough 
from the transmitting antenna they can be considered to be a different wave front 
plane. The plane containing field E and the propagation direction is called plane of 
polarization. 
 
 The propagation medium is non-dispersive; hence, the phase velocity of the 
spectral components does not depend on the frequency. 
 
 
 At a first stage, a direct beam may join the antennas. However, problems derived 
from multiple paths need to be taken into account. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 887
 The model can contemplate two cases: 1) isotropic antennas with the same signal 
strength transmitted in all directions; 2) antennas with certain directivity. They are 
considered to gain signal strength when compared to isotropic antennas. 
 
If the transmitting antenna is isotropic, the signal level transmitted per unit of surface of a 
sphere (power density) is: 
 
     Pd [w] = Pt / 4.π.d2                                                                           (6) 
where: [Pt] = Signal level transmitted by the antenna; [d] = Distance between the antennas 
and the point under study (radius of the sphere). 
 
The receiver antenna effective area is defined as the surface of the wave front plane 
with signal level Pd, which has a strength equivalent to the level delivered by the antenna. 
 
For an isotropic antenna, the effective area is: 
 
  Ae [m
2] = λ2/4.π              (7) 
where: [λ] = Wavelength of the radio electric field [m].  
 
Hence, the low signal level registered is understood. 
 
Relating both elements yields the reception strength of Pr in function of Pt for isotropic 
antennas: 
 
Pr [w] = Pt. {λ/4.π.d}2                                            (8) 
where: λ denotes frequency in MHz and d distance in km.  
 
The reception strength is less than the transmitting signal level due to the 
impossibility of capturing the entire level generated. It can be considered as attenuation 
due to propagation in free space without obstacles between isotropic antennas. 
 
According to ITU-R, recommendations RC 525 and RC 341, the value for free 
space attenuation Ao (in dB) is: 
 
         Ao [dB] = 10. log Pt/Pr = 32,5 dB + 20. log (f.d)                      (10) 
 
 Transceiver kits have among their features: 1) transmission power; 2) lack of 
frequency drift; 3) sensitivity (which is the minimum magnitude of an input signal 
required to produce an output signal, also called threshold level of the receiver Pu). 
 
We define the Fading Margin as the difference [dB] between the signal level 
received Pn and the minimum signal level Pu which yields a low error rate. 
 
FM [dB] = Pn – Pu                                                        (11) 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 888
Nominal reception signal level, shown in eq. (12), is obtained by subtracting from the 
transmitted signal level, Pt in dBm, the attenuation from the kit circuits (Ab), the coaxial 
cable (Ag), and the propagation of free space (Ao), and then adding antenna gain (Ga) 
 
                    Pn [dB] = Pt - Ab1 - Ag1 + Ga1 - Ao + 2 Ga – 2 Ag – 2 Ab             (12) 
 
Ab depends on the number of components, but it is estimated in the range of 0.2 dB per 
associated filter and circuit. 
 
Coaxial cable attenuation is stated in [dB/100 m] and is a direct function of the working 
frequency. 
 
The antenna gain is stated in the direction of maximum directivity and is a direct 
function of the frequency. 
 
With these parameters, in a practical and simplified way, the features of the link can be 
determined. In addition, other elements appear, affecting the behavior of the signal in its 
propagation through the atmosphere and originating additional attenuation such as: 
 
 Atmospheric refraction (elevated horizon) 
 Fresnel zone diffraction (obstacle attenuation) 
 Attenuation due to terrain reflection 
 Multiple trajectory fading (duct formation) 
 Absorption from vegetation close to the antenna 
 Absorption from gases or hydrometeors (fog, snow, and others) 
 Energy dispersion from rainfall 
 Wave polarization decoupling 
 
In the case of digital links, the error rate is measured in [BER]. Hence, the Pu is be the 
receiver level threshold which can assure a BER of 10-6 and 10-9 
 
With these error rates, an error bit in 106 or 109 bits transmitted is acceptable. In the 
case of digital links, the modulation system used is also relevant – directly associated to 
link capacity. 
4.3 Link Calculation  
When working with the simplified model described, software can be developed to 
obtain the following parameters: 
 
 
1) Antenna height;  
2) Attenuation from obstruction;  
3) Beam curvature from atmospheric refraction; among others 
 
Field experiences show that the obtained values are satisfactory in determining 
characteristics required for these applications. 
 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 889
In this case, Radio Mobile [7] software is used. This freeware was developed by Roger 
Coudé and can be downloaded from the web address shown in the references. 
 
The software requires the location coordinates and yields a satellite map of the area. It 
can also enhance the area to show the vegetation with the use of LANDSAT2 [10], which 
shares high definition satellite images for research and academic purposes. 
 
Once the working area is determined, the link endpoints are defined through the 
following parameters, among others: 
 
1) Coordinates;  
2) Weather conditions (desert, tropics, etc.), 
 
and other technical data such as 
 
3) Working power;  
4) Frequency of operation;  
5) Receiver sensitivity;  
6) Coaxial cable attenuation; 
7) Antenna height over the land;  
8) Type of antenna;  
9) Antenna gain. 
 
Figure 3 shows a satellite image of the working area for this particular case, showing 
link stations. 
 
The figure shows at the bottom the point coordinates and altitude where the cursor is 
located. 
 
Regarding the features of the transceiver kits, a kit under standard 802.11 is considered, 
such as model NanoStation from Ubiquiti 2 [11], working at 2.4 GHz as well as 802.11 
b/g and the kit of the same company, model NanoStation 5 [12], working at 5.7 GHz 
under standard 802.11a.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Satellite map of the area Bowen – Ovejeria 
                                                          
2 www.landsat.org. 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 890
The use of these kits implies the need for an access point (AP) in the same tower to 
avoid coaxial cable attenuation due to the low signal level in which they work. 
 
Given that the frequency link is either 2.4 GHz or 5.7 GHz, both frequencies are 
analyzed to determine the range granting the best signal level with an availability of 70% 
of the time – required by the software. 
 
Receiver signal is the sum of the beams which travel directly between the transmitter 
and the receiver. They follow the curvature of the Earth due to refraction at the low layers 
of the atmosphere, to the beams reflected at the high layers of the atmosphere, and to the 
beams reflected on the terrain. 
 
The software delivers a profile picture, Figure 4, where the attenuation levels from free 
space and from obstructions are shown; as well as the worst obstruction ratio from the 
first Fresnel radius, the link distance, and the signal level measured in [dBm] and in [μV] 
at the receiver. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Figure 4: Result of the link at 2.4 GHz                     Figure 5: Result of the link at 5,7 GHz 
 
In addition, Fresnel zones are shown. The obstruction to the fist Fresnel zone (F1) 
becomes clear in the graph and represents a value equivalent to the attenuation produced 
on the pair Fresnel zones against the odd zones. Finally, the reception level is equivalent 
to the value obtained in the area free of obstacles. 
 
In the same figure, a graph shows endpoint locations. It also reveals that the link is of 
No Line of Sight type. The same occurs at 2.4 GHz and 5.7 GHz frequencies in Figures 4 
and 5 respectively. In figure 5, the software shows in a red line the non feasibility of the 
link. 
 
The software also yields other relevant information; for instance, the signal level, with 
a sweep over the 360° azimuth from the main unit, increasing one degree at a time. Figure 
6 shows the result of signal level exploration for 2.4 GHz with a sweep from 40° azimuth 
to 90° azimuth. On the upper side, the signal levels of the selected area are shown. The 
information obtained confirms the non feasibility of the link. 
 
The program allows the user to modify different parameters such as antenna height, 
transceiver sensitivity, and transmission levels. Final values can be obtained for a feasible 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 891
link. As a first step, the link height is modified to obtain a feasible value when the heights 
of the endpoints are: 60 m in Bowen and 80 m in Ovejería. Figure 7 shows the results 
indicating the reception value. Link feasibility is shown in a green line. 
 
Maintaining antenna heights at the feasibility level, but changing the frequency to the 
5.7 GHz range, the link arrives to a critical level – shown in the yellow line –  because the 
reception level is equal to or is greater than -3 db but is less than 3 db. These values 
cannot grant the availability of 70% required by the software. (Figure 8) 
 
The results can be explained by an obstruction suffered at the Fresnel zone at 5.7 GHz, 
considering that the first zone is much smaller than in the 2.4 GHz case. The difference in 
size results from the curvature of the terrain separating both endpoints. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Representation of the signal level at 2.4 GHz 
 
Certainly, the solution presented is not convenient under economic or practical 
considerations because of the space required in Bowen for tower anchoring, as well as the 
presence of nearby buildings in Ovejería, the space required, and the safety measures 
needed to avoid accidents with tower anchoring. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Results from elevating antenna height         Figure 8: Results from elevating antenna 
at frequency 2.4 GHz                                                    height at  frequency 5.7 GHz 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 892
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Link with sensitivity 97 dBm at 2,4 GHz       Figure 10: Solution at 5.7 GHZ, modifying 
          height and sensitivity 
 
Thus, the most convenient alternative, which needs to be studied for each particular 
case, is to lower the minimum signal level of the receiver sensitivity to -97 dBm, instead 
of the -80 dBm originally established. It implies to work at lower transmission speeds: 
approximately 1 Mbps instead of 24 or 36 Mbps originally considered. 
 
In Figure 9, the red circle shows the change in the sensitivity value. Antenna heights 
remain at the same value of 30 m at both endpoints, at a frequency of 2.4 GHz. The upper 
side of Figure 9 shows that the receiver levels are higher than the established minima, 
guaranteeing the link. The green line joining the endpoints represents the feasibility 
condition. Figure 10 shows once again that the solution is not satisfactory only for a link 
at 5.7 GHz and the antennas need to be elevated to 50 m for the link to become feasible.  
 
In addition, transmission speed cannot be determined because the value cannot be 
predicted with the equipment used. It can be assumed that it would be within the previous 
range. 
 
The analysis confirms the feasibility of a link at 2.4 GHz requiring only a change in the 
level of sensitivity expected, as can be seen in Figure 11.  
 
Figure 12 represents the signal distribution and the success rate of a 6.4 dB link. They 
show that the signal level for a frequency of 2.4 GHz is above the receiver threshold level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Signal level for 2.4 GHZ and -97            Figure 12: Signal range of the link at 2.4 GHz  
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 893
5 Conclusions 
The work analyzes the design of a wireless link between two towns, both in the 
southeast of the Province of Mendoza, in Argentina, located beyond the optical horizon. 
 
The link is studied as a typical case to solve the general problem of populations with 
isolation problems. Hence, it can be extrapolated later to be applied in similar situations. 
In these cases, the distance to cover with the link ranges between 60 to 70 kilometers and 
the terrain is desertic or semi-desertic. 
 
Coordinates and terrain conditions are detailed between the two endpoints. Estimates 
for different bandwidths are established, i.e. 2.4 GHz and 5.7 GHz. 
 
Note that the distance between the endpoints (60 km) is greater than regular distances 
contemplated in the theory for the application of standard 802.11. 
 
In addition, analysis focuses on the fact that, in practice, transmitted signals in rural 
areas behave differently from those in urban settings because the former suffer less from 
noise spectrums. Radio Mobile software is considered to be a valuable tool in the design 
of radio electric links. 
 
It can be downloaded from the internet and used to obtain satellite information of the 
area under study. With this software, signal levels are determined for Fresnel zones in free 
space, granting the use of the equipment in the frequencies at 2.4 and 5.7 GHz. 
 
At a 5.7 GHz frequency, the obstruction of the first Fresnel zone is significant and 
could deteriorate further with the presence of obstacles such as trees. They could attenuate 
the transmitted signal to values leading to critical values or to a low transference rate. The 
same problem applies to 2.4 GHz frequencies.Therefore, the obtained results suggest the 
advisability to work primarily with links at the 2.4 GHz bandwidth, which in theory may 
have some advantages. 
 
In this sense, field tests have been scheduled with equipment at both frequencies to 
verify their behavior. 
 
In addition, and to establish the scope, tests will be conducted to analyze the results 
obtained from the 802.11 standard using antennas with a significant gain. 
 
These field experiences will follow the present analysis. Different parameters like 
antenna gain and equipment range will be tested at the setup of the link.  
 
The results from these experiences will be presented in a forthcoming article. 
6 Acknowledgements 
The financial support provided by Agencia Nacional para la Promoción Científica y 
Tecnológica and CITEFA (Project PICTO 11- PICTO 11-18621 is gratefully 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 894
acknowledged. The authors acknowledge the interest and collaboration of Engineer 
Walter López, Director of the General Alvear campus of the Instituto Tecnológico 
Universitario (ITU) towards the project. They also wish to thank the City Hall of General 
Alvear for its assistance in the field. 
7 References 
[1] Antonio Castro Lechtaler (Director). PICTO 11-18621. Redes Privadas Comunitarias. 
Proyecto FONCyT, ANPCyT. Working Paper. 
 [2] J. García Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler, R. Fusario and Guillermo 
Sevilla. Physical and Link Layer in Power Line Communications Technologies. 
Proceedings of 13th of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 978 - 950 – 656 – 
109 – 3. pp. 56 a 67. Corrientes. October 2007. 
[3] J. García Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler, R. Fusario and Guillermo 
Sevilla. Power Line Communications in the Electric Network. Proceedings of 13th of 
Argentine Congress on Computer Science ISBN 978 - 950 – 656 – 109 – 3. pp. 68 a 79. 
Corrientes. October 2007. 
[4] J. García Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler and R. Fusario. Transmission 
voice over 802.11. Proceedings of 14th of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 
978 - 987 - 24611 - 0 - 2. pp. 307 a 318. Chilecito. October 2008. 
[5] A. Castro Lechtaler, A. Foti, R. Fusario, C. García Garino and J. García Guibout. 
Communication Access to Small and Remote Communities: The Corral de Lorca Project. 
Proceedings of 15th of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 978 - 897 - 24068 
- 4 - 1. pp. 1.117 a 1.126 . Jujuy. October 2009. 
[6] A. Castro Lechtaler, A. Foti, C. García Garino, J. García Guibout, R. Fusario and A. 
Arroyo Arzubi. Proyecto Corral de Lorca: Una solución de conectividad a grupos 
poblacionales pequeños, aislados y distantes de centros urbanos. Proceedings de la 
Novena Conferencia Iberoamericana en Sistemas, Cibernética e Informática: CISCI 2010. 
- Volume III - ISBN - 13: 978 – 1 – 934272 – 96 - 1. PP. 121 a 127. Orlando, USA. June 
2010. 
[7] http://www.cplus.org/rmw/index.html (Radio mobile software). 
[8] Castro Lechtaler, A y Fusario J. Teleinformática para Ingenieros en Sistemas de 
Información – Second Edition. Volume 2. Editorial Reverte. Barcelona. 1999. 
[9] Google Earth: earth.google.es 
[10] LANDSAT. www.landsat.org 
[11] Datasheet at http://www.ubnt.com/dowloads/ns2_datasheet.pdf  
[12] Datasheet at http://www.ubnt.com/downloads/ns5_datasheet.pdf 
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 895
