A strategy for analyzing and enriching domain ontologies
﻿ During the last years there is an increasing interest on the
ontologies. The way in which the semantics of a domain entity is represented in an ontology may differ depending on the requirements that
the ontology should satisfy. However, in general the richness is a desired
quality attribute for an ontology.
The contribution of this paper is a strategy for evaluating and enriching the representation of real entity semantics in a domain ontology. In
addition, an application example is discussed.
1 Introduction
During the last years, with the advent of the Semantic Web, there is an increasing
interest on the ontologies [1]. The way in which the semantics of a domain entity
is represented in an ontology may differ depending on the requirements that the
ontology should satisfy [2]. However, in general the richness is a desired quality
attribute for an ontology.
When representing the semantics of an entity in an ontology, it is possible
that some of its features are implicit or the representation of these features
is incomplete. Therefore, their explicitness becomes necessary for enriching the
representation of the entity semantics. In this way, a strategy is necessary to
evaluate and improve the representation of the entity semantics in an ontology.
The purpose of this paper is to present a strategy for analyzing and enriching
the representation of the semantics of domain entities in an existing domain
ontology. To this aim, Section 2 defines the main concepts of the paper. Section 3
describes the proposed strategy. Section 4 shows an application example. Finally,
Section 5 is devoted to the conclusions and future work.
2 Background
The objective of this section is to give definitions to a set of main terms, which
will be used in the remainder of the paper.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 912
A domain is a portion of reality that forms the subject-matter of a single
field of study, a technology, or a mode of study; i.e., the domain of computer
science, of e-commerce, among others. A domain entity is anything which exists
within a given domain, including objects, processes, qualities and states [3].
A context is a set of circumstances in which something exists or occurs. In a
context, it can be distinguished features that describe that circumstances such as
geopolitical conditions, factors influencing a process, and so on. A given domain
entity or its features can have different interpretations and/or representations
depending on the context in which it is considered.
A contextual feature is one whose interpretation and / or representation
depend on the features of the context in which the domain entity is considered.
The semantics of domain entities could be represented by a domain ontology (from now on ”ontology”) that is a representational artifact used to render
the cognitive representations of a given domain [3]. The ontology elements are:
Terms that are words or group of words that represent domain entities in a
given domain or entity features that can be considered entities in themselves;
Properties that represent the features of domain entities that have not been
considered entities in themselves; Relations that are elements that glue together
other ontology elements; and Axioms that serve to represent sentences that are
always true in a domain [1].
3 A Strategy for Enriching Domain Ontologies
The strategy proposed in this paper intends to improve the representation of
domain entity semantics by representing their contextual features. It is composed
by six steps shown in Figure 1.
Orig
inal 
Onto
logy
Exte
nde
d
Onto
logy
Iden
tify t
he M
ain 
Enti
ties 
and
 
thei
r 
Fea
ture
s
Iden
tify t
he F
eatu
res
 
that
 
Hav
e to
 
be 
Rep
res
ente
d
Rep
res
ent
the
Req
uire
dFe
atur
es
of E
ach
Enti
ty
Des
igna
tea
 
Brid
ge 
Term
that
Refe
rsto
Eac
hEn
tity
Iden
tify t
he E
lem
ents
 
that
 
Rep
res
ent 
eac
h 
Enti
ties
Fig. 1. A Strategy for Enriching Domain Ontologies by Representing Contextual Features.
3.1 Step 1: Identify the Main Entities and their Features
The aim of this step is to specify what the main domain entities should be
represented in the ontology, their features, and their relations with other entities.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 913
The outputs of this step are both a list of the entities and their relations,
and, for each entity, a list of their features, whose semantics is affected by the
context in which the entity is considered. The list of the entities can be obtained
by exploring the documentation associated with the domain of discourse or by
having meetings with domain experts. The list of the features can be made
by encoding the knowledge required to understand the corresponding entities.
If necessary, domain experts could help to identify the features by indicating
the underlying knowledge they assume should be possessed in order to have an
accurate interpretation of the entity meaning in different contexts.
3.2 Step 2: Identify the Elements that Represent each Entity
The objective of this step is to identify the ontology elements that represent each
entity and their features as recognized in the Step 1. An entity could have been
represented with only a simple term or with a set of ontology elements.
3.3 Step 3: Identify the Features that Have to be Represented
This step allows the ontologist to identify the features, which are generally implicit in the representation of an entity. These features are not required to be
made explicit when the entities are considered within the same context, but it
becomes necessary when the entities have to be interpreted in another one. Based
on the outputs of previous steps, these features can be detected. Since not all of
these features need to be made explicit, answering the following questions could
help to identify the ones that do need.
– Are there any implicit features in the representation of an entity that although they may be inferred by a human they cannot be inferred by a
machine? If the answer is yes, could these features be inferred in the wrong
way in other contexts different from the considered one? If the answer is yes,
these features should be represented.
– Are there any entities whose representations and/or meanings could change
depending on the context in which the entities are considered? If the answer
is yes, are the representations and meanings of the features or entities completely explicit in the ontology? If the answer is no, the representations and
meanings should be made explicit.
– What are the dimensions used to represent a feature? Are they the same
regardless of the context in which the feature is considered? If the answer is
no, are they explicit in the ontology? If the answer is no, these dimensions
should be represented.
3.4 Step 4: Represent the Required Features of Each Entity
Once the features and their dimensions have been identified, they have to be
represented in the ontology. For that, reusing existing ontologies should be considered. This can be made by importing the portion of the ontology to be reused.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 914
When it is not possible to reuse an ontology, it must to identify if the feature
is simple or complex. A simple feature is a quality that does not bear other qualities, and it is associated with a one-dimensional representation in human cognition [4]. For example, the weight of a thing is associated with a one-dimensional
structure, whose possible values are positive real numbers. Thus, two elements
should be added to the ontology: a term denoting the representation dimension,
and a relation between this term and the term that represents the simple feature.
A complex feature is a quality that bears other qualities, and it is associated
with a set of integral dimensions that are separable from all other dimensions [4].
An integral dimension is one in which it is not possible to assign a value to an
object on one dimension without giving it a value on the other. For instance, color
can be represented in terms of the dimensions of hue, saturation, and brightness.
These dimensions are integral. By contrast, weight and hue dimensions are said
to be separable. Each integral dimension is associated with a simple feature. In
order to improve the representation of a complex feature, the following elements
should be added to the ontology:
– A term representing the set of integral dimensions and a relation between
this term and the term that represents the complex feature.
– For each integral dimension, a term representing it and a relation between
this term and the term that represents the set of integral dimensions.
– For each term representing an integral dimension, a relation between this
term and the term that represents the corresponding simple feature.
In addition, for each term representing a one-dimensional representation or an
integral dimension, a term representing the unit of measurement of the dimension
and a relation between these two terms should be added to the ontology.
Finally, it is possible that the feature to be represented is modeled as an
attribute of a term. In this case, this attribute should be deleted. It is important
to denote that in this way an attribute will become a term, and the ontology
will be more expressive due to the fact that the reasoners work better.
3.5 Step 5: Designate a Bridge Term that Refers to Each Entity
The intended uses of an entity in a given context should be represented by a
term, called bridge term because it allows linking different meanings and representations of the same entity in different contexts. A bridge term should also
be interpreted as representing contextual features, because the intended use depends on the context in which the entity is considered. Thus, in the ontology, it
is necessary to determine if there is a term that designates the intended use of
each entity in the considered context, otherwise, it has to be added.
A bridge term should be related to the elements that represent the entity
whose intended use it represents. An entity could be represented by a single element or a set of them. In the former case, a relation between that single element
and the bridge term should be added. In the latter case, the most representative
term should be chosen and then, a relation between this term and the bridge
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 915
Fig. 2. Original SOCIAL MOVIE SITE ontology (OSMS)
term should be added. As a bridge term represents a contextual feature, it should
also be related to the term that represents its dimension.
4 An Application Example
A good ranking for a website in a semantic search engine depends on the quality
of the ontology that represents the meaning of the website. Generally, the process
of improving ranking of a website in a search engine is an iterative and humanoriented process.
The strategy proposed in this paper could be applied with the aim of supporting the process of improving ranking of a website in a semantic search engine
by enriching the ontology that represents its content. Figure 2 shows an ontology
of a social network to share tastes in movies. Following, the steps to enrich the
SOCIAL MOVIE SITE ontology (OSMS) is presented.
4.1 Enriching the Ontology
Step 1: Identify the Main Entities and their Features The main entities
involved in the social network site are:
– A movie is the main entity of the system. Its features are a title, director,
writer, cast, genre, release date, soundtrack, awards, among others. The attributes of interest from the social network viewpoint are the scores given
by film critics and fans.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 916
– A fan is a person with an intense linking and enthusiasm for a movie. A fan
usually give a score to a movie.
– A film critic is a person who gives an analysis and evaluation of films.
Step 2: Identify the Ontology Elements that Represent Each Entity
A movie is represented by the term Movie, their properties and the relations
hasDirector, hasWriter and hasCast between this term and the term Artist.
An artist participating in any of the movies is represented by the terms Profile
and Artist, their properties and the relation is-a between them.
A fan is represented by the terms Profile, AccesibleProfile and Fan, their
properties, the relation is-a between these terms and the relation rateMovie
with the movies the fan has assigned a score. A group of fans of a given movie
is represented by the terms FanGroup and MovieFanGroup, their properties, the
relation is-a between these terms, and the relations hasCreator, hasMovie and
hasParticipants. A group of fans of a given artist is represented by the terms
FanGroup and ArtistFanGroup, their properties, the relation is-a between
these terms, and the relations hasCreator, hasArtist and hasParticipants.
A film critic is represented by the terms Profile, AccesibleProfile and
FilmCritic, their properties, the relation is-a between these terms, and the
relation rateMovie with the movies that the critic has assigned a score.
Step 3: Identify the Features that Have to be Represented Since a movie
is the main entity in the social network and their main attribute are the scores
of the fans and film critics, we have to pay attention in their representation. In
the case of fans, they qualify the movies by an integer value between 0 and 10.
The film critics in general consider different aspects to give a qualification to
a certain movie. However, in the original OSMS , they only can give an integer
value between 0 and 10. Making explicit the aspects considering by film critics
will improve the representation of the qualification concept.
The genre, the parent guide, and duration of a movie are represented by a
string. This representation does not satisfy the minimal encoding bias criterion
[5]. The box office of a movie is represented by an integer. Then, the following
questions arise: What is the unit of measure? Dollars or Euros? The value is
expressed in miles or millions? These issues must be solved in order to avoid
misunderstandings.
Finally, a movie has an attribute that represents its release date, the profiles
have an attribute that represent the date of birth and, the fans have a creation
date. All of these attributes are represented by a datatype date not satisfying
the minimal encoding bias criterion.
Step 4: Represent the Required Features of Each Entity With the aim
of improving the representation of a particular date in the OSMS , reusing the
OWL-Time ontology3 was considered. The release date of a movie is represented
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 917
by the term ReleaseDate, that derives from the term
CalendarInstant, and is related to the term Movie by using a formal relation
(See Fig. 3).
Since the box office of a movie is a simple feature, six elements should
be added to the OSMS : a term BoxOfficeDimension denoting the representation dimension, a term UnitOfMeasure representing the unit of measure of
the dimension, a relation between these terms, and a relation between the terms
BoxOfficeDimension and BoxOffice. Finally, this term has to be related with
the term Movie. An equivalent procedure has to be carried out considering the
simple feature that represents the movie duration. In this case, it has to be
added the term RuntimeDimension related to the term UnitOfMeasure, and the
relation between the terms RuntimeDimension and Runtime and this term with
the term Movie (See Fig. 3).
With respect the fan score, the process presents a unique difference. Applicable scores include integers between 0 and 10, but do not have a unit of
measurement. Simply, the higher the score more like a film. In this way the
term FanRatingDimension and a relation with the term FanRating are added.
Finally, the term FanRating is associated with the term Movie.
With the aim of representing the genre and the parental guidance, the terms
Genre and ParentGuide are added to the OSMS . Each of them is related to
the terms GenreDimension and ParentGuideDimension. However, these dimensions are not quantitative but consist of a list of possible values. For example,
GenreDimension could consists of a enumeration like action, adventure, drama,
comedy, romance, thriller, while the ParentGuideDimension could consist of G,
PG-13, PG-18, PG-21(See Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. A portion of the extended OSMS representing fan rating, run time and parent
guidance features.
Finally, representing the criteria generally used to describe a film critics would
allow a more complete representation of this measure. In general, an evaluation is
done based on three basic aspects of a movie: The story told by the film, the quality of the picture and the quality of soundtrack. To represent this, three terms
are added: StoryRating, PhotographRating and SoundtrackRating. These
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 918
terms have a formal relation with the term Movie. Their dimensions are represented by the terms StoryRatingDimension, PhotographRatingDimension
and SoundtrackRatingDimension, respectively. The unit of measure is not considered, since evaluations consist of integer values between 0 and 10. However, the evaluation includes these terms and is a complex feature related to
a set of dimensions represented by the term ReviewerRatingMultidimension.
The dimensions of this set are integral dimensions represented by the terms
StoryRatingDimension, PhotographRatingDimension and
SoundtrackRatingDimension. Figure 4 shows a portion of the extended OSMS
representing the aforementioned features.
Fig. 4. A portion of the extended OSMS representing the movie rating of critics.
Step 5: Designate a Bridge Term that Refers to Each Entity Most of
the modelling concepts seems to be clear in the context of the social networks
considered. However, the term AccesibleProfile could cause a misunderstanding. With the aim of clarifying its intended use and meaning, the bridge term
User is added. This term represents the meaning of the agreed in the context of
social networks a those who are able to access the system through a username
and password. Figure 5 shows the extended OSMS representing the bridge term
User.
4.2 Evaluating the Ontology Enrichment
The application of the strategy have generated a rich extended OSMS that represents a more detailed knowledge in a coherent and compact manner than the
original OSMS . Then, the extended OSMS should have a better ranking position.
This can be demonstrated by applying the metrics defined by Alani et. al [6] as
shown in Table 1.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 919
Fig. 5. A portion of the extended OSMS showing the bridge term User
Table 1. Evaluation of ontology representation improvement
Metrics Original OSMS Extended OSMS Improvement
Class Match Measure (CMM) 3,4 4,6 35%
Density Measure (DEM) 6 7,4 23%
Semantic Similarity Measure (SSM) 5 9,3 46%
– Class Match Measure (CMM). It is meant to evaluate the coverage of an
ontology for a given term.
Let C be a set of classes in an ontology, and T is the set of main entities
identified in Step 1. Each entity will be representated by its main label, i.e.
Movie, Fan and Film Critic.
I(c, t) = 1 : if label(c) = t
E =
∑
c∈C
∑
t∈T I(c, t) where I(c, t) = 0 : if label(c) 6= t
J(c, t) = 1 : if label(c) contains t
P =
∑
c∈C
∑
t∈T J(c, t) where J(c, t) = 0 : if label(c) not contain t
CMM = 0.6 ∗ E + 0.4 ∗ P
– Density Measure (DEM). It is intended to approximate the representationaldensity or information-content of classes that matches the main entities and
consequently the level of knowledge detail. An ontology that contains many
relations other than class-subclass relations is richer than a taxonomy[7].
DEM =
( 1n )
∑
c∈C(2 ∗ relations[c] + superclasses[c] + subclasses[c] + siblings[c])
where n is the number of matched classes.
– Semantic Similarity Measure (SSM). It calculates how close the classes that
matches the main entities are in an ontology. SSM is measured from the
minimum number of relations that connects a pair of terms.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 920
Let ci, cj ∈ C and ci →p cj is a path p ∈ P of paths between ci and
cj .
1
length(minp∈P ci→pcj)
: if i 6= j
ssm(ci, cj) = 0 : if i = j
SSM = ( 1n )
∑n−1
i=1
∑n
j=i+1 ssm(ci, cj)
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, a strategy for evaluating and enriching the semantic representation
of domain entities in an ontology was presented. This strategy could be applied in
different scenarios. In this paper, the strategy was applied to enrich an ontology
with the aim of improving the ranking of the website that it represents.
A complementary approach for increasing the expressiveness of an ontology
is the addition of rules. Future work will be focused on defining a methodology
that includes the definition and implementation of rules.
References
1. Gómez-Pérez, A., Fernández-López, M., Corcho, O.: Ontological engineering. 2nd
edn. Springer Verlag, New York (2004)
2. Gangemi, A., Catenacci, C., Ciaramita, M., Lehmann, J.: Modelling Ontology Evaluation and Validation. In: ESWC. (2006) 140–154
3. Smith, B., Kusnierczyk, W., Schober, D., Ceusters, W.: Towards a reference terminology for ontology research and development in the biomedical domain. In: 2nd
Int. Workshop on Formal Biomedical Knowledge Representation. (2006) 57–66
4. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models. PhD
thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands (2005)
5. Grüber, T.: A translation approach to portable ontology specification. Knowl. Ac.
5(2) (1993) 199–220
6. Alani, H., Brewster, C.: Metrics for ranking ontologies. In: 4th Int. EON Workshop,
15th Int. World Wide Web Conf. (2006)
7. Tartir, S., Arpinar, I.B., Moore, M., Sheth, A.P., Aleman-meza, B.: Ontoqa: Metricbased ontology quality analysis. In: Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition from Distributed, Autonomous, Semantically Heterogeneous Data and Knowledge Sources.
(2005)
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 921
