Semantics based visualization
﻿ Visualization is the process of mapping data into visual dimensions to create a visual representation to amplify cognition. Visual
representations are essential aids to human cognitive tasks. They are valued to the extent that they provide stable and external reference points
upon which dynamic activities and thought processes may be calibrated
and upon which models and theories can be tested and confirmed. The
active use and manipulation of visual representations makes many complex and intensive cognitive tasks feasible. A visual representation is able
to convey relationships among many elements in parallel and provides
an individual with directly observable memory. A successful visualization
allows the user to gain insight into the data, i.e. to communicate different
aspect of the data in an effective way. Even with today’s visualization
systems that give the user a considerable control over the visualization
process, it can be difficult to produce an effective visualization. To obtain
useful results, a user had to know which questions to pose; problems had
to be framed in very precise terms. A strategy to improve this situation
is to guide the user in the selection of the parameters involved in the
visualization. Our research goal is the design of a visualization system
that assist the user in the construction of the visualization, by considering the semantic of the data, the semantic of the stages through all the
visualization process and the semantic of the external elements affecting
the visualization.
Keywords: Semantic, Visualization, Semantics-based Visualization, Ontology, Reasoning, RDF, OWL
1 Problem
The visualization challenge is to find a visual metaphor that the user can understand and perceive effectively ([1], [2], [3]) combined with the interaction
methods ([4]) that make it possible for the user to work with and probe the data
as effectively and effortlessly as possible. Computer technology allows the exploration of big information resources. Huge amount of data are becoming available
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1060
on networked information systems, ranging from unstructured and multimedia
documents to structured data stored in databases. On one side, this is extremely
useful and exciting; on the other side, the ever growing amount of available information generates cognitive overload and even anxiety, especially in novice or
occasional users. While computational power has increased exponentially, the
ability to interact with useful information has only increased linearly. In recent
decades, the exponential increase in computing power has allowed many more
questions to be posed and more complex problems to be addressed. Information
is now massive, disparate, and disorganized. The dimensionality of data has also
increased, requiring greater effort to identify and comprehend relationships relevant to a particular analytic task. Nowadays, a wide diversity of users access,
extract, and display information that is distributed on various sources, which
differ in type, form and content. In many cases the users have an active control
over the visualization process but even then it is difficult to achieve an effective visualization. For example, since the goal of visualization is to provide a
representation, along with its associated interactions, which helps them to interpret their data or to communicate meaning, it is important that the mapping
from physical to perceptual dimensions be under control. A strategy to improve
this situation is to guide the user in the selection of the different parameters
involved in the visualization. The Visualization field has matured substantially
during the last decades; new techniques have appeared for different data types
in many domains. With the use of visualization becoming more generalized, a
formal understanding of the visualization process is needed ([5]).
Our main goal is the development of a visualization model that considers
the semantics of both the data and the different stages in the visualization process. This model will transform data into information; according to Keller and
Tergan ([6]), “information is data that has been given meaning through interpretation by way of relational connection and pragmatic context”. This meaning
can be useful. Information may be distinguished according to different categories
concerning, for instance, its features, origin and relationships. By making these
considerations, the visualization process will be able to determine the characteristics of an effective visualization and guide the user through the different
stages. The user is an active participant in the visualization process and the
goal of a visualization is to present data in a way that helps him to identify
trends, features and patterns, generate hypotheses, and assign meaning to the
visual information on the screen.
Since 2006 we have been working on the integration of semantic information
into the visualization process ([7], [8]) and our main goal is to define an unified
semantics for the data model and the process involved.
2 Related Work
In order to understand the challenges of our enterprise and to know the state of
the art in the integration of semantic into the visualization process, we began
our work by searching for examples of visualizations-related work with semantic
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1061
information. The first subsection gives a brief overview of several works that
used semantic information with visualizations. On the the next subsection we
review a ruled-based architecture which used semantic information, in the form
of metadata, to create colormaps.
2.1 Semantic in the Visualization
The papers [11], [12], [13], [14] and [15] are good examples of how semantic
information is integrated into visualization tasks. However in all these examples
the role of the semantic is to improve the integration, querying and description
of the data in the visualization; in any of these cases the semantic associated
with the data is used to create the visualization. Only in [16] there is a first
approach to the use of semantic as an aid to create the visualization. This work
define a customizable representation model which allows the biologist to change
the graphical semantics associated to the data semantics. The representation
models are base on an XML implementation; such models are based on an XML
Schema definition that prescribes the correctness of the model and provides
validation features. This is only a first approach to a system similar to the one
we proposed. The main differences between this work ([16]) and our proposal
are the lack of any support for a reasoning process, the use of XML instead of
RDF or OWL and the limitations in the application domain, the system is only
intended for biological use.
2.2 Rule-Based Architecture
PRAVDA (Perceptual Rule-Based Architecture for Visualizing Data Accurately)
([10]) is a rule based architecture for assisting the user in making choices of
visualization color parameters. This architecture provides sets of appropriates
choices for visualization based on a set of underlying rules which are used to
constrain operations i.e., selecting a colormap. Rules incorporate information
about data, that is metadata, such as minimum, maximum, spatial frequency,
among others and also information supplied by the user. This architecture also
provides for dependency between rules that control different visualization operations. For example, if the user selects a colormap, that information is fed
back to the operation for selecting contour lines, where rules constrain the parameters of the contour lines depending on which colormap has been selected.
Hence, if the contour lines are superimposed over a dark region, as defined by
the colormap, legibility rules would constrain the set of color choices to those
offering sufficient luminance contrasts to be detectable. This network of linked
operations help guide the user through the complex design space of visualization
operations. The key element in this rule based architecture is the use of metadata; system provided metadata, as data type, data range, metadata computed
by algorithm, as spatial frequency, and metadata provided by the user. These
metadata would, for example, represent the dynamic range of the data or the
geometric relationships between objects in the scene.
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1062
3 Framework
This thesis began with a survey on visualization models, automatic visualization
process and visualization taxonomies. While researchers in the area have presented different visualization models, they were usually focused on one area of
visualization in particular. Examples of these previous work are W. Schroeder’s
pipeline for scientific visualization ([17]), the pipeline presented by S. Card for
information visualization ([18]), the data state model introduced by E. Chi ([19])
and the Unified Visualization Model (UVM) created by Martig et. al ([20]). The
UVM is applicable to any particular field and consists of a single model that
allows the user to focus on both the processes and the data’s states. Our work
is based on the UVM, we seek to extend and improve this model by the use of
semantic information.
The second survey conducted on this thesis was related to the automatization of the visualization process. The first record of such process was the work
done by Mackinlay J. in 1986 ([21]). He established the goal of developing an
application for automating the creation of graphic representations. According to
him, the user may not have the necessary knowledge to create an effective visual
representation. Mackinlay based his work on the idea that a visual representation
is an expression in a graphical language, where this language is formally defined.
While Mackinlay set limitations on the scope of his work is the first benchmark
for the creation of an automatic visualization. His work set the ground for all
researchers in the Visualization area.
Our final survey was conducted on visualization related taxonomies. Every
concept evolves through three stages of formality, terminology, taxonomy and
ontology, the latter being the more formal. This is why visualization taxonomies
are so important for our work. As our goal is the development of ontologies to
support semantic and reasoning in the visualization pipeline, we can use predefined taxonomies and take the next step in formality. Without doubt, one of
the most relevant taxonomies in the area of Visualization and Graphics is the
one presented by Jacques Bertin in “Semiology of Graphics” ([1]). However this
taxonomy requieres a deeper analysis and the inclusion of newest elements such
us 3D visualization techniques and interaction classifications.
During the last two years we have been developing several ontologies and
prototypes that use, on different degrees, semantic information in the visualization process. In all the prototypes we used an application called Brows.AR. We
developed Brows.AR as an application for the visualization of file hierarchies
in 3D, based on the Spherical Layout ([9]). We are currently working on the
architecture to support the integration of semantic information and reasoning
process.
4 Challenges
A successful visualization allows the user to gain insight into the data. A successful visualization process takes advantage of the structure and the meaning of
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1063
the data to create the most effective visualization. The structure of the data can
be obtained from the data itself but not its meaning. Two sets may contain the
same data, but if its meaning is different then the final visualizations will not
necessary be the same. This is why we included the semantic about the data, a
way to describe the data about the data.
A visualization is greatly affected by what the user want to do with it. For the
same data set, also with the same meaning, certain visualization may be most
suitable for data exploration and another may be better for data comparison.
By knowing what the user want to do and its meaning the visualization designer
can create a better result. This is our motivation to incorporate the semantic
about the tasks.
Additionally, the response time of the interactions is crucial to obtain an
effective visualization. If the user want to explore a 3D visual representation
but there is no dedicated GPU on the computer, the user’s experience would
be negatively affected. Besides that, a 4 inches screen can not represent a visualization in the same way that a 42 inches screen does. A formal description
of the system’s hardware could help the visualization designer to enhance the
user experience with the visualization. Then, in addition to the data and task
semantics, we also included the semantic of the hardware, a description of the
actual system’s hardware.
All the mentioned semantics should be taken as input to the visualization
process. But the visualization process can contain its own semantics as previous
knowledge embedded in the system. We are working on several ontologies to
describe color coding, color matching, visualization techniques, etc. The goal is
to help the user in the decisions that depend on knowledge outside of the user
scope. For instance, which colors combine better or which colormap to use to
represent a data attribute.
5 Future Work
We have shown that it is possible to assist the user in the creation of a visualization through the use of semantic information. We must still determine the
degree of effectiveness of such visualizations. We have to establish effectiveness
metrics and design the test to evaluate them. The results from these evaluations
will be used as feedback for the defined semantics. Many research fields were
open through this work. Some of them are, the semantic of the user, the semantic of the tasks, the semantic of the techniques and the semantic of the colores.
The semantic of the techniques has been the topic proposed to the CONICET
to continue our research through a postdoc grant.
References
1. Bertin, J.: Semiology of Grahics. University of Wisconsin Press (1983).
2. Tufle, E., R.: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics Press
(1986).
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1064
3. Cleveland, S., W.: The Elements of Graphing Data. Wadsworth Publ. Co. (1985).
4. Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G., Beale, R.: Human-Computer Interaction. PrenticeHall, Inc. (1997).
5. Duke, D., J., Brodlie, K., W., Duce, A., D.: Building an Ontology of Visualization.
In: Proceedings of the Conference on Visualization ’04. pp. 598. IEEE Computer
Society (2004)
6. Keller, T., Tergan, S.: Visualizing Knowledge and Information: An Introdution. In:
Knowledge and Information Visualization. pp. 1-23, Springer (2005)
7. Larrea, M., Martig, S., Castro, S.: Visualizacin Basada en Semntica. In: Proceedings
of the XII Workshop de Investigadores en Ciecnias de la Computacón. pp. 270-274.
Red UNCI (2010).
8. Larrea, M., Martig, S., Castro, S.: Semantics-based Color Assignment in Visualization. In: Journal of Computer Science and Technology. pp. 14-18, ISTEC (2010)
9. Larrea, M., Martig S., Castro S.: Spherical Layout - Layout for 3D Tree Visualization. In: Proceedings of the IADIS 2007, Multi Conference on Computer Science
and Information Systems. pp. 91-98 (2007).
10. Bergman, L., D., Rogowitz, B., E., Treinish, L., A.: A rule-based tool for assisting
colormap selection. VIS ’95: Proceedings of the 6th conference on Visualization ’95
(1995).
11. Zhao, X., Huajun, C., Zhaohui, W.: Applying Semantic Web Technologies for Geodata Integration and Visualization. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2005).
12. Kashyap, V., et. al: An Ontology-based Approach for Data Integration - An Application in Biomedical Research. Real-world Applications of Semantic Web Technology and Ontologies (2008).
13. Kalogerakis, E., Christodoulakis, S., Moumoutzis, N.: Coupling Ontologies with
Graphics Content for Knowledge Driven Visualization. VR ’06: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on Virtual Reality (2006).
14. Nguyen, T., D., and Ho, T., B., Nguyen, D.: Data and Knowledge Visualization
in Knowledge Discovery Process. VISUAL ’02: Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Recent Advances in Visual Information Systems (2002).
15. Weng, Z., M., Bell, D.: Integrating Visual Ontologies and Wavelets for Image
Content Retrieval. DEXA ’98: Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on
Database and Expert Systems Applications (1998).
16. Bouzeghoub, M., Goble, C., Kashyap, V., Spaccapietra, S.: Semantics for Grid
Databases. First International IFIP Conference on Semantics of a Networked World
(2004).
17. Kitware Inc.: The Visualization Toolkit, Third Edition (2003).
18. Card, S., K., Mackinlay, J.: The structure of the information visualization design space. Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(1997).
19. Chi, E., Riedl, J.: An Operator Interaction Framework for Visualization Systems.
Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (1998).
20. Martig, S., Castro, S., Fillottrani, P., Estevez, E.: Un Modelo Unificado de Visualizacin. Proceedings 9 Congreso Argentino de Ciencias de la Computacin (2003).
21. Mackinlay, J.: Automating the design of graphical presentations of relational information. ACM Trans. Graph. (1986).
CACIC 2010 - XVI CONGRESO ARGENTINO DE CIENCIAS DE LA COMPUTACIÓN                                                 1065
