Analysis of Radio communication solutions in small and isolated communities under the IEEE 802 22 standard
﻿ In recent years the use of wireless communications has increased 
significantly. Rural communities without cable network communication have 
found a solution in wireless technologies. Based on previous fieldwork, this paper analyzes software development of integration based technologies for communication equipment. It focuses on the feasibility of the IEEE 802.22 standard 
as a solution to the wireless problem. 
Keywords: IEEE 802.22, White Spaces, Cognitive Radio, Rural Communications, Digital TV Broadcast.  
1 Introduction 
In the framework of the Project Communitarian Private Networks [1], different technologies providing links to small and isolated communities have been analyzed and 
compared. These communities, with low population densities, hold no commercial interest to service providers [2], [3], [4]. Notwithstanding, several rural facilities maintain operations in these isolated areas, providing significant quantities of food products at different stages of manufacturing. They supply not only nearby cities, but also 
constitute an important source of export commodities and revenue for many countries. 
The geographic dispersion of these facilities interfere with cable communications –
either with copper pairs, coaxial or optic fiber cables – due to high costs and maintenance problems. Consequently, the solution consists of establishing full duplex links 
via radio waves at a 30 to 70 km distance between antennas and at frequencies not restricted by government regulations [5], [6]. 
Towards the end of the 90s and beginning of this century, technical problems 
evolved side by side with their solutions. The process lead to the approval, on July 1st, 
2011, of the standard IEEE 802.22 - Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Policies and Procedures for 
Operation in the TV Bands [7]. 
1107
The present work analyzes the use of this type of links in the same area where our 
group is conducting fieldwork. 
2 Previous Fieldwork and Testing of New Technologies 
The Project Communitarian Private Networks [5] explores different technologies 
providing communications to small and isolated rural communities with low population densities and without telephone services, whether these may be landlines or cellular. Hence, these communities do not have access to voice, data or internet networks. 
A small community which met the requirements of the Project was searched: an 
isolated and distant town where experiences can be appropriately implemented. The 
community Corral de Lorca, in the department of General Alvear, province of Mendoza was finally selected. Its location is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Geographic Location of Corral de Lorca 
The technologies under study were: Power Line Communications (PLC) [2, 3] and 
the standard 802.11 [4]. Both experiences show that PLC technology is not recommended for outdoor links under the required conditions. 
The considered solution involves establishing a point to point link where one endpoint is located in the departments main city, General Alvear, with access to the 
PSTN network, and the other in the Corral de Lorca community, located in the 
southwest of the province of Mendoza, Argentina. 
Two Motorola Canopy platforms are used at bandwidths of 2.4 GHz and 5.7 GHz 
(similar to WiMax). At the Corral de Lorca node [6], phone services can be implemented through VoIP as well as 802.3 to the Local Area Network and 802.11 for 
Wireless Internet Services. 
The link is placed at a critical distance. Corral de Lorca is 70 kilometers from General Alvear in a straight line over a desert but with dense vegetation close to the base 
station area. To analyze the propagation issues the freeware Radio Mobile developed 
by Roger Coude [8] is used. 
1108
The outcome is not entirely satisfactory. Significant attenuation is registered due to 
the distance of the trans-horizon link and to the strong attenuation resulting from the 
dense vegetation at the outskirts of General Alvear. These factors contribute to a low 
value in the signal/noise ratio at the reception end in Corral de Lorca.  
The conclusions are: 
 The link is studied as a typical case to solve the general problem of rural populations. Hence, it could be generalized later for the application of analogous situations. In these cases, the distance to cover should range between 60 to 70 kilometers. 
 Coordinates and terrain conditions are detailed between the two endpoints. Estimates for different bandwidths are established, i.e. 2.4 GHz and 5.7 GHz. 
 The distance between the endpoints (60 km) is greater than regular distances contemplated in the theory for the application of standard 802.11. 
 In addition, the analysis focuses on the fact that, in practice, transmitted signals in 
rural areas behave differently from those in urban settings because the former suffer less from noise spectrums. Radio Mobile software is considered to be a valuable tool in the design of radio electric links. 
As a result of these experiences, continuing work is focusing on the new 802.22 
standard. 
3 Technical Problems and New Solutions 
3.1 Introduction 
The boundaries between the fields of communications and computer science have 
merged over time. Several concepts used in the field of telecommunications are now 
encountered in computer science and vice versa. Also, methodological practices of 
computer science are an integral part of telecommunications nowadays.  
Consequently, today we refer to both disciplines as Information and Communications Technology - ICT1 or as Teleinformatics, as referred to by European and American scholars.  
Moreover, by the end of the 90s and beginning of this century, wireless communications increased exponentially. For instance, currently the total number of mobile 
phone users exceeds the number of existing landlines. 
The pervasive use of mobile communications presents several technical difficulties, which in turn lead to the development of their consequent technical solutions. In 
the following section, the main changes of the advance in wireless technology are outlined. 
                                                          
1 Also known as TICs in Spanish  
1109
3.2 White Space and Congestion Bands  
Modern societies are increasingly relying on radio spectrum use. The pervasiveness of 
wireless services and communication devices (mobile phones, police communications, Wi-Fi and digital TV broadcasting) are examples of this dependency. It has become one of the most necessary resources of modern times [9]. 
Global demand growth for mobile data traffic has increased between 2011 and 
2012 at a rate over 100%. The expected growth rate of this demand for the period 
2008 and 2013 is estimated to average at 131% per year [10], exceeding 2.000.000 
Terabytes per month by the end of the current year. The intense spectrum use, up to 5 
GHz, and more specifically at the coverage below 1 GHz, has lead to a thorough review of regulatory policies, along with a renewed interest in White Space research 2 
[11]. 
Possible solutions to the increasing traffic, especially below 1 GHz, are: review 
and redesign of the regulatory framework, reduction of wireless services broadcasting, improved compression standards, replacement of various services by satellite or 
cable, dynamic spectrum access, and development of cognitive radio technologies. 
The latter is oriented to take advantage of under-utilized frequencies, temporary voids 
of primary signals, and different types of white space.  
The CEPT, European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations, has defined White Space as “a label indicating a part of the spectrum, 
which is available for radio communication applications (service or system) at a given 
time in a given geographical area on a non-interfering or non-protected basis with regard to other services with a higher priority on a national basis” [12]. Currently, several research efforts from different organizations, national and international, are working on white space.  
Cognitive Radio Technology (CRT) is considered another possibility to address 
the rising spectrum shortage. When fully operational, CRT could provide technologies for a variety of applications (rural broadband, public safety and emergency response, and urban frequency use). This technology will also have significant consequences for dynamic detection and spectrum management. 
3.3 Software Defined Radio 
With the exponential growth of the ways and means by which people need to communicate through wireless communications, modifying radio devices easily and costeffectively has become critical. 
The technology Software Defined Radio (SDR3) provides flexibility and profitability, as well as grants end users with comprehensive benefits from service providers 
and product developers [13]. The Wireless Innovation Forum defines Software Defined Radio as “radio in which some or all of the physical layer functions are software 
defined.” 
The radio is a device which transmits or receives wireless signals using a portion of 
the radio spectrum. Traditional radio devices exclusively based on hardware (e. g.: 
                                                          
2 Or white holes. 
3Also known as Software Radio. 
1110
mixers, filters, amplifiers, modulators/demodulators, and detectors) are limited because their features can be modified only by physical intervention. 
On the other hand, a Software Defined Radio (SDR) is implemented by means of 
software on a computer or embedded system. The concept is not new, but the rapidly 
evolving capabilities of digital electronics render practical many processes which 
used to be only theoretically feasible before [13]. 
Under this technology, the software proves to be efficient at a relatively inexpensive cost, with multimode and multiband wireless devices which can be continuously 
improved with software updates. In some cases, the software manages some or all of 
the functions to operate the radio equipment (including those of the physical layer 
processing). 
3.4 Cognitive Radios 4 
At the end of the decade of the 90s, Joseph Mitola5 and Gerald Maguire, researchers 
from the Royal Institute of Technology6 developed what they called Cognitive Radio, 
an improvement of their previous work on Software Defined Radio technology [14] 
[15],  
While Software Defined Radio offers great potential, it also requires arduous processing, limiting its flexibility and adequacy of network response. 
Cognitive Radio embedded in communications software, such as Radio Knowledge 
Representation Language - RKRL, can be considered an intelligent and efficient system for radio communications and protocols. Basically, it provides mechanisms based 
on the use of smart technology to optimize the spectrum. 
As mentioned in 3.2, the allocation of frequencies in a saturated spectrum is not 
optimal, originating White Space. A special range is assigned to the operators for the 
use of Digital TV Broadcasting.  
Those were the reasons which led to develop Cognitive Radio for wireless communications: to detect the parts of the radio frequency spectrum used inefficiently 
and to allow reuse without causing interference with the services assigned to them. 
The solution of these problems by variable frequency allocation, allows others to take 
advantage of unused parts of the spectrum. 
Using intelligent software, Cognitive Radio periodically scans the spectrum in 
search of white holes, detects the use given to each of them, and then determines 
whether it is reusable. 
The system operates by changing the transmitter parameters based on interaction 
with the environment. It has the ability and the technology to capture or sense the information from other radio equipment, providing spectrum awareness whereas reconfigurability enables the radio to be dynamically programmed.  
It can be programmed to transmit and receive on a variety of frequencies and to use 
different transmission access technologies supported by its hardware design. 
                                                          
4 Mitola defines cognitive as the mix of declarative and procedural knowledge in a self-aware 
learning system. 
5 Joseph Mitola III received his doctorate in the Royal Institute with his thesis Cognitive Radio: 
An Integrated Agent Architecture for Software Defined Radio. 
6 Located in Stockholm, Sweden. 
1111
These operating procedures show the interaction between hardware design and application software development. They also represent a typical teleinformatics application, as characterized by Minola in his thesis. 
3.5 Digital TV Broadcasting 
Frequency spectrum use for TV broadcasting has varied since the first black and 
white broadcasts to the current digital high definition systems. Two bands are used: 
VHF (54 to 88 and 174 to 216 MHz) and UHF (512 to 806 MHz). 
 
 
 
Figure 2a. Province of Buenos Aires Figure 2b. Rest of the country 
In several South American countries, the Japanese standard Integrated Services 
Digital Broadcasting (ISDB) has been adopted with a few variants, such as the replacement of the compressing system MPEG-2 for MPEG-47. It was developed by the 
Association of Radio Industries and Businesses, known as ARIB, which promotes 
the efficient use of the spectrum. 
ISDB include four standards depending on the used medium: ISDB-S (satellite), 
ISDB-T (terrestrial), ISDB-C (cable) and 2.6 GHz mobile broadcasting. All of them 
are based on multiplexing with a transport stream structure and are capable of HighDefinition Television (HDTV) and standard definition television. The name of the 
standard was chosen for its similarity to ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network). 
Both allow the simultaneous transmission of multiple channels of data through the 
multiplexing method. 
In most cases, broadcasting stations have antennas reaching about 150 meters high, 
with significant coverage areas. 
In the case of Argentina, more that 50 broadcasting stations have been set up as of 
July of 2013, covering a significant area of the country. The plan is to cover practically all of the populated areas, giving service to 90% of the population. Figures 2a and 
2b illustrate the cities where these stations have been installed. 
                                                          
7
 International Services Digital Broadcast, Terrestrial Brazilian version ISDB-TB.  
1112
3.6 IEEE 802.22 as a Solution for Rural Areas 
In Argentina, as in many countries with large rural areas, most cities are located 
within a range of 40 to 80 km apart in average. 
The Project Communitarian Private Networks focuses on evaluating solutions to 
the communication problems of rural areas, in particular, isolated communities with 
low population density. 
In our countries, the intensive use of spectrum and saturation in many of its frequency bands is due to wireless communications which has been the only feasible solution. 
The 802.22 standard aims at using the vacancies in the TV spectrum. These frequencies are particularly suitable for remote areas where cables signal transmission 
are expensive or difficult to implement. Cables could only be replaced by costly satellite services. Thus, to implement a link using spare frequencies in these bands may be 
a practical and inexpensive solution. 
In our country, the TV on the VHF band will be eliminated in 2016 (analogic 
blackout), liberating most of the UHF band, considering that the Argentine National 
Authority for Broadcasting Services - AFSCA8 has licensed only a few channels in 
the main cities (22 to 36). 
As the new digital TV technology allows several standard definition programs in 
the same bandwidth of one high definition channel, there is a significant spectrum 
saving, and we still can get lots of free frequencies (channels 38 to 69), mainly in 
small cities. 
It is an opportunity for this IEEE 802.22 standard to be considered in the spectrum 
reallocation under study by the National Argentine Spectrum Authority - CNC9. 
4. IEEE 802.22. Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
4.1.  Introduction 
On July 1st 2011, the standard IEEE 802.22: Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Policies and Procedures for Operation in the TV Band was approved under the sponsorship of the LAN 
/ MAN Standards Committee. 
The standard aims to set up criteria for the deployment of multiple interoperable 
products of the 802.xx series10, offering fixed broadband access in various geographical areas, including especially those of low population density in rural areas, and 
avoiding interference to services working in the television broadcasting bands. 
The standard, commonly known as Wireless Regional Area Networks – WRANs, 
has been developed to operate primarily as broadband access to data networks in rural 
areas. 
                                                          
8 Autoridad Federal de Servicios de Comunicación Audiovisual. 
9 Comisión Nacional de Comunicaciones. 
10 Wireless. 
1113
4.2.  General features 
The standard includes cognitive radio techniques to moderate interference to other existing operators, to grant geolocation capability, to provide access to a database of incumbent services, and to detect the presence of other services through spectrumsensing technology, such as different WRAN systems or IEEE 802.22.111 wireless 
beacons. 
The WRAN systems involve the use of channels ranging from 54 to 862 MHz in 
the VHF and UHF bands. The use of cognitive radio technologies scans for spare frequencies while avoiding interference with TV stations operating in the same bands. 
 
 
Figure 3. 802.22: Working scheme 
Figure 3 illustrates a typical design. Assuming different quality of service (QoS), a 
Base Station - BS complying with the standard provides high-speed Internet services 
of up to 512 Customer Premise Equipments - CPEs, fixed or portable, or groups of 
devices. 
4.3. Cognitive Radio Capability 
The cognitive radio capabilities supported by the standard are required to meet regulatory requirements for protection of frequency of incumbent’s operators as well as to 
provide for efficient operation. They include: spectrum sensing, geolocation services, 
database access, registration and tracking of channel set management [8]. 
In areas where a computer with the IEEE 802.22 standard is intended to operate, 
the detection of operational channels which could be subject to interference includes 
the following: 
 Television broadcasts. 
 Wireless microphone transmissions. 
 Transmissions from protecting devices, such as a Wireless Beacon12. 
 Other transmissions such as medical telemetry that may need to be protected in the 
local regulatory domain. 
                                                          
11 IEEE 802.22.1: Standard to Enhance Harmful Interference Protection for Low-Power Licensed Devices Operating in the TV Broadcast Bands. 2010. 
12 IEEE 802.22.1. 
1114
4.4. Topology 
The standard topology is point-to-multipoint. The protocol works in a master/slave 
procedure, so that each CPE requires approval from the BS to transmit. 
The system functions with a Base Station - BS and multiple Customer Premise 
Equipment - CPEs. The base station controls the whole link, as well as its own performance and the CPE stations. It executes media access control, modulation of the 
RF transmission, coding, and selection of operating frequencies. 
The CPE uses an antenna system as shown in figure 4. It has a directional antenna 
similar to those used for transmitting/receiving TV signals, one sensing antenna that 
surveys the spectrum to determine which frequencies are available and a GPS antenna 
to determine the exact location of the transmitting station [8]. 
 
 
Figure 4. Customer Premise Equipment Antennas 
When the sensing antenna detects a band of the spectrum in use, the cognitive radio system changes the transmission features to avoid interference while granting priority to TV operators. 
The GPS determines the exact location of the detected signal, so that the system 
searches the database service of the regulatory agency and find free frequencies for 
frequency hopping. According to the received information, the base station changes or 
not the parameters of transmission/reception. 
4.5. The IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Committee: Family of Wireless Standards 
The IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standard Committee has developed a large and diverse 
family of wireless data communication standards. Since the first 802.3 version to the 
present, they have dealt with different requirements in wireless communications.  
Figure 5 illustrates the most significant wireless standards and the relative position 
of the 802.22. 
1115
 Figure 5. Different Wireless Standards Developed by the IEEE 802 Committee 
The standard provides wireless broadband access in rural areas within a range of 
30 up to a maximum of 100 km from a base station. 
4.6. Physical Layer - PHY 
Similarly to the Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line – ADSL, the IEEE 802.22 
standard provides broadband access at a data transfer rate of 1.5 Mbps for uplink and 
384 kbps for downlink (Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 6. Different Wireless Standards Developed for the IEEE 802 Committee 
It works with multiplexing Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access - 
OFDMA and defines twelve combinations of three modulations: QPSK - Quaternary 
Phase Shift Keying, 16-QAM, and 64-QAM Quadrature Amplitude Modulation; and 
convolutional coding for error handling with the procedure Forward Error Control - 
FEC. 
 
1116
 Figure 7. Details the Different Features of the Standard 
4.7. Medium Access Control Layer - MAC 
The MAC layer supports cognitive capabilities. Thus, it must have mechanisms for 
flexible and efficient data transmission. It must guarantee the reliable protection of 
services in the TV band and should be allowed to coexist with other 802.22 systems. 
This layer is applicable to any region in the world and does not require countryspecific parameter sets. 
It is connection-oriented and provides flexibility in terms of QoS support. It also 
regulates downstream medium access by TDM, while the upstream is managed by an 
OFDMA system. The BS manages all the activities within its cell and the associated 
CPEs are under the control of the BS. 
5. Conclusions 
Societies today have become highly dependent on the radio spectrum with the intensive use of wireless devices and communication services. Cognitive Radio, using intelligent software and taking advantage of white holes, may be a solution to spectrum 
saturation. 
The Project Communitarian Private Networks has focused on evaluating solutions 
to the communication problems of rural areas. It has concluded that wireless communications may be among the feasible solutions. 
Taking advantage that Argentina has a plan to cover a significant area of its territory with a TV broadcasting system, the conditions may be the ideal to introduce simultaneously the 802.22 standard to the problem of rural communications. 
The Project Communitarian Private Networks continues its work on this line of 
research. 
1117
6. Acknowledgements 
The financial support provided by Agencia Nacional para la Promoción Científica y 
Tecnológica (Project PICTO 11- PICTO 11-18621 is gratefully acknowledged. 
7.  References 
[1] Antonio Castro Lechtaler (Director). PICTO 11-18621. Redes Privadas Comunitarias. Proyecto FONCyT, ANPCyT. Working Paper. 
[2] J. Garcia Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler, R. Fusario and Guillermo Sevilla. 
Physical and Link Layer in Power Line Communications Technologies. Proceedings of 13th 
of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 978 - 950 – 656 – 109 – 3. pp. 56 a 67. 
Corrientes. October 2007. 
[3] J. García Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler, R. Fusario and Guillermo Sevilla. 
Power Line Communications in the Electric Network. Proceedings of 13th of Argentine 
Congress on Computer Science ISBN 978 - 950 – 656 – 109 – 3. pp. 68 a 79. Corrientes. 
October 2007. 
[4] J. García Guibout, C. García Garino, A. Castro Lechtaler and R. Fusario. Transmission 
voice over 802.11. Proceedings of 14th of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 
978 - 987 - 24611 - 0 - 2. pp. 307 a 318. Chilecito. October 2008. 
[5] A. Castro Lechtaler, A. Foti, R. Fusario, C. García Garino and J. García Guibout. Communication Access to Small and Remote Communities: The Corral de Lorca Project. Proceedings of 15th of Argentine Congress on Computer Science. ISBN 978 - 897 - 24068 - 4 - 1. pp. 
1.117 a 1.126. Jujuy. October 2009. 
[6] A. Castro Lechtaler, A. Foti, C. García Garino, J. García Guibout, R. Fusario and A. Arroyo 
Arzubi. Proyecto Corral de Lorca: Una solución de conectividad a grupos poblacionales pequeños, aislados y distantes de centros urbanos. Proceedings de la Novena Conferencia Iberoamericana en Sistemas, Cibernética e Informática: CISCI 2010. - Volume III - ISBN - 13: 
978 – 1 – 934272 – 96 - 1. PP. 121 a 127. Orlando, USA. June 2010. 
[7] http://www.cplus.org/rmw/index.html (Radio mobile software). 
[8] IEEE 802.22 - Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Policies and Procedures for Operation in the TV Bands. 
[9] Carlos Cordeiro, Kiran Challapali, and Dagnachew Birru, Sai Shankar N. IEEE 802.22: An 
Introduction to the First Wireless Standard based on Cognitive Radios Journal of Communications, Vol. 1, N° 1, april 2006. 
[10] C. Gómez. Spectrum Regulation and Policy Officer Radiocommunication Bureau. 
www.itu.int/ITU-D/asp/CMS/Events/.../ITU-APT-S3_Cristian_Gomez.pdf. ITU. Apia, 
Samoa. April 2013. 
[11] CEPT Report 24. A preliminary assessment of the feasibility of fitting new/future applications/services into non-harmonized spectrum of the digital dividend (namely the so-called 
"white spaces" between allotments. Report C from CEPT to the European Commission in 
response to the Mandate on: Technical considerations regarding harmonization options for 
the Digital Dividend. 1 July 2008. 
[12] http://www.wirelessinnovation.org/introduction_to_sdr 
[13] Dillinger, M; Madani, K; Alonistioti, N. Software Defined Radio: Architectures, Systems 
and Functions. Ed. Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[14] J. Mitola, G. Maguire. Cognitive radio: making software radios more personal. IEEE Personal Communications Magazine, vol. 6, Nr. 4, pp. 13–18, Aug. 1999. 
[15] J. Mitola. Cognitive Radio: An Integrated Agent Architecture for Software Defined Radio. 
Dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the degree of Doctor of Technology. Royal 
Institute of Technology (KTH) - Teleinformatics. ISSN 1403 - 5286. Sweden. May 8, 2000. 
1118
