ISSN 1810-0732

4
FAO ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND HEALTH

proceedings

THE DYNAMICS OF SANITARY AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS ASSISTING THE POOR TO COPE
Expert Consultation Rome, 22 ­ 24 June 2004

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2005

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

ISBN 92-5-105348-0

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org

© FAO 2005

iii

Contents
Glossary Executive summary Introduction Background v vii xi xiii

Scope and definitions
Standards Risk analysis, food chains and value chains The poor

1
1 1 2

Who and what drives standards setting?
Drivers of standards Standards setting processes Problems for developing countries and the poor

5
5 7 7

How do existing and anticipated standards affect the structure of the livestock food chain and vice versa? Who is winning and who is losing from changes?
Winners Losers

9 13
13 13

What can be done to help the losers? In particular, what can be done to assist the poor to cope?
Standards setting Assistance in complying with standards Exit strategies

15
15 16 17

Recommendations
FAO mandate and activities Challenges for the future The standards setting process Methodology The overall approach to food safety and veterinary public health Advocacy on behalf of developing countries Dissemination of information

19
19 19 19 20 20 21 21

iv

Strategy

21

Working papers References Additional Bibliography Annexe 1. List of participants
Experts Observers FAO Secretariat

23 25 27 31
31 32 33

v

Glossary
AGAL BSE CoAg Livestock Information Sector Analysis and Policy Branch Bovine Spongiform Encepalopathy Committee on Agriculture

CODEX Codex Alimentarius Commission EU FAO HPAI LIC MRL NGO OIE SPS TBT UHT WTO European Union Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Low-Income Country Maximum Residue Level Non-Governmental Organization World Organisation for Animal Health Sanitary and Phytosanitary Technical Barriers to Trade Ultra High Temperature World Trade Organization

vii

Executive summary
An FAO expert consultation on The Dynamics of Sanitary and Technical Requirements: Assisting the Poor to Cope was held at the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in Rome from 22 to 24 June 2004. Six experts provided working papers and participated in the consultation. The objective of the consultation was to provide advice to FAO and Member Governments on the impact of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards on domestic livestock markets, and in particular the poor who participate in livestock food chains, and the extent to which their concerns are being addressed. The consultation was asked to deliberate on the following questions: a. Who drives standards setting in food safety and animal health? b. How do existing and anticipated standards affect the structure of the livestock food chain and vice versa? c. Who is winning and who is losing from changes? d. What can be done to help the losers? In particular, what can be done to assist the poor to cope? Scope of the consultation and definitions While the consultation recognized that a wide range of standards can be applied in livestock food chains, the discussion focused on standards encompassed by the SPS agreement. SPS standards and regulations are one measure within a risk management strategy for livestock and public health. Since the consultation believes that setting and application of standards is an element of risk management, it follows that standards should be evaluated within a risk management framework. A value chain approach can be used to good effect to take into account participation and distributional impacts. There has been little work done to make a systematic typification of livestock value chains. Who and what drives standards setting? Standards are driven by consumers with high purchasing power, the demands of the export market, competition within the national market from export or export quality goods, and the influence of tourism. Consumers with high purchasing power demand food which is safe, sustainable and ethical, free of toxic substances, residues, additives and contaminants. Consumers may have a disproportionate influence on standards setting compared to producers. Developed countries also have a disproportionately high role in both World Organisation for Animal Health and Codex. International standards should ideally be set at levels necessary for safety, but no higher, or they become exclusionary. In countries where supermarkets have made inroads into the domestic market, they introduce a variety of both safety and technical standards.

viii

International standards setting, which sets the framework for negotiating power in the international arena, requires an understanding of the negotiating process and the ability to participate. There is a lack of representation of developing countries in SPS meetings and also in Codex. The private sector is having an important impact. Public sector involvement often seems to lag behind the private sector, or even be driven by the private sector. Developing countries face a number of problems that prevent them from fully participating in the international standards setting process. These include lack of resources to attend meetings and prior negotiations, limited exploration of alternative measures more suited to developing countries, lack of economic evaluation, complexity of standards, frequent changes, lack of legal recourse. How do existing and anticipated standards affect the structure of the livestock food chain and vice versa? Food security has been an emphasis for many developing countries. Food safety is considered very important in developed countries but elsewhere has received less attention. Food safety needs to be given increasing but appropriate emphasis, as it is important to the poor. It is not evident that risk is taken into account when assessing appropriate standards. Governments should be setting the minimum national level of risk. However, the international community needs to help them to do the appropriate risk assessment. Trends in food chains include lengthening of chains, vertical integration and market concentration. There has been a decoupling of production locations from consumption, and therefore the risks through the food chain become an issue. OIE and Codex standards should be the minimum needed for safe operation of long food chains. The consultation is concerned that these standards are in fact moving to become more representative of affluent country producers and consumers, which may create obstacles to regional trade. Cross-border food chains, and a dramatic rise in the market share of the modern retail sector in many countries have created a number of effects. Most notably, these are changes in procurement systems and shifts towards private safety and quality standards. Regional diversification and value adding introduces new products and the need for new standards. People who are not involved in any kind of integration or concentration may not be affected by international standards at all, and they may continue to apply local standards. However, if consumers learn of new products or new standards, this may change the value of traditional knowledge.

Who is winning and who is losing from changes? Impacts may be complex, affect each stakeholder differently, and change over time. Winners include: · countries and people with negotiating power, who can influence the standards setting process to minimise negative impacts; · those that receive external support to overcome the time lag between increased

ix

investment and increased returns; · those who benefit from job creation; · producers or consumers who experience positive externalities through improved livestock services or general raising of food safety standards; · consumers who can afford safe food. Losers include: · countries or individuals that are unable to participate in the lobbying process; · countries or individuals that cannot afford to meet compliance requirements, because of overall cost or cash flow problems; · those affected by barriers to trade created when international standards are above minimum required standards for food safety; · the developed country consumer may lose if standards are not appropriately formed by science in view of the trends to intensification and consolidation; · those adversely affected by the risks in high value markets. What can be done to help the losers? In particular, what can be done to assist the poor to cope? Food safety is linked to food security, is beneficial to the poor when it is provided at an appropriate level, and deserves a higher priority on national agendas. More efforts are needed to facilitate the poorest to access the negotiating process that precedes meetings. Membership of international standards setting bodies and trading blocs is beneficial. Poor producers and poor consumers are unlikely to have much voice in the standards setting process until they become organised and join lobbying groups. It is necessary to promote standards setting appropriate for the risk management situation, and that can actually be enforced. There is a need to make more effort in helping all member countries of these organizations to access the SPS information system. It is important that all governments use standards setting as part of a risk management system, i.e. one that considers the level of risk and the measures that might be applied to mitigate it. Decision support tools are needed to assist policy makers. Mandated international organizations should provide their own assessment of the impact of changing standards on the poorest. Good practice guidelines for practitioners exist, but not for all commodities and production systems, and they need to be updated and more widely disseminated. Assisting small farmers, traders and processors to enter formal (regulated) or vertically integrated markets will include but not be restricted to helping them to comply with standards. Involvement of the private sector can produce beneficial changes, however this requires political stability, a sufficiently large and concentrated consumer population, a sufficient number of livestock producers to provide the necessary volume of produce, and sufficient infrastructure. Those who cannot participate in the formal market may need to exit from livestock production and may require assistance.

x

Recommendations for FAO Encourage a national agenda of gradual implementation to avoid serious adverse impact on the most vulnerable producers and consumers. Be aware of proposals from the standards setting bodies, to review their impact on developing countries and different types of farming system, and consider them in an holistic manner. Efforts should be made to identify the gaps in the science that impact on the standards setting process and provide information to the bodies and member countries involved in standards setting. This is the responsibility of the whole international community. Monitor, as a regular process, the attendance of developing countries at key standards setting meetings, and explore alternative and innovative methods that do not necessarily involve attending central meetings. There is no international organization currently monitoring, evaluating or communicating the impact of standards on sustainable development. It falls within FAO's mandate to take on this role, taking a lead in this process. Standards setting within a risk management context is a multi-disciplinary activity. FAO has a number of separate initiatives. These need to be synergized and harmonised into a programme. The consistent application of a standard framework is essential, and this should include economic evaluation. A value chain approach is useful to identify distributional and governance issues. SPS standards can be valuable in promoting food safety, but the process by which they are set, and the speed at which they are implemented, may result in exclusion of vulnerable groups. FAO should develop appropriate strategies for analysis of the problem and promote effective methods of dealing with it. FAO is in a position to champion and protect the interests of least developed member states and work with regional groups of standards setting organizations to take into account issues of relevance to low-income countries. Information on food safety standards is available but scattered. There is a need to co-ordinate the dissemination of such information in a way that is useful to developing countries. The recently established FAO biosecurity information portal is highly recommended. Advice and technical packages for practitioners, related to animal health food safety standards, are valuable ­ more are needed. They should be based on a supply-driven focus to risk management in the food or value chain. This consultation and its documentation should be converted into a strategy for assisting the poor in the context of SPS agreements and should be funded accordingly.

xi

Introduction
An FAO expert consultation on The Dynamics of Sanitary and Technical Requirements: Assisting the Poor to Cope was held at the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in Rome from 22 to 24 June 2004. Six experts provided working papers and participated in the consultation. A further two experts provided background notes. Members of the Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative Steering Committee acted as observers providing additional inputs. A full list of participants is given in Annexe 1. Ms Louise Fresco, Assistant Director-General, Agriculture Department of FAO, opened the consultation of behalf of FAO. Ms Fresco noted that the meeting is timely as the Millennium Development Goals are being re-thought 10 years after Rio and the Brundtland report. There have been several declarations on food security and lately on food safety and biosecurity. The challenge is to find ways that these can be translated into concrete actions. Ms Fresco reminded the meeting of ongoing FAO discussions on trade, food chain approaches and health and nutrition which relate to the subject of the consultation. It is important to consider ways to make trade work for the poor, and the way in which standards relate to this. There is a general concern about the existence of higher standards for the rich and lower for the poor, and a need to define how standards are being applied in practice differently to the way they were negotiated. FAO has adopted a food chain approach, accepted last year at CoAg. The food chain approach needs to build a new type of inter-disciplinarity and to take into account that innovations in the food chain will come from the consumer side, reflecting rapid changes in consumer demands in developing countries. FAO engages in the debate on health and nutrition as related to food. A further emphasis needs to be placed on linking poverty, trade and health aspects, for example how to look at maximum residue levels. These are delicate and politically loaded questions. FAO needs to engage more in issues related to trade and biosecurity, capacity building, technical advice, policy advice and negotiation capacities in this varied area of animal production, trade, health. FAO works with academia but also has opened the doors to NGOs and the private sector and is moving away from rigid government intervention. Mr J. Scudamore acted as Chairperson for the consultation. Ms A. McLeod (FAO, AGAL) acted as rapporteur.

xiii

Background
Livestock food chains worldwide are changing to respond to changing demands for quantity and quality of livestock products. Within middle-income, low-income and leastdeveloped countries, changes include increased industrialization, geographic shifts, and new forms of marketing and co-operation including increased vertical integration. Standards and regulations for animal health, food safety and food quality affect and are affected by the structure of livestock food chains. These standards are increasing in stringency, complexity and cost. They are variable in nature and driven by multiple forces, which include international agreements and bodies, national policies and laws, and the requirements of large scale retailers. Consumers in affluent countries have a major impact on standards setting, yet the results may affect poor and marginal producers, processors and consumers who do not directly trade in the global market and have very little voice in the standards setting process. The private sector has an increasing influence, while the impact of the public sector is limited and policies do not always reflect the needs of the various stakeholders in livestock food chains. While the safety and quality of food for consumers is of paramount importance, a balance must be found between their needs and the livelihoods of vulnerable producers, traders and processors. Standards set may be inappropriate for local circumstances, imposing unnecessarily high demands on poor and marginal players, who may then be excluded from markets without alternative forms of livelihood. Many developing countries would wish to expand their capacity to carry out the necessary analysis of what is appropriate for their domestic circumstances, and to negotiate in the international arena for standards that allow them to trade internationally and in a responsible manner, while at the same time promoting locally appropriate safety and quality of food. It is the responsibility of FAO to assist such countries in analyzing their respective situations, defining appropriate food safety and quality policies that do not lead to increased livelihood vulnerability, and engaging productively in international dialogue on standards and regulations. The objective of this consultation was to provide advice to FAO and Member Governments on the impact of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards on domestic livestock markets, and in particular the poor who participate in livestock food chains, and the extent to which their concerns are being addressed. The consultation was asked to deliberate on the following questions: a. who drives standards setting in food safety and animal health? b. how do existing and anticipated standards affect the structure of the livestock food chain and vice versa? c.who is winning and who is losing from changes? d. what can be done to help the losers? In particular, what can be done to assist the poor to cope? An FAO/OIE workshop was held during Livestock Week, Montpellier, March 22-25

xiv

2004 and attended by members of the CGIAR system, international organizations and representatives of donors to livestock research. At this workshop, papers were presented on: `Trends in livestock market chains'; `Dynamics of animal health regulations'; `Food safety and quality requirements affecting the livestock sector'; `Technical and quality requirements of retailers'. Questions arising from the papers were debated by working groups and produced preliminary recommendations that were made available to the members of the current consultation while they prepared their working papers.

1

Scope and definitions

STANDARDS
While the consultation recognized that a wide range of standards can be applied in livestock food chains, relating to animal health, food safety and other technical requirements, the discussion focused on standards encompassed by the SPS agreement. These have a well developed institutional infrastructure including formal international regulations as well as nationally and locally applied standards. SPS standards derive from the need to maintain animal health and food safety when countries trade livestock and livestock products internationally. Without international standards, many countries would adopt a `zero-risk' policy and would use unnecessarily stringent precautionary measures as a sanitary barrier to trade. The imposition of international standards provides a basis for negotiation and guidance based on the best assessments of the science available. The issue at stake is the identification of hazards and management of risk for countries and people. SPS standards and regulations are one measure within a risk management strategy for livestock and public health.

RISK ANALYSIS, FOOD CHAINS AND VALUE CHAINS
Since the consultation believes that setting and application of standards is an element of risk management, it follows that standards should be evaluated within a risk management framework. This framework would encompass the definition of hazards, identification and assessment of risk, as well as the development of a strategy to manage risk elements and risk communication. Animal health and food safety are affected by events that occur throughout the food chain (using the term in a market rather than physical sense), from input supply to consumer. Therefore, the development and enforcement of SPS standards needs to reflect risk along the whole food chain. FAO acknowledges the relevance of a food chain approach to food safety:
"...recognition that the responsibility for the supply of food that is safe, healthy and nutritious is shared along the entire food chain - by all involved with the production, processing, trade and consumption of food. This approach encompasses the whole food chain from primary production to final consumption. Stakeholders include farmers, fishermen, slaughterhouse operators, food processors, transport operators, distributors (wholesale and retail) and consumers, as well as governments obliged to protect public health. The holistic approach to food safety along the food chain differs from previous models in which responsibility for safe food tended to concentrate on the food processing sector."
FAO, 2003a

In order to assess impact on the poor, it is important to use an approach that takes into

2

FAO expert consultation

account participation and distributional impacts. A value chain approach can be used to good effect:
"The value chain describes the full range of activities which are required to bring a product or service from conception, through the different phases of production... delivery to final consumers, and final disposal after use. (Kaplinsky and Morris, 2000) .... "...the emergence of 'value chains' as the foremost organizational arrangement in global food markets. In contrast with a 'supply chain' dynamic, where production is often insensitive to market requirements and the focus is exclusively on efficient logistics, a value chain is demand-driven. A value chain recognises the real opportunities that all participants have to contribute and to increase product value through skilful management in meeting market requirements." GRDC (2003) "a vertical alliance or strategic network between a number of independent business organizations within a supply chain. A value chain is created when organizations have a shared vision and common goals. It is formed to meet specific market objectives through satisfying the needs of consumers." (Hobbs, Cooney and Fulton, 2000).

There are several definitions of value chains and value chain approaches. Important work was done by Porter in the 1980s who defined parallel value and support chains. The "Filière" approach is essentially a value chain one. The relevance of the approach is that it takes into account value changes along the chain, providing a distributional dimension, and it also considers the participation of different actors, bringing into focus the governance and control of the chain. For the present discussion, food chains (and possibly value chains) were typified as follows: · formal, regulated, complying with SPS standards, long and vertically integrated, including an international dimension; · formal, regulated, complying with national standards; · vertically integrated national; · concentrated national, e.g. co-operatives; · informal, unregulated, standards set by agreement between producer and consumer: many of the poor sell to and buy from informal markets. With illegal standards set by agreement between producer and consumer, there may be no compliance with national or international standards. Examples of this include: · tax evasion; · cross-border trade in domestic animals; · trade in bush meat. There has been little work done to make a systematic typification of livestock value chains. This would be a valuable starting point for analysis of the impact of standards.

THE POOR
The consultation addressed two dimensions of poverty ­ developing countries and poor people. Developing countries (notably Low-Income Countries or LICs) need to be singled out for special consideration because of: · the extent to which they may or may not be involved in standards setting;

Scope and definitions

3

· the extent to which they choose are or able to apply international standards; · problems of dumping where unequal standards are applied between countries. The poor within a country will experience the effect of standards in a variety of ways. Their point of participation in the value chain (production, trading, wholesaling, processing, consumption) may affect the way that they experience the impact of standards more than their physical location (e.g. rural/urban). Different levels of poverty can be seen and have been formally defined. They include the destitute (often described as below the poverty line, which in the international definition means having an income of less than $1 a day) as well as those who are not destitute but are still vulnerable. It is accepted that there are poor people within rich and middle-income countries. FAO's priority reflects the Millennium Development Goals and is likely therefore to place most emphasis on poor people within the poorest countries. However, the consultation did not consider it appropriate to place strict boundaries around the poor for the purpose of this discussion.

5

Who and what drives standards setting?

The standards imposed internationally and nationally are driven by the need to manage risk in the food chain. The demand for changes in standards is created by drivers within a country's economy, while the institutional structure influences the way in which standards are defined and imposed.

DRIVERS OF STANDARDS Consumers with high purchasing power
Consumers are the primary drivers of standards. Those who are very poor are concerned mostly with access to food. As their livelihoods improve, they become concerned with safety and then with other less tangible quality elements. Consumers with high purchasing power demand, as a right, food which is safe, sustainable and ethical, free of toxic substances, residues, additives and contaminants. They have influence, hence their preferences become reflected in standards set and imposed by the public and private sectors. In any national livestock food chain, the demand for health and safety standards is influenced by an interaction between the demands of the export market and competition within the national market.

FIGURE 1

Consumer needs and expectations

??? Enviroment, tecnologies (GMOs), animal health & welfare...


Function Conscience Convenience Safety Access/Affordability Tangible Quality

Social responsability & personal Values

Perceived Quality

Ethics, fair trade, labor iusses, rural life, politics...

6

FAO expert consultation

Export
Consumers in affluent countries have a major impact on standards setting. Their preferences are expressed through their governments, international supermarket chains and multinational food processors. Long, vertically integrated market chains originate in developing countries to supply consumers in affluent countries. Consumers may have a disproportionate role in standards setting compared to producers. A culture of litigation encourages retailers in developed countries to pursue a `zero-risk' policy, to demand very high international standards and expect government to enforce them. International retailers demand safety standards that are at least as strict as those set by international agreements and in some cases (e.g. organic food) may be higher, while other technical standards (consistency of appearance and flavour, volume, animal welfare) may also be very high. Developed countries also have a disproportionately high role in both OIE and Codex. Little account is taken of the needs and circumstances of developing countries in e.g. setting MRLs. For instance, developed countries and affluent consumers consume on average much higher quantities of meat but lower quantities of maize than the poor in Africa, and MRL levels reflect developed country consumption. No alternatives are considered based on dietary patterns. International standards should ideally be set at levels necessary for safety, but no higher, or they become unnecessarily exclusionary. One example is the need for very expensive laboratories to test MRL levels which are becoming increasingly stringent but may not be a realistic reflection of the safety needs of the consumer.

Competition on the national market from export quality or local goods
Standards imposed by export can affect those in domestic markets. Examples include Thailand, where chickens for export are produced by approved farms and slaughtered by approved abattoirs. However, some parts are not exported and enter the domestic market, where they are consumed by a variety of people including the poor. This has created an expectation of standards among urban consumers. In South Africa, competition from imported foreign cheese, which is more expensive than the local product but has a longer shelf life and is preferred by consumers who can afford it, has led to a raising of standards by some local processors. Income influences the market for standards ­ as people become richer, they demand higher standards. In countries where supermarkets have made inroads into the domestic market, they introduce a variety of standards, both safety (e.g. quality testing of milk, use of packaging) and technical (e.g. labelling, type of cut). Livestock products have been less affected than vegetables, but the share of milk passing through supermarkets is increasing rapidly, e.g. in China. Producer groups may attempt to use SPS measures to prevent `dumping', although under WTO this cannot be done purely as a trade barrier, but only where local standards justify it.

Tourism and media impact
Tourism creates a direct relationship between the consumers of one country and the

Who and what drives standards setting?

7

producers and processors of another. It may create a demand for certain products and safety standards, perhaps resulting in a specialized market niche, or eventually influencing the preferences of consumers from the host country. It may also create a hazard if tourists travel in livestock producing areas and then return home. Consumer preference is affected by the information at their disposal. Hence, there is concern among middle class consumers in Africa about genetically modified organisms, which have received considerable media exposure, but rather less about zoonoses which have an immediate and major impact on human health.

STANDARDS SETTING PROCESSES
International standards setting, which sets the framework for negotiating power in the international arena, requires an understanding of the negotiating process and the ability to participate. There is a lack of representation of developing countries in SPS meetings and also in Codex and this may be leading to an unnecessary trend towards raising of international standards (which should be those necessary for safe food consumption rather than zero tolerance). In addition to standards setting, negotiations are needed for international trad