Cover illustration by Emanuela D'Antoni

Model plan for a Pacific Island country
National plan of action to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2005

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

ISBN 92-5-105374-X

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org

© FAO

2005

iii

PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document presents a model plan for a Pacific Island country to assist in the elaboration of a National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (NPOA-IUU). It was prepared by FAO Consultant, Colin Brown, under a regional project funded by the FAO Technical Cooperation Programme, TCP/RAS/3009(A), Elaboration of a National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing for the Federated States. Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing is increasing in world fisheries and is proving to be a major obstacle in the achievement of long-term sustainability and enhanced responsibility in fisheries. The model NPOA-IUU outlined in this document seeks to facilitate the wider implementation of the 2001 FAO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU) in the Pacific Islands region. Action towards this end is consistent with the large number of calls that have been made in international fora for States, industry and other stakeholders to take steps to implement the IPOA-IUU. Although the Model Plan has been developed specifically for the Pacific Islands region based on the realities of its fisheries, management challenges and regional institutional arrangements, the concepts and ideas underlying the Model Plan could be modified and adapted for use in other regions. Brown, C. Model plan for a Pacific Island country. National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. Rome, FAO. 2005. 43p. ABSTRACT The Model Plan for the elaboration of an NPOA-IUU is designed to assist Pacific Island States give effect to the IPOA-IUU. The model incorporates the essential aspects and features of the IPOA-IUU, demonstrating how a NPOA-IUU might be drafted. In seeking to address IUU fishing the model provides an introduction (with an important focus on the fisheries situation in the model country) followed by measures that might be adopted under the headings of all State responsibilities, flag State responsibilities, coastal State measures, port State measures, internationally agreed market-related measures, research, regional fisheries management organizations and the special requirements of developing countries. Importantly, the model in the Appendix provides a checklist of supporting actions that Pacific Island States should take in developing and implementing their NPOAs-IUU.

v

CONTENTS Acronyms and abbreviations Executive summary 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 Purpose 1.2 FAO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing 1.3 Definition of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing 1.4 Why is IUU fishing a problem ? 1.5 Fisheries profile 1.5.1 Marine fisheries 1.5.1.1 The subsistence fishery 1.5.1.2 Coastal commercial fishery 1.5.1.3 The industrial fishery 1.5.2 Economic considerations 1.5.2.1 Economic role of the fishing industry 1.5.2.2 Economic policy objectives of the government for the fisheries sector 1.5.2.3 Development prospects 1.5.3 Fisheries management 1.5.3.1 Coastal commercial fisheries 1.5.3.2 Industrial fisheries 1.5.4 The Fisheries Management Act 1.5.5 Research and training 1.5.6 Development assistance 1.5.7 International and regional law and relations 1.5.7.1 Treaties and agreements 1.5.7.2 Membership of regional fishery bodies 1.6 Impact of IUU Fishing 1.7 Scope of the NPOA-IUU 2. ALL STATE RESPONSIBILITIES 2.1 International instruments viii ix 1 1 1 2 3 5 5 5 6 7 8 8 9 9 10 10 12 15 15 16 16 16 17 19 20 20 20

vi

2.2 National legislation 2.2.1 Legislation 2.2.2 State control over nationals 2.2.3 Vessels without nationality 2.2.4 Sanctions 2.2.5 Non-cooperating States 2.2.6 Economic incentives 2.2.7 Monitoring, control and surveillance 2.2.8 Cooperation between States 2.2.9 Publicity 3. FLAG STATE RESPONSIBILITIES 3.1 Fishing vessel registration 3.2 Record of fishing vessels 3.3 Authorization to fish 3.4 Measures to control transport and re-supply vessels 4. COASTAL STATE RESPONSIBILITIES 5. PORT STATE MEASURES 5.1 Advance notice of access 5.2 Denial of access 5.3 Authorized ports 5.4 Evidence indicating IUU fishing 5.5 Cooperation with port States and through RFMOs 6. INTERNATIONALLY AGREED MARKET-RELATED MEASURES 6.1 Trade-related measures 6.1.1 Catch documentation schemes 6.1.2 Transparency of markets 6.1.3 Information dissemination

22 22 22 23 23 24 24 25 27 28 28 28 29 30 31 31 32 32 33 33 34 35 35 35 36 36 37

vii

7. REGIONAL FISHERIES MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATIONS 7.1 Party compliance 7.2 Non-party compliance 7.3 Innovation 7.4 Inclusion of non-contracting parties 8. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

37 37 38 38 39 40

APPENDIX: Supporting action Table 1: Fisheries exports (FOB) 2001-2003 Table 2: List of instruments ratified by the PIC

41 8 21

viii

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 1982 UN Convention 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 1993 FAO Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas 1995 United Nations Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks automatic location communicators Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora FAO Committee on Fisheries exclusive economic zone fish aggregation devices Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency 1979 Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Convention Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations free on board 2001 FAO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing International Maritime Organization institutional strengthening project monitoring, control and surveillance Harmonized Minimum Terms and Conditions of Access for Foreign Fishing Vessels 1992 Niue Treaty on Cooperation in Fisheries Surveillance and Law Enforcement in the Pacific Islands Region 1999 FAO National Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity

ALC CITES COFI EEZ FADs FFA FFA Convention FAO FOB IPOA-IUU

IMO ISP MCS MTCs Niue Treaty

NPOA-Capacity

ix

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This document provides a model National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (NPOA-IUU) for a Pacific Island country (PIC). The Plan has been developed in accordance with the 2001 FAO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in 2001. Protection of the marine ecosystem is a key issue for the PIC in its bid to ensure food security. All fishing activities that degrade the marine environment and that threaten the health of fish stocks in the PIC and the wider Pacific Islands region is a threat to the health and livelihood of the PIC people and to the supply of fish, particularly tuna, available to the outside world. Coastal marine resources as well as the deepwater snapper and grouper stocks are already under stress from legitimate fishers and so the additional impact on resources by illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishers will be catastrophic. The PIC is conscious that the Pacific Islands region's tropical tuna resources are in a generally healthy state and that these resources contribute significantly to the world's supply of tuna. Along with partner small island developing States (SIDS) in the region, the PIC is concerned to ensure the long-term sustainability of these resources both for food security purposes and because the PIC is seeking to derive long-term economic benefit from the exploitation of tunas. The domestic tuna industry has expanded significantly in recent years and has the prospect for further expansion. Currently, fresh and frozen tunas make up approximately 25 percent of total export earnings. In future, domestic demand for tuna will increase as coastal fishery resources become fully exploited. IUU fishing on tuna and associated species is a threat to food and economic security as the PIC seeks to develop a sustainable and viable tuna fishing and processing industry. The PIC has limited fisheries management resources and relies to some extent on regional and bilateral cooperation to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. The PIC is committed to further developing its management capacity and to working with partner States, both in the region and internationally, to ensure the conservation and long-term sustainable use of fish stocks and the protection of the environment.

x

Since the PIC has adopted fisheries management initiatives developed regionally and has enacted new legislation that incorporates principles contained in the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement, the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement and the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, to a large extent, this document is a record of actions already underway. There are, however, a number of matters to be considered for further action and these are listed at the end of the document. The PIC will review the NPOA-IUU on an ongoing basis and will submit revisions to FAO, as required.

1

1. 1.1

INTRODUCTION Purpose

This document provides a model National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (NPOA-IUU) for a Pacific Island country (PIC). The NPOA-IUU has been developed in accordance with the 2001 FAO International Plan of Action (IPOA-IUU) to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing (IPOA-IUU). The IPOA-IUU was adopted by the Committee on Fisheries (COFI) of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in 2001 and later in that year, endorsed by the FAO Council. 1.2 FAO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing

The IPOA-IUU was developed as a voluntary instrument within the framework of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The objective of the IPOA-IUU is to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing by providing all States with comprehensive, effective and transparent measures by which to act, including through appropriate regional fishery management organizations (RFMOs) or arrangements established in accordance with international law. The IPOA-IUU called on States to develop and implement NPOAs-IUU by June 2004, to further achieve the objectives of the IPOA-IUU and to give full effect to its provisions as an integral part of their fisheries management programmes and budget. The IPOA-IUU serves as a comprehensive "toolbox" of measures to address IUU fishing in a range of situations and contexts. The IPOA-IUU contains general measures targeted at all States, as well as measures targeted specifically at flag States, coastal States and port States. It also contains market-related measures, ways to support the special requirements of developing countries in their achievement of the objectives of the IPOA-IUU and measures to be taken by States through RFMOs. Some of the IPOA-IUU provisions reflect obligations that many States have accepted as binding, either through internationally agreed instruments, RFMOs or through national legislation. The IPOA-IUU incorporates the following principles and strategies: Participation and coordination: To be fully effective, the IPOA-IUU should be implemented by all States either directly, in cooperation with other States, indirectly through relevant RFMOs or through FAO and other appropriate

2

international organizations. The participation of stakeholders in combating IUU fishing, including industry, fishing communities and non-governmental organizations is encouraged. Phased implementation: Measures to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing should be based on the earliest possible phased implementation of NPOAs-IUU together with regional and global action in accordance with the IPOA-IUU.

Comprehensive and integrated approach: Measures to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing should address factors affecting all capture fisheries. In taking such an approach, States should embrace measures building on the primary responsibility of the flag State and using all available jurisdiction in accordance with international law, including port State measures, coastal State measures, market-related measures and measures to ensure that nationals do not support or engage in IUU fishing. States are encouraged to use all these measures, as appropriate, and to cooperate to ensure that measures are applied in an integrated manner. NPOAs-IUU should address all economic, social and environmental impacts of IUU fishing.

Conservation: Measures to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing should be consistent with the conservation and long-term sustainable use of fish stocks and the protection of the environment.

Transparency: The IPOA-IUU should be implemented in a transparent manner in accordance with Article 6.13 of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.

Non-discrimination: The IPOA-IUU should be applied without discrimination in form or in fact against any State or its fishing vessels.

1.3

Definition of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing

The IPOA-IUU defines IUU fishing. The PIC uses this definition in its NPOA-IUU. Illegal fishing refers to activities:

· ·

conducted by national or foreign vessels in waters under the jurisdiction of a State, without the permission of that State, or in contravention of its laws and regulations; conducted by vessels flying the flag of States that are parties to a relevant RFMO but operate in contravention of the conservation and management measures adopted by that organization and by which the States are bound, or relevant provisions of the applicable international law; or

3

·

in violation of national laws or international obligations, including those undertaken by cooperating States to a relevant RFMO.

Unreported fishing refers to fishing activities:

· ·

which have not been reported, or have been misreported, to the relevant national authority, in contravention of national laws and regulations; or undertaken in the area of competence of a relevant RFMO which have not been reported or have been misreported, in contravention of the reporting procedures of that organization.

Unregulated fishing refers to fishing activities:

·

·

in the area of application of a relevant RFMO that are conducted by vessels without nationality, or by those flying the flag of a State not party to that organization, or by a fishing entity, in a manner that is not consistent with or contravenes the conservation and management measures of that organization; or in areas or for fish stocks in relation to which there are no applicable conservation or management measures and where such fishing activities are conducted in a manner inconsistent with State responsibilities for the conservation of living marine resources under international law.

The IPOA-IUU notes that unregulated fishing may take place in a manner that is not in violation of applicable international law and may not require the application of measures envisaged under the IPOA-IUU. 1.4 Why is IUU fishing a problem? In the context of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and its overriding goal of sustainable and the responsible use of fisheries, the issue of IUU fishing is a serious and increasing concern. IUU fishing undermines efforts to conserve and manage fish stocks in capture fisheries. In the face of IUU fishing, national and regional fishery management organizations or arrangements can fail to achieve management goals. This situation leads to the loss of both short- and long-term social and economic opportunities and to negative effects on food security and environmental protection. In the extreme, IUU fishing can lead to the collapse of a fishery or seriously impair efforts to rebuild stocks that have already been depleted. In many instances international instruments have been ineffective in addressing IUU fishing because of a lack of political will to support their acceptance and implementation, low priority accorded to them by States and insufficient

4

capacity and resources to ratify or accede to them and then to take steps to implement them. To avoid detection, IUU fishers often violate basic safety requirements on fishing vessels such as keeping navigation lights lit at night, thereby putting their crew and other users of the ocean at risk. Operators of IUU vessels also tend to deny crew members fundamental rights concerning the terms and conditions of their labour, including rights relating to wages, insurance, safety standards as well as their living and working conditions. In addition to its detrimental economic, social, environmental and safety consequences, the unfairness of IUU fishing raises serious concerns. By definition, IUU fishing is either an expressly illegal activity or at minimum, an activity undertaken with little regard for applicable standards. IUU fishers gain an unfair advantage over legitimate fishers. In this sense, IUU fishers are "free riders" who benefit unfairly from sacrifices made by others for the sake of proper fisheries conservation and management and the adherence to other applicable international standards. This situation undermines the morale of legitimate fishers and, perhaps more importantly, encourages them to disregard the rules as well. Thus, IUU fishing tends to promote additional IUU fishing, creating a downward spiral of management failure. The unreported nature of IUU fishing makes it particularly difficult to quantify. Available information nevertheless indicates that, for some important fisheries, IUU accounts for up to 30 percent of total catches. Moreover, available information strongly suggests that, despite apparent improvement in some regional situations, the amount of IUU fishing worldwide is increasing, as IUU fishers seek to avoid compliance with stricter fishing regulations that are being imposed to deal with downturns in a growing number of fish stocks. While some estimates suggest that IUU fishing may account for as much as one quarter of total catch in the world's oceans, fully reliable data on IUU fishing are by definition scarce. IUU fishing is a dynamic, multi-faceted problem that cannot be effectively addressed by any single strategy. A multi-pronged approach is required at international, regional and national levels, with buy-in from all stakeholders involved and affected by IUU fishing. The IPOA-IUU contains a range of tools to address IUU fishing. Widespread implementation of the provisions contained in the IPOA-IUU presents an opportunity for States and RFMOs to reinforce existing measures and to implement new measures to address IUU fishing.

5

1.5

Fisheries profile

The PIC is situated in the Pacific Islands region between latitudes 12° and 23° south and longitudes 180° and 170° west encompassing an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 800 000 km² and land area of 700 km². The PIC is comprised of more than 100 islands spread across three major island groups: Taitonga, Havana and Taitokerau. About 70 percent of the population of 100 000 is located in Taitonga. Being a small island developing State (SIDS), fisheries resources have always been an important part of life in the PIC as a source of protein and for customary purposes. PIC people harvest, consume and market a wide range of marine products including finfish, crustaceans (crab, lobster), seaweed, corals, bivalves (clams, cockles), and other molluscs (such as octopus) and invertebrates such as jellyfish and sea cucumbers. As an exporter, the fisheries sector is gaining importance particularly due to the rapid development in recent years of industrial tuna catching and processing capacity. Other significant economic activities include the deepwater snapper and grouper fishery, aquarium trade, dried shark-fin and the seaweed fishery. The free on board (FOB) value of marine products exported in 2003 approached PIC$14 million1 with tuna exports amounting to more than PIC$8.8 million or approximately 25 percent of export earnings. 1.5.1 Marine fisheries The PIC's fisheries sector can be divided into three broad subsectors: · · · Subsistence; Coastal/commercial; and Offshore/industrial.

1.5.1.1 The subsistence fishery The subsistence fishery targets lagoon and reef resources and in some cases, pelagic species associated with fish aggregation devices (FADs). In outer island areas, in particular, fish resources remain a significant proportion of protein intake as revealed by a recent survey that estimated per capita consumption of fresh fish ranging between 74 km (in urban communities) to 180 km (in rural communities).2 It has been estimated that as many as half the male population in

1 Ministry of Fisheries Annual Report 2003. The current exchange rate is (PIC$1.0 = US$0.52) 2 PIC Country Report (draft), DemEcoFish-PROCFish, SPC, 2004.

6

rural areas spend some part of their time fishing.3 Women have traditionally focused on reef gleaning. Community surveys are currently underway to determine the nature of local fisheries in order to develop community fishery management plans. It is largely through community fisheries management systems that the government will work to ensure food security and to promote responsible and sustainable resource use for those communities that depend significantly on fisheries resources. 1.5.1.2 Coastal commercial fishery The coastal commercial fishery exploits resources which fall into two main categories: · resources marketed for domestic consumption: mainly finfish, octopus, lobsters, seaweed, mud crabs and various shellfish. In general, these resources are supplied by fishers who are also involved in the subsistence fishery but also by commercial fishers including those involved in the export of deepwater snappers and tunas who supply bycatch and low grade fish; and resources for export: mainly seaweed, aquarium fish and live coral.

·

The seaweed fishery includes species collected for domestic consumption and species collected from the wild and farmed for export mainly to Japan. Cladosiphon spp. mariculture is at an advanced stage and a preliminary annual export target of 2 500 tonnes has been set. In 2003 approximately 223 tonnes of Cladosiphon spp. was exported. The aquarium trade is well established in the PIC and is limited to the export of certain types of live corals and aquarium fish (including hatchery reared giant clam). Licensed operators are limited to specified areas of Taitonga that are opened on a rotational basis through the year. There is also a small but active sports fishery operating in Taitokerau and Taitonga targeting game fish. Management and supporting compliance plans for each of the key fisheries, including deepwater fisheries, commercial fisheries and aquaculture are being developed. The Tuna Fishery Management Plan has been approved by the government.

PIC Natural Resources Use and Sustainable Socioeconomic Development, ADB Pacific Studies Series, 2002.

3

7

1.5.1.3 The industrial fishery The industrial fishery encompasses the tuna fishery and the deepwater snapper and grouper fishery: The PIC commercial oceanic fisheries longline fleet grew rapidly from one vessel catching around 200 tonnes annually in the early 1990s to around 20 vessels catching about 2 000 tonnes by 2002. The catch is mainly albacore tuna with smaller, but valuable, quantities of bigeye and yellowfin tuna. Most of the longline catch is landed in Napa, the only export point for air freight out of the country, although some domestic vessels also discharge catch in American Samoa. Over 90 percent of the catch is taken in PIC waters but more recently there has been a small amount of fishing in neighbouring areas of high seas. The PIC does not licence foreign vessels directly. Locally based foreign fishing vessels operate under PIC control utilizing charter arrangements to PIC entities. These vessels are subject to the terms and conditions of access based on regional agreed terms and conditions for foreign vessels. Falling albacore catch rates, apparently related to oceanographic conditions, undermined the viability of the albacore fishery in 2003 and caused uncertainty about the future of the commercial tuna fishery in the PIC. However, since then a gradual recovery in catch rates has been reported.4 At present there are five plants that airfreight fresh tuna to markets in Japan and USA. Tuna, mainly albacore is also exported in frozen form principally to America Samoa for canning. For the year ending June 2003, approximately 1 300 tonnes of fresh and frozen tuna was exported.5 As a party to the Multilateral Treaty on Fishing with the USA, the PIC also licenses purse seine vessels that target surface swimming skipjack and juvenile tunas. At present 20 vessels are licensed under the arrangement but since PIC's EEZ falls outside the main purse seine fishing area, purse seining in the zone is rare. The deepwater snapper and grouper fishery was developed in the 1980s when catches peaked in 1987 at 563 tonnes. Annual catches then settling at around 200-300 tonnes through the 1990s. Currently, there are 20 vessels licensed to operate and in 2003, approximately 200 tonnes of mainly snapper was exported to markets in Hawaii in the USA and Japan.

4 5

Country Mission Report: PIC, FFA, 2004. Country Mission Report: PIC, FFA, 2004.

8

1.5.2

Economic considerations

1.5.2.1 Economic role of the fishing industry The fisheries sector remains a critical element of the PIC economy. The PIC Reserve Bank set the contribution of the fisheries sector to export earnings in 2002 at 37.6 percent.6 The value of exports for 2001 to 2003 were as follows: TABLE 1: FISHERIES EXPORTS (FOB) 2001-20037 Fisheries exported FOB value in 2001 FOB value in 2002 FOB value in 2003

Dried shark fin Tuna (fresh) Tuna (frozen) Tuna (cannery) Snapper & grouper Aquarium Seaweed Total PIC$

346 232 7 935 840 1 466 402 1 463 880 1 228 920 1 514 910 42 672 13 998 856

547 040 4 818 858 3 147 870 2 223 210 1 153 086 2 751 477 10 004 14 651 545

540 960 3 781 800 1 713 360 3 346 200 1 030 834 3 213 148 78 053 13 704 355

In 2002, it was estimated that 105 tonnes of snapper and grouper from commercial fishers was sold on the domestic market along with 497 tonnes of tuna.8 An Asian Development Bank (ADB) study estimated that in 2001, the nonmarket catch of fish contributed around 30 percent of value added by fisheries.9 In terms of employment, the snapper and grouper fishery is estimated to employ 150-200 fishers, masters, processors and retailers10 while the tuna industry employs around 500 people.11 At the artisanal/subsistence level, it is estimated that 7 700 persons are engaged in fishing.12

Ministry of Fisheries Corporate Plan 2004-2007, 2003. Ministry of Fisheries Annual Report, 2003 (draft). 8 Ministry of Fisheries Corporate Plan, 2004-2007, p.11. 9 PIC Natural Resource Use and Sustainable Socioeconomic Development, ADB Pacific Studies Series, 2002. 10 Deepwater Fishery Report, 2003-2004, Ministry of Fisheries. 11 Domestic Tuna Industry Development in the Pacific Islands, FFA Report 03/01. 12 Ministry of Fisheries Corporate Plan 2004-2007, 2003.
7

6

9

The PIC receives about PIC$310 000 annually in fees from the Multilateral Treaty on Fishing with the USA. In addition, licence fees from locally based vessels amounted to about PIC$200 000 in 2003. 1.5.2.2 Economic policy objectives of the Government for the fisheries sector The Fisheries Management Act, 2002, provides for the conservation, management sustainable utilization and development of fisheries resources in the country. Policy objectives include: · long-term conservation and sustainable use of fishery resources and the adoption of management measures that promote the objective of optimum utilization to achieve economic growth, human resources development, employment creation and sound ecological balance; to promote and expand sustainable competitive exports of marine products by implementing appropriate fisheries management plans developed in partnership with the private sector; to provide assurance of adequate air freight for export production; and to encourage local value adding and downstream processing with the aim of maximizing the value of marine products.

· · ·

1.5.2.3 Development prospects The tuna resources occurring within PIC's EEZ offer the opportunity for growth in the domestic industry.13 However, major growth would need to be associated with a fishing component that is able to range beyond the PIC zone and a processing component that is able to add value. The resource of deep-swimming tunas, accessible to longline gear, is dominated by albacore tuna (70-80 percent), with smaller quantities of yellowfin and bigeye tuna, and is available year-round. Surface swimming tunas (skipjack and juvenile yellowfin) occur more seasonally in PIC waters and are currently not exploited to any significant degree. A range of other species occurs along with the tunas, including billfish, dolphin fish, moon fish, wahoo and sharks. These species are commonly taken as bycatch in tuna fishing. The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) estimates, based on productivity and the size of the PIC's fisheries waters, that annual longline catches of up to 5 000 tonnes (tunas and bycatch) could be sustainable at moderate levels of exploitation. This quantity is considerably higher than current and historical longline catches and does not take into account the affects that changing oceanographic conditions might have had on resources and their
13

Oceanographic conditions do vary however and over the last two years these changes have affected, tuna abundance in PIC waters and across neighbouring SIDS.

10

availability. The surface fishery potential may be even higher (14 000 tonnes for skipjack), but it is considered that such an amount would be more difficult to achieve.14 On a regional basis, the stocks of skipjack, yellowfin and albacore tuna are considered to be in a healthy condition, but concerns exist for bigeye stocks, particularly in view of declining longline catch rates and increased surface catches of juvenile fish. The PIC's tuna industry remains in a developmental stage with potential for further growth given essential improvements in infrastructure and a lower cost operating environment. It will be important to maintain flexibility in the development and implementation of conservation and management strategies to avoid unnecessary costs to industry that could inhibit further expansion. Given the consistently falling catch rates over the last five years, the development prospects for the snapper and grouper fishery are not robust. There is concern that the fishery has excess capacity and industry representatives are working with governments to develop strategies to ensure the fishery is sustainable. Further development of other commercial marine products including seaweed, aquarium fi