FAO Fisheries Circular No. 1012

FIRM/C1012 (En)
ISSN 0429-9329

MANUAL FOR THE MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT OF QUEEN CONCH

Copies of FAO publications can be requested from: Sales and Marketing Group Information Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org Fax: (+39) 06 57053360

FAO Fisheries Circular No. 1012

FIRM/C1012 (En)

MANUAL FOR THE MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT OF QUEEN CONCH

by Paul Medley Consultant Alne, North Yorkshire United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2005

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2005

PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT This document was prepared for FAO by Dr Paul Medley with funding from the FAO Regular Programme and the FAO FishCode Programme with Trust Fund support from the Government of Norway. In the course of preparing the manual, Dr Medley consulted with scientists and officials from the relevant government departments and other scientific experts on queen conch in the region. He expresses his particular thanks to Kevern Cochrane, Richard Appeldoorn, Miguel Rolón, Graciela García-Moliner, Andre Kong, Karl Aiken, Vincent Gillette and Mauro Gongora who have provided many useful comments and help for this document. Grateful thanks also go to the staff of the Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism Secretariat, Jamaica Fisheries Division, Belize Fisheries Department and the International Queen Conch Initiative, coordinated by the Caribbean Fishery Management Council for help and support in the production of the manual. The watercolour painting on the front cover was done by Lesley Ninnes.

iii

Medley, P. Manual for the monitoring and management of queen conch. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 1012. Rome, FAO. 2005. 58p.

ABSTRACT The Caribbean queen conch Strombus gigas is listed on Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). A listing on Appendix II requires that any specimen of the species included in Appendix II can only be exported if a permit has been issued to allow the export. Further, CITES states that export permits should only be issued when the responsible authority has deemed that the export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species. This manual presents guidelines on the requirements for responsible management of the fisheries exploiting queen conch, with particular emphasis on the requirements to comply with the relevant CITES regulations. The manual describes the basic fisheries management cycle which includes: development and interpretation of policy; the need for management controls to regulate fishing activities; data collection and analysis; decision-making; enforcement of and compliance with the management controls; and regular feedback and review of the management system. It provides general guidance on each of those steps for the queen conch fisheries of the Caribbean. It also provides two case studies of management systems currently being applied: the Turks and Caicos Islands and Jamaica. Sections 2 to 6 (Part 1) cover the main issues and examples in a relatively non-technical manner and Sections 7 to 16 (Part 2) cover similar issues in a more technical manner.

iv

CONTENTS Page INTRODUCTION PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL 1. THE CONVENTION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FLORA AND FAUNA (CITES) AND THE FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES (CCRF) FISHERY BIOLOGY THE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT CYCLE 3.1 Policy 3.2 Controls 3.3 Data collection 3.4 Data analysis 3.5 Decision-making 3.6 Enforcement and compliance 3.7 Feedback and review EXAMPLE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 4.1 Turks and Caicos Islands 4.2 Policy 4.3 Controls 4.4 Data collection 4.5 Data analysis 4.6 Decision-making 4.7 Enforcemement and compliance 4.8 Feedback and review JAMAICA 5.1 Background 5.2 Policy 5.3 Controls 5.4 Data collection 5.5 Data analysis 5.6 Decision-making 5.7 Feedback and review MANAGEMENT CHECKLIST 1 3

3 4 4 5 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 11 11 11 11 12 14 14 15 15 16

2. 3.

4.

5.

6.

PART 2: TECHNICAL 7 8. SUMMARY SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS 8.1 Management objectives 8.2 Initial data collection v

8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 9.

Long-term data collection and monitoring Assessments linking data to indicators Initiating management advice Management control Monitoring Long-term research

16 16 17 17 17 17 17 17 18 19 22 24 24 25 25 26 28 28 29 29 30 30 30 33 36 36 36 36 37 37 37 38 38 38 38 39 39 39 39 40 40

GENERAL APPROACH 9.1 Stock identification and management units 9.2 From policy to data collection 9.3 Logical framework 9.4 Standard indicators and reference points 9.5 Empirical or non-parametric indicators 9.6 Probalistic indicators

10. DATA COLLECTION 10.1 Introduction 10.2 Catch and effort 10.3 Catch size frequency sampling 10.4 Fishery independent surveys 10.5 Tagging 10.6 Other information 11. ASSESSMENTS LINKING DATA TO INDICATORS 11.1 Introduction 11.2 Biomass dynamics assessment 11.3 Per-recruit assessment 11.4 Other assessments 12. LONG-TERM POPULATION MONITORING 12.1 Population assessments 12.2 Standardized minimum meat weight 13. CONTROLS AND MONITORING 13.1 Introduction 13.2 Fleet capacity and effort 13.3 Catch quotas 13.4 Minimum size and maturity 13.5 Closed area 13.6 Closed season 13.7 Taxation 14. OTHER ISSUES 15. ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT 15.1 Management cycle 15.2 Verification and transparency 16. POTENTIAL REGIONAL MANAGEMENT REGIME

vi

17. REFERENCES APPENDIXES I II III Fishery checklist Interpreting mean meat weight Participatory fisheries stock assessment (ParFish)

41 43 51 56

vii

INTRODUCTION CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora) is concerned with preventing conch from becoming an endangered species. Governments which have a conch resource are concerned with the sustainable development of their fisheries. However, CITES and Government policy should have considerable common ground. Managing a fishery to maximize sustainable economic benefits and protect the ecosystem is compatible. This indicates that good management practice should meet CITES requirements as well as improve economic returns from these fisheries. The main issue should not be what fisheries are setting out to achieve, but whether these objectives can be met with available technical and logistical resources. Achieving optimal sustainable economic returns from a fishery is far from simple, mainly due to the lack of the necessary information to define where the optimum is and how to get there. To define the optimum and then enforce the conditions to ensure this is reached requires considerable scientific and management expertise and resources. However, once set up, monitoring and maintaining the fishery should be simple and well within the capability of most Governments. Good management requires political choices, which is why emphasis is placed here on easier communication, by reducing complex fisheries to a set of simpler performance indicators, and planning ahead. Planning ahead means gaining agreement on appropriate actions before they need to be applied. Prior agreements not only allow Government to plan ahead, but industry too. This should lead to smoother changes and greater stability in the long term. This manual is focused on Caribbean queen conch Strombus gigas and the requirements for responsible management of the fisheries exploiting this important resource, with particular emphasis on the requirements to comply with CITES regulations and requirements for the Appendix II listing. It presents guidelines only. The large differences between fisheries make it impossible to prescribe exactly what must be done in all fisheries. However, it is possible to make two general requirements that will need to be met by any conch fishery. · The processing and catching capacity needs to be on the same scale as the productivity of the resource. Where there is over-capacity, political and economic pressures will often lead to short-term planning aimed at meeting immediate demands of the processing and catching capacity, which in turn will lead to overfishing. A stock assessment should provide advice on the appropriate capacity. It should be possible to show that the policy and the fishery management system are effective. For this, you have to monitor the resource state and the fishery. When a control is applied, you need to be able to demonstrate that the control affects the monitoring variables in the manner expected. For example, if the average vessel catch rate is used to monitor stock size, when you apply a control, such as reducing the number of vessels allowed fish so as to increase stock size, you need to see a corresponding increase in catch rate. This implies that the control has increased the stock as intended. Similarly, it should be possible to show that a stock increases once a "no-take zone" has been established. There are many reasons why controls may be ineffective. If you do not have effective controls, you are not managing the fishery and not meeting CITES requirements.

·

The level of management, control and monitoring needs to be appropriate for the size of the fishery. There is often concern that the management required will be too expensive. It need not be, and should not be, expensive relative to the size of the fishery. Importantly, the more certain 1

you wish to be as to the state of the fishery, and you will need to be certain if you wish to exploit the resource at close to the maximum level, the better information and enforcement will be required, and the higher the cost of management. Lower management costs generally mean lower levels of exploitation, but should not prevent you from exploiting the resource efficiently and optimally. There are two ways to deal with uncertainty. The first, and perhaps most important, is to obtain more and better information about your fishery. The second is to keep fishing pressure low. This decreases the chance of overfishing even if you are uncertain exactly when overfishing will occur. It is quite possible, where a management regime is not well developed, that you will start with little information on which to base decisions. It is reasonable to develop a programme which will bring the management system up to the required standard without closing the fishery. To meet international standards, however, the development would need to follow a predetermined time table. Sections 2 to 6 (Part 1) cover the main issues and examples in a relatively non-technical manner. This Part is suitable for decision-makers and persons not familiar with fisheries methods. Sections 7 to 16 (Part 2) cover similar issues in a more technical manner. Further information on fisheries management in general can be obtained from the publications listed at the end of this manual. These include the FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries No. 4 ­ Fisheries management (FAO, 1997); the FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries No. 4.2 ­ Fisheries management: the ecosystem approach to fisheries (FAO, 2003); the FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 424 - A fishery manager's guidebook (Cochrane, 2002); and the book "Managing small-scale fisheries" by Berkes et al. (2001).

2

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
1.

THE CONVENTION FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA (CITES) AND THE FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES (CCRF)

The Convention for the International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) is an agreement to control the exports and imports of species listed in its appendices. Most importers, such as the European Union and United States of America are bound by the agreement. Conch is listed under Appendix II. The most relevant part of the convention for conch is: "2. The export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit. An export permit shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met: (a) a Scientific Authority of the State of export has advised that such export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species; ...", and "3. ...[Appendix II species exports] should be limited in order to maintain that species throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in the ecosystems in which it occurs and well above the level at which that species might become eligible for inclusion in Appendix I." Appendix I listed species are banned from international trade. If conch were listed under Appendix I, the export trade in conch would essentially cease. The central aim of fishery management is to prevent overfishing. The FAO Code of Conduct sets out the principles which need to be applied to achieve this. We can reinterpret CITES convention in the terms of the Code of Conduct. While the Code covers considerably more issues than CITES, CITES requirements fall well within its scope. In fact, perhaps the most important aim of good fisheries management is to maintain the abundance of the stock above the state where it would be considered depleted or have a negative impact on the ecosystem. This should be, as a minimum, above the endangered state where the species would be moved from Appendix II to Appendix I. Ideally, good management of queen conch fisheries across the region, and in accordance with the Code of Conduct, should result in the restoration of the stocks to a state where queen conch no longer meets the criteria for listing on Appendix II and could be delisted. So, if we apply good management as defined under the Code of Conduct, CITES conditions are met, the productivity of the resource is maintained and, its function in the ecosystem is not impaired. However, we still need to define "overfished" and "overfishing". The decision to decide that a fishery is overfished needs to be based on more than "expert opinion". It needs to have a sound basis in science, which depends on data collection and research. It is also critical that a fishery can be clearly seen to be not overfished by people not involved in the fishery.

3

2.

FISHERY BIOLOGY

Fish stocks have much in common with other exploited living resources, such as goats. Managing fisheries is like managing a goat herd where you must maintain the herd with its own offspring. If you sell too many female goats1, you will not be able to produce enough young goats in future years to support the herd's productivity and eventually you will have to reduce the number sold. Conversely, if you allow the goat population to increase, they will consume all the available grass and forage and will become thinner, produce fewer kids and will be more likely to die from disease until the herd balances out with births and deaths, reaching its "carrying capacity". Usually farmers like to maintain the herd at its optimum size, the size when its productivity is at its maximum, the "maximum sustainable yield". If you replace "goats" with "conch", you have a description of conch fisheries management. However, there are two important differences between farming and fishing. · You will be uncertain exactly how many conches remain in the sea. Whereas a farmer can count his stock, you can only make an estimate of how many conches you have remaining to ensure the stock can replenish it. To ensure the estimate is as good as possible, and to make it acceptable to all parties (including CITES), you must use good statistical and scientific methods. The stock is held in common with all fishers2. Where, as sole owner, a farmer can take decisions in his own best long-term interest, fishers can not unless they cooperate. If fishers believe that any conch they leave will be taken by others, from their point of view there is no benefit in leaving enough conch in the sea to replenish the stock. Under such conditions, they are therefore encouraged to take as much as they can before the stock is depleted by others. It is management's task to create the circumstance where it is in fishers' best long-term interest to cooperate. This will require setting up a suitable system of access rights, effort control or both as well as an effective management system. A part of that management system must be to ensure the regulations are obeyed because illegal fishing (poaching) may not only directly cause overfishing, but may also undermine the degree to which fishers will cooperate with management.

·

3.

THE FISHERIES MANAGEMENT CYCLE

Fisheries management, like driving a car, should be a "feedback control system". Driving a car consists of the controls (accelerator, brakes, gears, and steering wheel) and monitoring (the driver's eyes and ears). When you are driving you are constantly monitoring the progress and position of your car and taking appropriate action by slowing down, speeding up or changing the direction in which the car is moving. Few people drive without moving the steering wheel or with their eyes shut. Fisheries management also needs controls. In the case of queen conch fisheries, controls are usually in the form of effort limits, catch quotas, minimum size and closed areas; and eyes and ears in the form of a monitoring programme. The monitoring programme should do more than simply report on the state of the fishery. It also needs to measure the effectiveness of controls, to make sure that they are working and help decision-makers ensure that they are implementing the policy correctly.
1

One male goat can fertilize many females. It is the number of females which control the herd's productivity and growth. 2 Also known as the tragedy of the commons: co-management and individual transferable quotas are fisheries management techniques that try to recreate a sense of sole ownership of the resource.

4

3.1

Policy

Policies set out the principles on which decisions are made. Most policies usually state that a fishery should be exploited optimally and sustainably. Policies should also state that the precautionary approach be applied in making decisions, if the policy is to be consistent with the Code of Conduct. It is necessary to interpret "optimal", "sustainable" and "precautionary". This is usually done by agreeing what indicators and reference points will be used. Indicators should be straightforward to calculate, reliable and easy to understand. Reference points may require more sophisticated analysis to define, but should be based on simple, agreed principles. Reference points generally define conditions in the fishery when some management action will be taken. The "precautionary approach3" can be particularly difficult to interpret. Generally, decisionmakers should avoid unnecessary risks and irreversible actions, and support research and data collection which will reduce uncertainty.

3.2

Controls

Legislation should allow the means to control the exploitation rate of the resource and various other protective measures which reduce the chance of overfishing. It is best to use a variety of controls and not just depend upon one. Controls should always include some limit on fishing effort, or, at the very least, a limit on fishing capacity. Fishing effort is the work done by fishers to catch fish (days fishing, amount of gear set etc.). Fishing capacity is the maximum limit on what effort (work) could be applied in the short-term in a particular fishery. For example, capacity could be the number of vessels available for fishing. The limit on effort (i.e. capacity) would be reached if all these vessels fished all the time that they possible could. Effort controls might force days fishing to be reduced below this limit: vessels could be laid up, for example, or limited in how many days of the week they are allowed to fish. However, the capital cost of the vessels (e.g. interest on loans used to purchase the vessels) strongly encourages their maximum use. Therefore trying to maintain effort far below the potential fishing capacity becomes very difficult to enforce and represents a significant cost to both industry and management.

3.3

Data collection

Data will be needed to monitor the fishery. Data must be collected for objective assessment of the state of the fishery and is necessary for rational, informed decision-making. An efficient and effective data collection system will also be necessary to convince outside observers that the fishery is meeting international standards. Data are best collected from critical monitoring and control points during catching and processing, which will vary from fishery to fishery. Identifying these critical points forms an important part of an effective management system. Critical points can be identified as being

3

For a full discussion, see FAO. Precautionary approach to capture fisheries and species introductions. Elaborated by the Technical Consultation on the Precautionary Approach to Capture Fisheries (Including Species Introductions). Lysekil, Sweden, 6-13 June 1995. FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries. No. 2. FAO. Rome. 1996. 54p.

5

"bottle-necks" in the fishery, where costs of monitoring are low and monitoring can be enforced. Such critical points are often at points of landing and export. Low cost approaches fit the data collection system to the fishing industry practices. For example, it is natural for processors to provide purchase receipts to fishers, and routine data collection can include getting copies of such receipts. Getting copies of such transactions need not be onerous to industry, and accuracy is enforced by the businesses involved. There are four types of monitoring data which can be collected, in order of importance: · · · fishery based indices will monitor the inputs to and outputs from the fishery. Indices usually include catches and fishing effort; abundance based indices will monitor the changes in the population size. A commonly used index is catch-per-unit-effort, but some fisheries are monitored using abundance surveys; biological indices monitor specific aspects of the fish population. An important statistic is the number or weight of females in the population at spawning time. As, in many species, one male should be able to fertilize the eggs of many females, the ability of the population to replenish itself is usually thought to depend on the number of females. However, this also depends on the species, and in the case of queen conch, scientists may decide to assume an equal sex ratio between males and females is desirable; socio-economic and other indices are important to monitor the fishery in relation to policies required to meet economic objectives. The simplest indices would be the price of the product, which multiplied by the landings give the revenue from the fishery. Other indices of interest could include the number of employees (licensed fishers and numbers involved in processing etc.) and costs of the industry.

·

3.4

Data analysis

Raw data need to be interpreted using models of the fishery. Models are just simple versions of how scientists think the fishery behaves and should capture the most important behaviour of the fishery in relation to management decisions. Because models are only approximations of reality, the advice obtained from them needs careful consideration. The analysis should produce simple indices, which indicate how well the fishery is doing. Appropriate indices include average vessel catch rates, fishing mortality and the spawning stock biomass. These can be used to indicate the economic efficiency of the fishery, whether the fishery is sustainable, and whether the stock is overfished.

3.5

Decision-making

The decision-making authority needs to be defined. That is, the people responsible for the decisions need to be clearly identified. Decisions need to be documented and transparent, so that it is clear how and why particular decisions have been made. Decision-making must be consistent with CITES and the Code of Conduct. The easiest way to implement these policies is to apply decision rules. Decision rules are management actions which are planned to be applied in response to key changes in indicators. For example, a simple decision rule could be a 20 percent reduction in quota when catch rates fall below some critical level. The difference between decision rules and any other sort of decision-making is that the rules are 6

planned in advance. They should be simple and transparent, so that their implications to the fishing industry can be discussed before they have to be applied.

3.6

Enforcement and compliance

While decisions can be made easily, ensuring they are carried out can be difficult. Enforcement usually consists of direct methods and auditing methods. Direct methods include patrolling by enforcement vessels and spot checks at landing points by fisheries officers. These methods can be expensive, but at least some direct policing at landing sites is recommended. A complementary method creates audit trails, by using documentation and comparing information obtained at different points during the catch to export process. This is a powerful method to enforce rules and regulations set by decision-makers, and audit-like documentation is increasingly required for international export by many countries and international organisations, like CITES. Enforcing unpopular decisions can be expensive or impossible. Improving the effectiveness of decision-making requires two actions: a) consultation with stakeholders and participation in decision-making makes decisions better as the concerns of stakeholders are taken into account. Also, if stakeholders understand the problems, they may be more ready to accept decisions that result in short-term hardship in exchange for long-term sustainable benefits. Co-management is a term implying fisher (and others) participation in management and encourages much of the decision-making to be devolved to the fishers themselves; b) enforcement is always necessary. Once a few fishers get away with ignoring controls, other law-abiding fishers will see less reason for themselves to follow regulations and controls, and management can break down. Similarly, poaching undermines the management process unless it can be suppressed by enforcement activities. CITES has proved useful in helping countries enforce decisions. However, this is a two-way process, and in return managers have to accept "interference" in policy by stakeholders and the requirement for transparency in decision-making. One complaint against CITES has been the lack of involvement of stakeholders in making CITES policy. CITES is perceived by some as having been thrust upon many Caribbean countries which may make enforcement in some cases more difficult.

3.7

Feedback and review

It is important that decision-making undergoes some sort of feedback, whereby the process can make improvements, adapt to new situations and learn from its mistakes. Feedback should not be obtained only from the management authority, government officials and the like, but should include industry and other stakeholders. Reacting to their concerns and including them in the management process should improve management, making it more cost effective and better enforced. Independent reviews, particularly of the technical parts of the decision-making process (i.e. the science), will add significantly to the credibility of the decisions. It is rarely possible for international institutions to study a fisheries management system in depth. Confidence in the management system can come from independent experts who do have the time and local knowledge to study decisions and satisfy themselves, perhaps through discussion with decision-

7

makers, that the process has met international standards. Local, independent scientists, for example, might be easily recruited from the region's academic institutions.

4.

EXAMPLE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

The following general examples follow implementation of some of the ideas in the manual in two fisheries. These examples have been simplified to illustrate the approach. The reality of day-today management needs to consider many details of administration not covered here. One of the aims of these examples is to demonstrate that good management need not be expensive or complex. Fairly simple procedures may be applied and provide adequate management for small scale fisheries, as long as they are well adapted to local conditions.

4.1

Turks and Caicos Islands

4.1.1 Background
Most fishing occurs on the Caicos Bank, a 6 140 km2 area of shallow sand, seagrass, algae and reef habitat suitable for conch. There are approximately 600 registered fishers and 200 vessels exploiting conch, landing around 450 pounds whole meat each fishing day. Vessels are three metres in length and have outboard engines. They depart in the morning and return mid to late afternoon, usually landing at one of the five main processing plants that purchase the conch. Shells are removed and discarded at sea. Conch are cleaned, frozen and packed for export mainly to the United States. Recent quotas for the total landed meat weight were 1 675 million pounds falling to 1.4 million pounds because of concerns over the state of the stock.

4.2

Policy

The Policy is bound by CITES requirements, and the stock is managed so as not to impair the ability of the conch population to replenish itself. This in practice means maintaining the population above 50 percent of its unexploited size. When the population is at 50 percent of its unexploited size, it is presumed to be at the point of maximum sustainable yield. Once below this point, the stock is considered overfished.

4.3

Controls

The fishery is primarily controlled through licensing and an export quota, which is calculated based on a target TAC4. There is also a small area closed to fishing, a closed season to spread the catches more evenly through the year, and fishers are not allowed to use breathing apparatus, but must free dive. The export TAC was set up largely as a result of CITES requirements. The export TAC is controlled both locally and internationally through customs. Most exports go through Miami, USA, where they must be accompanied by a CITES form issued by the Turks and Caicos Government, which indicates the part of the TAC which the export constitutes. Quotas, as parts of the TAC, are allocated to processors.

4

TAC: Total allowable catch

8

The number of licences is limited, but is not controlled by management. While any Turks islander can get a licence, the number of eligible people in the population is small, making the number of full-time licence fishers limited. The processing sector is similarly licensed, although they do not only process conch; they also buy lobster and finfish from fishers.

4.4

Data collection

Data collection for monitoring purposes relies mainly on the processing industry. Every processor must complete forms indicating the daily landings from each vessel. At the end of each month the processor sends the completed form to the fisheries department where the data are entered on to a computer. The data reported by industry are used to calculate the total landed catch, by adding up all the reported daily landings, and the total effort, by counting all the landings that have been made. Each landing reported for a boat represents a day's fishing for a boat, the fishing effort. The Turks and Caicos Islands is unique in that it has a very long time series of data which can be used to help interpret how the resource responds to different levels of fishing.

4.5

Data analysis

A standard fishery model is used to interpret the catch and effort data. By analysing past behaviour of the fishery, it is possible to estimate the abun