TIME FOR ACTION
CHANGING THE GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

R E P O R T OF THE UNECE/FAO TEAM OF SPECIALISTS ON GENDER AND FORESTRY

i

Changing the gender situation in forestry

Time for action

Report of the team of specialists on gender and forestry

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS 2006

6

iii

FOREWORD

The Team of Specialists on `Gender and Forestry' was established in April 2004 by a decision of the former FAO/ECE/ILO Joint Committee on Forest Technology, Management and Training. The objective was to raise visibility of women and women's involvement in the forestry sector and to understand the gender structures throughout the sector. The Team's mandate was developed from discussions and recommendations at the FAO/ECE/ILO seminar in Viseu, Portugal in 2001, and has been regarded as part of a strategic framework for the work carried out by the Team during the two years period. The Team focussed on reviewing relevant and available data, which is compiled and presented in this Final Report. The Team was made up of 15 specialists from across Europe and North America, and the work has mainly been carried out by team members. I would like to thank the Team for their contribution and goodwill, and for committing themselves on top of normal duties to execute the manadate given by the former joint committee. In particular, I thank the Team coordinators Anna Springfors and Simmoné Rose, the editors Renate Späeth, Marion Karman and Maria Gianinni and the lay-out artist Maria Guardia. In addition to Team members' work, very valuable contributions have been made by a number of other persons; Inna Hakobjanyan, Mike Fullerton, Zeljka Ivanovi , Marilena Idzojti , Katja Turunen, Ritva Toivonen, Laura Secco, Laura Peruch, Viera Petrasova, Zusana Sarvasova Lea Jylha, Diana Mizaraite, Uta Hohn, Andreas Keil, Orhan Güles, Mulualem Tigabu, Robert Nygård, Margareta Söderberg Maria Hehn and Till Westermayer. I would like to thank them all for their efforts which have enriched this Final Report. However, the work on this important subject is not finished, indeed scarcely begun. I hope that what we have done will not only raise awareness, but also lead to actions for a better gender balance in forestry.

Gun Lidestav Team Leader

v

CONTENTS
FOREWORD Introduction Background 1 Gender structures in forestry organizations 1.1 Introduction 1.2 Review of the current situation 1.2.1 What is the current status quo of gender representation across organizations? 1.2.2 Why is gender representation as it is? 1.2.3 What are the key drivers for change and the actions required in driving the employment gender "agenda" forward? 1.2.4 What are the positive benefits to be gained? 1. 3 Employment Trends ­ The European Forest Sector Outlook Study 1.4 Armenia 1.4.1 Introduction: 1.4.2 Socio-demographic situation in Armenia, including gender issues 1.4.3 Gender structure in Armenian forestry 1.4.4 Employment at other Armenian forestry agencies 1.4.5 Conclusions 1.5 Canada 1.5.1 The Employment Equity Framework in Canada 1.5.2 Gender-based analysis 1.5.3 Gender issues in Natural Resources Canada and the Canadian forest service 1.5.4 Gender statistics for the Canadian forest sector 1.5.5 Gender demographics of Canadian university graduates 1.5.6 Conclusion 1. 6 Croatia 1.6.1 Summary 1.6.2 Introduction 1.6.3 Methodology 1.6.4 Results 1.6.5 Conclusions 1.7 Finland 1.7.1 Background 1.7.2 Data 1.7.3 Results 1.7.4 Activities to develop women foresters' careers in Finland 1.7.5 Conclusions 1.8 Germany 1.8.1 The current status of gender representations across organizations in Germany 1.8.2 Why is the gender representation the way it is in Germany's forestry sector? 1.9 Italy 1.9.1 Introduction 1.9.2 Official data on women in the primary sector in Italy 1.9.3 Results of a preliminary ad hoc survey in Italy 1.9.4 Final considerations for Italy 1.10 Norway 1.10.1 General aspects of the forestry sector in Norway 1.10.2 Gender representation across organizations in Norway 1.10.3 Gender structure within forestry education 1.10.4 Gender representation in Norway 1.10.5 What are the key drivers for changing the gender "agenda" forward in Norway? iii 1 1 7 7 8 8 12 13 15 16 17 17 17 18 18 20 20 20 21 22 24 24 25 26 26 27 28 28 29 29 29 30 30 32 33 33 34 38 39 40 40 47 49 50 50 50 53 55 56

vi

1.10.6 What are the positive benefits Norway can gain? 1.11 Poland 1.11.1 Background 1.11.2 General characteristics of Poland's forests and forestry 1.11.3 Gender in forest ownership 1.11.4 Employment in Poland and the forestry sector 1.11.5 Women in science 1.11.6 Conclusion 1.12 Slovakia 1.12.1 Introduction 1.12.2 Women's situation in Slovakia 1.12.3 Educational level of female foresters 1.12.4 Conclusion 1.13 Sweden 1.13.1 Swedish Forestry in general 1.13.2 The current status quo of gender representations across organizations in Sweden 1.13.3. Why is gender representation the way it is? 1.14 United Kingdom 1.14.1 Employment of women in UK forestry industry 1.14.2 What are the reasons for this picture? 1.14.3 What can be done to address the imbalance? 1.15 The United States 1.15.1 The United States Forest Service Agency 1.15.2 The Forest Service administrative units 1.15.3 Workforce objectives 1.15.4 Gender history 1.15.5 CLF comparisons with women in the Forest Service 1.15.6 Forest Service leadership positions 1.15.7 Leadership at national headquarters 1.15.8 Leadership across the United States 1.15.9 Women in key leadership positions 1.16 Review of gender situation in other countries 1.17 Summary 2 Gender structures in family forestry 2.1 Introduction 2.1.1 Ownership structure in the ECE area 2.1.2 Lack of data 2.2 Gender structures in Swedish family forestry 2.2.1 Introduction 2.2.2 Gender and inheritance in Swedish family forestry 2.2.3 Comparing male and female owners 2.2.4 Women's representation in forest owners' associations 2.3 Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany 2.3.1 Introduction 2.3.2 Survey concerning forest owners' structure and motivation 2.3.3 Conclusions 2.4 Norway 2.4.1 Introduction 2.4.2 Gender structure in the Norwegian Forestry Association 2.4.3 Gender structure in the Norwegian Forest Owners' Federation 2.5 Gender structures in Finnish family forestry 2.5.1 The Finnish ownership structure 2.5.2 The MTK 2.5.3 Gender structure at the national level 2.5.4 The Regional level

57 58 59 60 61 63 65 65 66 66 66 67 68 69 69 69 71 73 73 76 78 79 79 79 79 80 80 82 82 82 82 83 86 89 89 89 90 90 90 90 93 95 96 96 96 96 97 97 97 98 104 104 105 105 105

vii

2.5.5 MTK's equality programme 2.6 Gender structures in Baltic family forestry 2.6.1 General aspects of the forestry sector in the Baltic States 2.6.2 Private management problems and the needs of the private forest owners 2.6.3 Conclusions 2.7 Summary and conclusions 3. Gender and perceptions of forest and forestry 3.1 Perceptions of forests and forestry ­ what people think about forests and forestry 3.2 The public's perception of and relation to the forest or how Swedish men and women view the forest 3.3 Innovation and Forestry: Attracting visitors and changing perceptions 3.3.1 Borders Forest Trust Projects: 3.3.2 The importance of initiatives like BFT in the United Kingdom 3.3.3 Future Research on changing perceptions about forestry 3.4 Urban nature ­ perception, evaluation and adoption by Turkish migrants in the northern Ruhr area under special consideration of urban-industrial woodlands 3.4.1 Research design 3.4.2 Interview of the residents 3.4.3 Expert interviews 3.4.4 Conclusion 3.4.5 Summary 4. Means and actions 4.1 Introduction 4.2 Political tools 4.2.1 Sweden 4.2.2 Political tools in Norway 4.2.3 The United States Civilian Labor Force 4.2.4 The gender mainstreaming strategy within the European Union 4.3 Gender issues in education and research: cases and examples 4.3.1 Introduction 4.3.2 Do gender-related factors influence students' choice of courses at the Faculty of Forest Sciences, SLU, Umeå? 4.3.3 Gender issues in forestry curricula ­ results from surveys in 2002 and 2004 4.3.4 Gender studies ­ a new subject in forestry curricula: the University of Freiburg, Germany 4.3.5 Gender does matter: studying corporate culture and the possibilities for gender-sensitive reforms in Germany's forest services 4.4 Networks on women and forestry 4.4.1 Networks in Sweden 4.4.2 Slovakia 4.4.3 Lithuanina 4.4.4 Networks in Germany 4.4.5 The Norwegian organization ­ Women in Forestry 5. Criteria and indicators 6. Summary and conclusions REFERENCES ANNEXES I. List of acronyms and definitions: II. List of Tables III. List of Figures IV. List of ToS members V. Norway: Political tools VI. Norway: Actions carried out by Women in Forestry VII. References to endnotes for Questions 4 to 7

105 106 106 107 109 109 111 111 113 115 116 118 118 119 119 119 120 120 122 123 123 123 123 126 128 128 134 134 135 136 139 144 146 147 148 149 150 152 155 157 163 173 173 174 176 177 178 181 185

Introduction

1

INTRODUCTION

BACKGROUND
Human societies are deeply pervaded by the principle of gender, by which individuals, animals and inanimate objects and things are sorted and assigned a value. Throughout history, most phenomena have been given a masculine or feminine connotation. Ideas of specific masculine or feminine qualities are thus connected to certain roles, positions, tasks and professions in individuals. The perception of what is "appropriate" for men and women forms the basis for the distribution of work, the design and the evaluation of different tasks, and the criteria for promotions. Forestry is not an exception to this since it has been generally regarded as an arena mainly for men's work, business and governance. Within organizations, from households to companies to authorities, a gendered organizational logic is at work, which not only reproduces a structure of gender division but also, paradoxically, at the same time, makes gender invisible. Gender invisibility comes in many forms. One example is the way in which the terms forestry and forestry work are defined and perceived, while another is the way statistics on the involvement of women and men in the forestry sector are not kept separate, or not at all. In many countries, reliable statistics on the demographics of the forestry workforce are difficult to obtain, and when it concerns women's participation, data are virtually non-existent. Similarly, information on women's involvement in family forestry, both as part of the workforce and as owners, is also scarce. Therefore, in April 2004, the Joint FAO/ECE/ILO Committee on Forest Technology, Management and Training established a Team of Specialists (ToS) to study gender and forestry in order to raise visibility of women and women's involvement in the forestry sector and to understand the gender structures throughout the sector. The ToS was an outcome of the seminar on "Women in Forestry ­ Strategies to Increase Women's Participation in the Forestry Sector in Europe and North America", which was held in Viseu, Portugal, in April 2001. The Joint Committee agreed that they would play an active role in advocacy and remind countries of their obligation to promote equal opportunity between men and women, which is in direct alignment with one of the goals of the United Nations Women's Conference held in Beijing, China, in 1995. The countries who attended the conference agreed to adopt and implement gender mainstreaming as a strategy for involving and integrating gender equality into all major policy and decision-making processes. Adopting such a strategy

2

CHANGING GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

ensures that gender considerations will permeate all aspects and areas of governmental policy. Increasingly, a number of influential drivers have been effecting change on global, regional and national levels: at the United Nations level (the women's conference in Beijing, for instance) to the European Union Agricultural Council action plans (2004) regarding gender mainstreaming and country-level legislative changes and government policy initiatives.

MANDATE AND MEMBERS OF THE TEAM OF SPECIALISTS
The ToS members were selected either directly by the Joint Committee secretariat or through a nomination process by their respective countries. The nomination process resulted in the following Team: Liz Agpaoa (United States) is Chief of Staff for the United States Forest Service. She has worked in the natural resources field for more than 25 years, providing leadership as district ranger and forest supervisor. She has been involved in the area of civil rights and diversity, including gender diversity, throughout her career in the Forest Service. Currently she serves on a non-governmental board for the diverse selection of graduate candidates for scholarship recommendation. Skadrite Albertina (Latvia) holds an undergraduate degree in forestry and a Ph.D. in biology. She is a member of the Forest Owners' Association of Latvia, a board member of the Forest Owners Association of Latvia and chairperson of the Council of PEFC, Latvia. From 1968 to 1977, she was lecturer of forestry and silviculture. Her project experience includes education and training in forest, private forestry strengthening in Latvia, rural development programme of Latvia, rural diversification in Latvia, forest certification, models, systems, implementation of PEFC system in Latvia. Merete Furuberg (Norway ­ International Union of Forest Research Organizations [IUFRO]) has

a Ph.D. in forest engineering. She is forest owner, researcher, politician and among one of the women that
established the organization "Women in Forestry" in Norway. She initiated the first World Wide Symposium on Women and Forestry in Lillehammer, Norway, 1999. One outcome was the new research group within IUFRO on "Gender and Forestry", where she is coordinator. Gender perspective and issues have been a topic for several years in her work. She is an Assistant Professor at the Hedmark University College, Norway. Natalie Hufnagl (Germany ­ Confederation of European Forest Owners [CEPF]) is SecretaryGeneral of the CEPF since 1999. In this function, she coordinates the policy input of national forest owners' associations from 23 European countries to European and global forest policy institutions and processes. She is a member of the "Women in Natural Resource Management" network that was founded in 2003. Marion Karmann (Germany) has a Ph.D. in natural science/forest work science. She is a visiting lecturer

Introduction

3

and former researcher in work science at the University of Freiburg. The view on gender issues in forestry has been a focus in her research on national and tropical forest utilization and ergonomics as well as in her work with forest labour unions and as IUFRO office holder. She is presently coordinator at the Forest Stewardship International (FSC). Bozena Kornatowska (Poland ­ Ministerial Conference on the Protection of Forests in Europe [MCPEF]) has a Ph.D. in Agricultural Sciences at the Agricultural University in Warsaw, Poland. She has worked on several scientific projects concerning forestry and agriculture, with special emphasis on crop protection, at the Forest Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland; the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United States; and the University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada. For the past two years, she has worked for the MCPFE Liaison Unit, Warsaw, as a specialist on communication and organization. Siegfried Lewark (Germany) is professor of forest work science at the University of Freiburg. In teaching and research, he has been dealing with gender issues for more than ten years. He helped found the IUFRO unit on Gender and Forestry, and is coordinator of the IUFRO unit on Education, Gender and Forestry. Gun Lidestav (Sweden) is associate professor at the Department of Resource Management and Geomatics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. In her research on family forestry and contract labour force in the entire forestry sector, gender perspective and gender issues have been a main topic for several years. She has also developed postgraduate courses on this topic. Wieslawa L. Nowacka (Poland) is adjunct professor at the Department of Forest Utilization, Warsaw Agricultural University (SGGW). Her research has focused on ergonomics applied to forestry with particular emphasis to physiology of work, the situation of women in forestry, and family life of those living near forests and use of forest products. She steered several master theses regarding women in forestry. Simmone Rose (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [ FAO]) is a Forestry Officer with the Forest Products and Economics Division. She is responsible for Post Harvest Impact Assessments and is one of the gender focal points for the Forestry Department. Anna Springfors (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO]) is a former Associate Professional Officer attached to the FAO Forestry Department. While at FAO, she was involved in work on microfinance and gender issues. Berit Sanness (Norway) was the first chairperson of Women in Forestry (1986-1992) and the former Director of Information and Director of International Affairs at the Norwegian Forest Owners' Federation. She managed the Living Forests project (the stakeholder process in Norway) in the 1990s and played a key

4

CHANGING GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

role in the establishment of PEFC (global forest certification system). Presently, she manages the consultant company Pinus-Betula AS. Renate Spaeth (Germany) is forest officer at the Ministry for Environment in Nordrhein-Westfalen. She has been working on different aspects of forestry such as forest policy, planning, nature conservation, environmental education and public relations. She is a member of the German Network "Frauen in der Forstwirtschaft", initiated a regional network of female forest owners and is internationally active for women in forestry. Patricia Tomlin (United Kingdom) is director of the management consultancy company Wildcat One Ltd. She undertook the first substantive research on the employment of professional women foresters in the British forestry industry, on behalf of the British Forestry Commission in 2000, and presented findings from this research at the FAO/ECE/ILO seminar in Viseu, Portugal, in 2001. She works regularly with clients in the field of equal opportunities, diversity and managing change. Gunilla Törnquist-Hedström (Sweden) is forest owner and member of the Swedish women forest owners' association Black Woodpecker. She represents the forestry sector in a reference group supporting the Minister of Agriculture in Sweden. At present, she is a senior adviser and communications consultant. Eriks Zakis (Latvia) is a member of the Latvian Forest Owners' Association. At the first workshop held in Rome on 23 April 2004, Gun Lidestav was elected Team Leader, Skadrite Albertina as Deputy Team Leader, and Simmone Rose and Anna Springfors contributed as coordinators. The Team of Specialists' mandate was developed from discussions and recommendations at the FAO/ ECE/ILO seminar in Viseu, Portugal (2001), and should be regarded as a strategic framework rather than a targeted one. The mandate covers: · reviewing relevant data; · developing criteria and indicators that reflect gender aspects in sustainable forest management; · launching case studies concerning specific aspects of gender and forestry, including family-owned forests; · disseminating information about national experiences, in particular success measures and good practices; · promoting national networks of women in forestry; and · organizing follow-up meetings to the 2001 seminar in Portugal that focus on "Gender in Forestry" and used to monitor change in gender balance and equal opportunity.

Introduction

5

The Team of Specialist has focused its work mainly on the first and last issue, but it has also concentrated on disseminating information on national experience and organizing meetings. So far, five meetings have been held since the seminar in Portugal (see Table 1). At the first meeting, three subthemes and subgroups were set up, namely: (i) gender structures in forestry organizations; (ii) gender structures in forest ownership; and (iii) gender and the perceptions of forests and forestry. This report continues to follow the same subtheme structure for reviewing the current forestry situation. Because country data was difficult to find or retrieve, the ToS decided to use a case study approach and presented cases from areas where reliable and abundant data was available. Moreover, Chapter 4 explores the different means and actions for improving gender balance in the forestry sector while Chapter 5 outlines the recommendations for criteria and indicators on gender in forestry. Finally, Chapter 6 presents the conclusions and recommendations. Table 1: FAO/ECE/ILO Team of Specialists Attendance at Meetings on Gender and Forestry
Rome, Italy 23 April 2004 Merete Furuberg Natalie Hufnagel Marion Karmann Siegfried Lewark Gun Lidestav Berit Sanness Renate Spaeth Anna Springfors Patricia Tomlin Gunilla Tornqvist Eriks Zakis Skadrite Albertina Düsseldorf, Germany 22-23 November 2004 Liz Agpaoa Merete Furuberg Marion Karmann Bozena Kornatowska Siegfried Lewark Gun Lidestav Wieslawa Nowacka Berit Sanness Renate Spaeth Anna Springfors Patricia Tomlin Gunilla Tornqvist Zvolen, Slovakia 18-19 June 2005 Liz Agpaoa Merete Furuberg Bozena Kornatowska Siegfried Lewark Gun Lidestav Simmone Rose Berit Sanness Renate Spaeth Gunilla Tornqvist Piedmont, Italy 28-29 October 2005 Liz Agpaoa Marion Karmann Siegfried Lewark Gun Lidestav Simmone Rose Berit Sanness Renate Spaeth Rome, Italy 30-31 March 2006 Liz Agpaoa Merete Furuberg Natalie Hufnagel Bozena Kornatowska Siegfried Lewark Gun Lidestav Simmone Rose Berit Sanness Renate Spaeth Patricia Tomlin Gunilla Tornqvist

Gender structures in forestry organizations

1 GENDER STRUCTURES IN FORESTRY ORGANIZATIONS

1.1 INTRODUCTION
In order to assess the current situation pertaining to gender structures of employment and work in forestry organizations it was important for the team to determine the scope of the study. The team agreed that the overall review needed to encompass the whole forestry supply chain, including the forest and timber industries and arboriculture, as well as all sectors (i.e. the private and public sector, NGOs, cooperatives, universities, etc.). The study therefore has focused on direct employment relationships because more data was available in this area; however, indirectly, the intent was also to glean information about contract labour forces whenever possible. The team identified four key areas to review: (i) to determine the current status quo of gender representation, across the supply chain and across all sectors, drawing on existing quantitative and qualitative data, as well as to highlight critical data gaps; (ii) to understand why gender representation is the way it is and whether this differs across different sectors and different geographical regions and countries; (iii) to identify the key drivers for change and the means for driving the gender "agenda" forward; and (iv) to confirm the positive benefits organizations could gain by applying new measures. In attempting to answer the foregoing issues and establish a current picture of employment patterns for the industry, the ToS decided on studying the source materials from European and North American countries. The information includes: Statistical data (such as national census, workforce demographics and national industry-level data), the registries and records of trade organizations and professional memberships, and university/ college documents, etc. Qualitative research, including case studies, surveys, anecdotal evidence, among other things. Each member of the group was assigned responsibility for collecting and reviewing data from different geographical regions, which was then collated centrally to provide an overview of the situation.

7

CHANGING GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

1.2 REVIEW OF THE CURRENT SITUATION
1.2.1 What is the current status quo of gender representation across organizations?
One of the major challenges encountered during the course of this review was the relatively limited
8

amount of data on gender and related issues. This was apparent across all aspects of the industry's supply chain (although less so for government and public sector organizations and, in some countries, larger NGOs). In some countries, for example Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States, national-level statistics for forestry are often encompassed with other land-based industries, making it difficult to determine the forestry industry's status. Similarly, the definition of what constitutes forestry work, as used at the national workforce census level, can sometimes differ from the one the industry uses. These constraints prevented extrapolation of the data in a wider sense, or the ability to draw sufficiently robust conclusions on gender structures across the various sectors of the industry. It also proved difficult to undertake meaningful benchmarking across various sectors of the industry or of the different participant countries. In view of the nature of data available and the evident gaps, a summary of data has been compiled, which helps to identify main, high-level themes. This, along with the broad criteria used for analysis, is detailed in Table 2. Explanation of Table 2: Q1. Question/Indicator: The economical impact of forestry/forest industry on society: (N) = none (L) = little (M) = medium (G) = great.

For the economical impact classification of GDP, within the forest sector as percentage of total value, is used and set to three classes, made on the basis that characterizes some important forestry countries: (G)reat > 3 % (M)edium 1-3 % (L)ittle 0-0.9 %

Q2. Question/Indicator: The cultural impact of forestry/forest industry on society: (N) = none (L) = little (M) = medium (G) = great.

For the culture impact of forestry/forestry industry on society, three factors are taken together: forest area/capita, percentage of employment within forestry sector, and private ownership of forest area. Each factor is first estimated separately with three classes, then added together and divided by 3. Results are given in three classes:

Gender structures in forestry organizations

(N) = none

(L) = little

(M) = medium

(G) = great.

Forest area/capita (ha/cap):

3 > 1, 2 = 0.5 -1, 1= 0 - 0.49 3> 2% , 2 =1 ­ 1,9%, 1< 1% 2 =25- 49% 3< 25% (L)ittle < 1,5
9

Percentage of employment within forestry sector: Private forest area of total forest area: 3 > 50%, Sum of factors: (G)reat > 2 (M)edium 1,5 - 1,9

Q3. Question/Indicator: Is gender/equality an issue in general in society? Indicated by policy of gender mainstreaming, Equality Act or some other policies: (Y) = yes, (N) = no Q4. Question/Indicator: Is gender/equality recognized as an issue in forestry/forest industry? (Y) = yes, (N) = no Q5. Question/Indicator: If yes, what kind of actions (indicators) are there: A) Some kind of official reports/studies/recommendations B) Networks/organizations of, for example, female foresters or forest owners C) Statistics divided by gender, D) Research on gender and forestry E) Programs in order to reach certain aims such as recruitment activities Q6. Question/Indicator: Are women's representation in forestry B(alanced) or UnB(alanced) considering (a) different levels/positions. (b) different parts of the forestry sector. Q7. Question/Indicator: Is there any analysis of remuneration, careers, job satisfaction, etc.? (Y) = yes, (N) = no If so, what did they show?

CHANGING GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

Table 2: Gender situation and structures in forest organizations at the national level
Country/ Question Ar menia Austria 10 Belgium Bulgaria Bosnia and Herzegovina Canada Croatia Cypr us Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Ger many Greece Hungary Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg The Netherlands Norway Q1 L M L M G M M M M G G L L L M M G M M L M Q2 G L L Q3 Y-1 Y-1 YA A A, B C-6 D17,18 A B? UnB Q4 Q5 A Q6-A UnB Q6-B UnB Q7 Y-8 Relative to health, especially physical

G M L M G G M L L L M G M L G

Y-3 Y Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-2

Yes

UnB UnB UnB UnB

UnB UnB UnB UnB* UnB UnB UnB UnB

Y Y-8 Easier for men to have a career Women 46% of chief of staff

Y Y Y N

A AC ABCD A, B C D14,15,16 E

UnB UnB UnB UnB

Y-15 Low representation

Y Y

ABCD ABCD

UnB UnB

UnB UnB

Y-2

A, B C2,5 D-10, 11,12,13 E

UnB

UnB

Y

Poland

M

L

Y-1

Forest engineers not balanced, but still at high level A D-8 A B UnB UnB A A B C-4 D7,8,9 E A AC A C-5 D E UnB UnB UnB UnB UnB B UnB UnB UnB UnB UnB UnB UnB

Portugal Romania Serbia and Montenegro Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom

M M G M G M G M L L

M L G G M G M L

Y-1

Y-1 Y-1 Y-1 Y-1

Y

Y-2

Y

Women less paid, harder to have a career

Yes Yes Y

United States of America

G

M

Y

No

A, B C 2,5 D-19,20,21

UnB

UnB

Related to health, especially physical Y Differences in public/private sector employment in representation and pay, but hard to reach senior levels in both sectors Y-20 Probably some at local or regional level

Y-8

Gender structures in forestry organizations

Representation of women in forestry employment Quantitative data is known to be too patchy and insufficient to determine, with confidence, the number of women working in the forestry industry, or their roles and employment levels. There are, however, common themes that emerge from this data and, combined with more qualitative information from research, surveys and anecdotal evidence, provide clear insights as to the nature of gender representation across the industry. Although the data show that improvements have been made in the number of women holding technical, professional and managerial positions over the last 10 to 15 years, women are still clearly underrepresented in the forestry industry. Similarly, although statistics are not available for the whole supply chain, enough evidence exists to suggest that it is indicative of the whole industry and in most, if not all, participant countries.
11

THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN THE INDUSTRY
In terms of seniority levels and positions of decision-making and responsibility, the data and feedback confirmed that it was overwhelmingly unbalanced in favour of men. This was true in all the sectors and countries studied, although there was evidence that more women held senior positions in the public sector (though, even here, the balance still clearly favoured men). What the information does suggest is that women in the forestry sector are primarily employed in administrative and support roles, with "professional" women foresters tending to have specialist roles (i.e. research), or first-line junior management positions. Moreover, there is limited information (either quantitative or qualitative) on the numbers and roles of women in contracting or self-employed forestry work, as here especially women seem to be invisible. Examples of good practices, however, have been emerging, which proves that concerted and sustained commitment and planning at the most senior organizational level can result in quantifiable improvements in the number of professional women foresters employed and the level of seniority they can attain. The ToS defined "professional" to mean women who qualified at the university degree level and who worked in forestry or forestry-related roles. This is demonstrated in the United States Forestry Service and detailed in Section 1.15. The relatively low level of female representation ­ both in terms of critical mass and levels of seniority/ professional roles ­ is in stark contrast to the feedback from all respondent countries that gender/equality is perceived as an important issue in society. This was evidenced through referencing national government and international (i.e. United Nations) policies and initiatives, combined with legislative measures to enforce equality. This is further underlined by the fact that all participant countries confirmed that gender equality

CHANGING GENDER SITUATION IN FORESTRY

was also considered to be an "issue" within their respective forestry industry. It is therefore important to understand the reasons why the efforts to redress the current imbalance have been unsuccessful.

1.2.2 Why is gender representation as it is?
12

Despite the difficulties in accessing sufficiently robust data sources across all sectors of the industry and for all countries, the data the ToS collected clearly show