pour for producteurs et Exporters from West Africa l'Ouest les Producers and exportateurs de l'Afrique de

A Guide pratique Practical Manual

REGLEMENTATIONS, REGULATIONS, NORMES & CERTIFICATION STA LEXPORTATION DE PRODUITS POUR NDARDS & CERTIFICATION FOR AGRICULTURAL EXPORT AGRICOLES

This manual has been produced with the financial support of The Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA), the Government of Germany and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The manual is partly based on the FAO/RUTA (Unidad Regional de Asistencia Técnica in Spanish) manual `'¿Es la certificación algo para mí? Una guía práctica sobre por qué, cómo y con quién certificar productos para la exportación'' by M. Andersen, C. Pazderka and P. Liu (2003, 32p, ISBN: 9968-866-30-X).

Authors:
Aïcha L. Coulibaly, Commodities and Trade Division, FAO Pascal Liu, Commodities and Trade Division, FAO

With the collaboration of:
Cora Dankers, Commodities and Trade Division, FAO Antoine Fayossewo, Techno 3M Services & Farms Ltd

Layout of the manual: Bruno Dumoulin Illustrations : Diop Aly NGuer
The mention or omission of specific companies, their products or brand names does not imply any endorsement or judgment by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other noncommercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permissions should be addresses to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO. Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org

© FAO 2006

i

Why this manual?
Objectives
Provide producers and exporters with information on: * the regulations of main import countries * major certification programmes *contacts where more information on import regulations and certification schemes can be found
any producers may feel that the market for certified agricultural products is very complex and that the opportunities and requirements associated with the certification programmes are not always clear. In addition, producers do not always know if the requirements are compulsory (created as an official law or regulation in the importing country) or voluntary. It is in this framework that this manual has been created. After having read its content, the reader should be able to understand the main voluntary certification schemes, their importance, the differences between them as well as their advantages and limitations. In order to be able to export his/her products any producer or exporter must also conform with the regulations of importing countries. Therefore, the reader will be able to find in this manual information concerning the main import regulations in the United States (US), the European Union (EU) and Japan. However, topics such as farming practices and post-harvest activities are beyond the scope of this manual.

M

This manual comprises two parts: - standards and Import Regulations - main voluntary Certification Schemes It is difficult to provide comprehensive information on import regulations and certification programmes for many reasons such as the changing nature of regulations in import countries and the diversity of products and their characteristics. Therefore, numerous Internet addresses have been provided where additional information can be obtained when necessary. You will find at the end of the manual a blank page that will enable you to update or add the Internet links gathered during your search. We hope this manual responds to your needs.

ii

ESCR
An important part of the mandate of the Commodities and Trade Division (ESC) of FAO is to identify the problems affecting commodity trade and propose solutions to address them, preferably through international action. ESCR (the Raw Materials, Tropical and Horticultural Products Service) became involved in issues regarding social and environmental certification as these continued to arise in the analytical work on trade and economic problems related to bananas and other commodities for which it is responsible. FAO-ESCR has produced several technical studies and information publications on social and environmental certification. These include: a small brochure targeted at wholesale and retail buyers of bananas, explaining the differences between various certification schemes; an extension manual aimed at producer associations and exporters in Central America on voluntary certification programmes and describing the import regulations of main export markets; cost-benefit analyses on certified citrus in Spain and in Costa Rica; and recently, a technical paper on environmental and social standards, certification and labelling for cash crops. FAO has established an Internet portal where relevant studies and links to organizations working to improve social and environmental conditions in agricultural production and trade can be found. http://www.fao.org/es/ESC/en/20953/22218/highlight_44152en.html

The Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA) was established in 1983
under the Lomé Convention between the ACP (African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States) and the European Union Member States. Since 2000, it has operated within the framework of the ACP-EC Cotonou Agreement. CTA's tasks are to develop and provide services that improve access to information for agricultural and rural development, and to strengthen the capacity of ACP countries to produce, acquire, exchange and utilize information in this area. CTA's programmes are designed to: provide a wide range of information products and services and enhance awareness of relevant information sources; promote the integrated use of appropriate communication channels and intensify contacts and information exchange (particularly intra-ACP); and develop ACP capacity to generate and manage agricultural information and to formulate ICM strategies, including those relevant to science and technology. CTA's work incorporates new developments in methodologies and cross-cutting issues such as gender and social capital. CTA, Postbus 380 - 6700 AJ Wageningen - Netherlands -Website: www.cta.int

iii

CONTENTS
WHY THIS MANUAL? GLOSSARY PART1: TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONTROLS FOR IMPORTING
1. - Commercial Quality and Labelling Regulations 2. - Food Safety Regulations

i iv

1
2 4

Maximum Residue Limits of Pesticides Biological Contamination and Product Traceability
3. ­ Environmental Safety and Phytosanitary Regulations 4. ­ Customs Clearance 5. - Organizations supporting export from West Africa

4 6
8 10 12

PART2: VOLUNTARY CERTIFICATION
1. ­ Questions about certification 2. ­ Environmental Certifications

16
17 19

Organic agriculture ISO 14001 Certification Utz Kapeh
3. ­ Social Certifications

19 25 28
31

Fair-Trade SA 8000 Certification
4. ­ Food Safety and Quality Certifications

31 34
37

EUREPGAP Ce tification r ISO 22 000 BRC Global Standard
5. ­ Goals of the six certification schemes 6. ­ Opportunities and constraints of the six certification schemes

37 40 41
42 43

iv

GLOSSARY
Bioterrorism Bioterrorism is a new form of terrorism based on pathogen use. This practice comprises the use of bacteria, virus or other toxins against persons, animals or plants. Biological contamination It is the contamination of any material or living matter by pathogens or genetically modified organisms. Fumigation It is a treatment based on the disinfection of products by chemical agents. This type of treatment is also sometimes required to disinfect material used for commodity packaging meant for export. Quarantining Quarantining is the confinement of products that do not comply with the phytosanitary requirements of import countries. This confinement of products aims at avoiding the introduction and the spreading of diseases. Confined products are kept under observation and research or for further inspection, testing and/or treatments. HACCP principles The HACCP system maintains food safety along the food supply chain from farm to consumer table. It consists of analysing possible contamination hazards in order to identify critical control points in the production line of the product and therefore avoiding possible contamination and ensuring food safety. The steps leading to HACCP system implantation are: Assemble the HACCP team Describe product and identify intended use Construct flow diagram and on-site confirmation of flow diagram List all potential hazards associated with each step, conduct a hazard analysis and consider any measures to control identified hazards Determine critical control points Establish critical limits for each critical control point Establish a monitoring system for each critical control point Establish corrective actions Establish verification procedures Establish documentation and record keeping

1

PART 1
TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONTROLS FOR IMPORTING

T

his

part

describes

important

technical

norms

and

import

requirements of the United States, the European Union and Japan.

To export their products into the international market, producers and exporters must comply with norms and regulations in order to ensure product quality, environmental protection and consumer health. These norms and regulations are different depending on the product and the country of export and import. Some regulations are based on international food standards, while others are developed by individual countries. Non-compliance with these requirements may lead to quarantining or product rejection by import countries.

2

1. COMMERCIAL QUALITY AND LABELLING REGULATIONS

C

onsumers are increasingly concerned about their health, the country of origin and the quality of the products they consume.

Most popular regulations focus on grade, size, weight, and package labelling. Regarding labelling, required information includes: country of origin, product name, variety and quantity. Requirements relating to commercial quality are about variety, colour, expiration date, external damage and shape.

Before allowing the entry of products, require comply grades import that with and countries products minimum conditions.

3 United States

The United States requires that agricultural imports be graded according to the standards of the American Marketing Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). For more information on product grading and quality requirements

established by the USDA: USDA: www.ams.usda.gov/standards/stanfrfv.htm USDA: www.ams.usda.gov/fv/moab-8e.html FDA: www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/lab-ind.html One of the components of the 2002 Farm Bill (the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002) is the implementation of mandatory country of origin labelling (COOL). For more information on this programme: USDA: http://www.ams.usda.gov/cool/

European Union
The European Union requires that imported fresh fruits and vegetables meet the European Community marketing standards for quality and labelling. The control is done by an inspection body at the point of import or in the case of some approved "third countries", at the point of export. For more information on the marketing standards of the European Union, consult the United Kingdom Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) website: DEFRA EU Marketing Standards: www.defra.gov.uk/hort/hmi.htm

Japan
Japan requires that imported products comply with regulations in the Food Sanitation Law, the Japan Agricultural Standards (JAS) Law and the Measurement Law. For more information on standards and import procedures for specific products: Japan External Trade Organization: http://www.jetro.go.jp/en/market/regulations/ Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries: http://www.maff.go.jp/soshiki/syokuhin/hinshitu/e_label/index.htm

4

2.

FOOD SAFETY REGULATIONS

Producers need to ensure the quality and safety of the produce and avoid all potential hazards such as risks from contaminated water.

Maximum Residue Limits of Pesticides

R

egulations on the maximum residue limits (MRLs) of pesticides (herbicides, insecticides, fungicides etc.) are effective both at national and international levels. Producers and exporters must comply with the regulations of their country (when the latter has a regulation on maximum residue limits of pesticides) and the regulations of import countries. They may only use chemicals that are registered for use on a particular crop and must strictly follow the directions indicated in the instructions leaflet or on their containers (boxes and bottles).

For treatments, it is important to meet recommended doses

The following links contain comprehensive information on Food safety regulations at international level (e.g. Codex Standards) and/or national level :
http://www.ipfsaph.org/En/default.jsp http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/food/food_fruits_en.stm

5 United States
In the United States, the maximum residue limits for pesticides are established by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and controlled by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) at the point of import for all agricultural products. For more information on the requirements and the maximum residue limits established by the EPA: US Environmental Protection Agency: www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_04/40cfr180_04.html www.epa.gov/pesticides/food/viewtols.htm www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-PEST/index.html The following website enables users to get maximum residue limits according to crop, pesticide active ingredient or pesticide type and country: www.fas.usda.gov/htp/MRL.htm

European Union
The European Union continues to lower the maximum limits of pesticide residues permitted in products. For many pesticides there are now common limits that apply to the entire European Union. However, for some pesticides the residue limits vary from country to country. Each country verifies that regulations are met (usually through the ministry of agriculture) at its point of entry. When European Union countries have not set up maximum limits, exporters are required to obtain an import tolerance. For more information about pesticide residue limits in the European Union member countries: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/plant/protection/pesticides/index_en.htm http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/plant/protection/index_en.htm http://europa.eu.int/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l21289.htm For appropriate contact points in the member states: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/plant/protection/evaluation/contact_dec.xls For information about application procedure of an import tolerance: http://www.pesticides.gov.uk/applicant_guide.asp?id=1239

6 Japan
In Japan, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare and the Environmental Department are responsible for establishing and testing residue limits. These limits are based on the Food Sanitation Law. Information on pesticide residue levels can be found at: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/foodsafety/positivelist060228/index.html

Biological Contamination and Product Traceability
n response to recent problems about food safety (e.g. mad cow disease) and global terrorism, many governments are increasing control over all stages of food production, processing and distribution to protect consumers against the biological contamination of food. Traceability systems are used to identify products, their origin and their location within the supply chain. They also enable efficient recall in case of products' contamination. Furthermore, they help determine the origin of a food safety problem, comply with legal requirements and meet consumer's expectations for the safety and quality of purchased products.

I

To limit contamination risks, it is necessary to monitor each stage of the supply chain.
A growing number of governments and retailers are now requiring that the HACCP principles together with the application of Good Hygienic Practices (GHPs) and Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) be used in crop production. http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/food/food_fruits_en.stm http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/food/quality_haccp_en.stm

7 United States
The Government of the United States has adopted the Bioterrorism Act, which requires that all exporters register with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and give notice prior to product arrival in the United States. For more information about the United States Bioterrorism Act: Food and Drug Administration: www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/ffsbtac5.html www.access.fda.gov/ The USA COOL programme will have impacts on traceability requirements of the United States towards its supplier countries. General information on this programme can be found at: USDA: www.ams.usda.gov/cool/

European Union
The European Union regulations on traceability entered into force in January 2005. In order to comply with these rules, it is important that European Union importers identify the origin of products. As a consequence, the latter could require exporters to comply with traceability requirements even if "Exporters in trading partner countries are not legally required to fulfil the traceability requirement imposed within the EU. General information on traceability can be found at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/food/foodlaw/guidance/guidance_rev_7_en.pdf http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/food/foodlaw/traceability/index_en.htm http://europa.eu.int/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/132041.htm For detailed explanations on this regulation you can consult the Pesticide Initiative Programme of COLEACP: http://www.coleacp.org/, Email: pip@coleacp.org For explanations on the foodstuff hygiene requirements, please consult: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/food/biosafety/hygienelegislation/guidance_doc_8522004_en.pdf

Japan
At the time of preparing the manual, no traceability requirements for exporters existed in Japan.

8

3. ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY AND PHYTOSANITARY REGULATIONS
roducers must comply with phytosanitary regulations to prevent the entry and spread of plant diseases and pests into new areas. The major importing countries around the world implement pest risk analysis systems in order to determine the risk level of an imported product and inspect products on arrival to ensure that the level of risk is not exceeded.

P

It is necessary to apply for phytosanitary certificates for regulated products such as plants, seeds, fruits and vegetables, and cut flowers. For detailed information on phytosanitary certificate content: https://www.ippc.int/IPP/En/default.jsp (under phytosanitary regulations' section)

9

United States In the United States, inspectors from the Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service (an agency of United States Department of Agriculture) must examine and approve all shipments before they can be cleared for customs. If signs of pests or disease are found, the produce may be either fumigated (or treated in another manner), returned to the country of origin or destroyed. For further information on the plant quarantine system of the United States: USDA: www.aphis.usda.gov/ppq/permits

European Union

To export to the European Union, producers and exporters must comply with the plant health regulations of the European Union. Regulations are enforced at the point of entry. For more information on the plant health regulations in Europe, contact the

International Phytosanitary Portal at: https://www.ippc.int/IPP/En/nppo.jsp or for the Consolidated text on the phytosanitary requirements of the EC (Council Directive 2000/29/EC plus amendments) go to: http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/consleg/pdf/2000/en_2000L0029_do_001.pdf

Japan

The Japanese Government requires supplier countries to comply with the Plant Protection Law, the Plant Health Law and the Food Sanitation Law. These regulations are enforced by the Plant Protection Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and

Fisheries (MAFF). More information on Japanese phytosanitary regulations or Japanese quarantine system can be found at: Plant Protection Station: www.pps.go.jp/english/ Japan External Trade Organization: http://www.jetro.go.jp/en/market/regulations/pdf/plant2003apr-e.pdf

10

4. CUSTOMS CLEARANCE
inal authorization for product entry depends on the customs officials in the country of import. To clear customs, the exporter must fill out the necessary forms (commercial, shipping) and pay all fees (duties, taxes). Since processing these forms can be time-consuming, some countries now offer pre-clearance programmes to save time. This means that products can be cleared for customs in the country of origin by officials who can guarantee that product regulations were followed.

F

Non compliance with one of these norms or regulations of import countries may cause product rejection.

11

United States

Customs officials can only authorize the entrance of products into the United States after inspections by APHIS and the FDA at the point of entry. Exporters must also pay the necessary duties there, as determined by quantity, value, description and country of origin. To speed up the processing time at the border,

exporters can complete certain customs procedures before departure. For example, through APHIS International Services it is now possible for some countries to get pre-clearance on import documents like phytosanitary certificates. For more details about the available pre-clearance arrangements in the United States: www.aphis.usda.gov/ppq/preclearance/ Exporters can also use an Automated Commercial System developed by the US Customs to process documents electronically. For more information: www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/import/operations_support/automated_systems/ams/

European Union

Procedures for customs clearance in the European Union vary according to countries. However, many of these countries have electronic customs systems and other programmes that speed up clearance time. For specific information about customs procedures

and tariff rates (by country): Taxation and Customs Union
http://europa.eu.int/comm/taxation_customs/common/about/welcome/index_en.htm

Centre for the Promotion of Imports from Developing Countries (CBI): www.cbi.nl

Japan

Prior to arrival of the products, exporters must notify the quarantine station at the point of entry through an electronic system operated by the Ministry of Health and Welfare. To further reduce the time spent at customs, a sample of the

product can be brought to an official lab in Japan or in the exporting country and the results submitted for pre-clearance. Consumption tax and duties are paid before final clearance is given. For further information about import procedures: www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/importedfoods/index.html

12

5. ORGANIZATIONS SUPPORTING EXPORT FROM WEST AFRICA

national organizations located in each of the West African countries that work to help producers comply with these regulations.

P

roducers and exporters need to familiarize themselves with a large variety of technical norms and import regulations which can at first seem complicated. However, there are a number of international and

Various organizations may help you find the right information
Don't hesitate to contact international or local organizations! They can provide you with additional information or relevant training.

At International Level
COLEACP, Pesticide Initiative Programme (PIP) and Harmonized Framework for Codes of Practice: www.coleacp.org EU on-line Export Help Desk for developing countries: http://export-help.cec.eu.int/ Guidelines to facilitate trade: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fvo/pdf/guide_thirdcountries_en.pdf International Trade Center: http://www.intracen.org/menus/itc.htm Market Access Database: http://mkaccdb.eu.int

13

National Organizations

Benin

- Association de développement des produits d'exportations (ADEX); Tel.: (229) 31 78 21, Email: adex@intnet.bj - Centre béninois du commerce extérieur, Tel.: (229) 301320/301397; Email: cbce@bow.intnet.bj, www.cbce.africa-web.org/ (FR)

- Fédération des groupements d'intérêts économiques de l'atlantique, Tel.: (229) 315726, Email: sylvieamoussou@yahoo.fr

Burkina Faso

- Association professionnelle des exportateurs de fruits et légumes du Burkina (APEFEL), Tel.: (226) 300210/311338 - Ministère du commerce, de l'artisanat et de la promotion de l'entreprise; Tel.: (226) 324828; Email: mcia@cenatrin.bf - Union nationale de groupements et sociétés coopératives de

production fruitière et maraîchère du Burkina Faso, Tel.: (226) 20975234; Email: ufmb@fasonet.bf

Côte d'Ivoire

- Association pour la promotion des produits d'exportation de Côte d'Ivoire (APEXCI), Tel.: (225) 20315700; Email: apexci@aviso.ci - Association pour la promotion des produits d'exportation agricoles non­traditionnelles de Côte d'Ivoire (PROMEXA), Tel.: (225) 20210561/62; Email: info@promexa.ci - Organisation centrale des producteurs/exportateurs d'ananas &

bananes de CI, Tel.: (225) 20/25251872; Email: ocab.a@aviso.ci (exportation: mangue, ananas) - Société d'étude et de développement de la culture bananière, Tel.: (225) 20209300; Email: scb@scb.ci

14 Gambia
- Department of State of Trade, Industry and Employment Tel.: (220) 228868, Email: dostie@qanet.gm Web: www.gambia.gm/Introduction/introduction.html

Ghana

- Federation of Associations of Ghanaian Exporters (FAGE); Tel.: (233) 21232554; Email: fage@ighmail.com; web: www.ghana-exporter.org -Ghana Association of Vegetable Exporters (GAVEX), Email: tacks@africaonline.com

- Ghana Export Promotion Council (GEPC); Tel: (233)-21228813/228830, Email: gepc@ghana.com; web: www.exportghana.org -Horticulturist Association of Ghana (HAG), Email: hag@africaonline.com - Ministry of Trade and Industry; Tel.: (233-21) 663188, Email: mismoti@africaonline.com.gh; web: www.moti-ghana.com -Papaya and Mango Producers and Exporters Association of Ghana (PAMPEAG), Email: pampeag@yahoo.co.uk -Plant Protection and Regulatory Services Directorate, Tel.: (233) 21302638; Email: spsghana@africaonline.com.gh or uqadams@hotmail.com -Vegetable Growers and Exporters Association of Ghana (VEPEAG), Email: vepeag@yahoo.com, Web: www.ghana-exporter.org/vepeag/DEFAULT2.HTM

Guinea

- Projet cadre de promotion des exportations agricoles (PCPEA); Tel.: (224) 411461; Email: pcpea@mirinet.net.gn

Liberia
- Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Tel.: (231) 226283

Mali

- Ministère de l'industrie et du commerce; Tel.: (223) 2214928; Email: dnae@datatech.toolnet.org - Trade Mali, Tel.: (223) 2291750; Email: info@trademali.com

15 Niger
- Centre nigérien du commerce extérieur, Tel.: (227) 732288 - Ministère du commerce de l'industrie et de la promotion du secteur privé Tel.: (227) 735867, Email: nicom@intnet.ne.

Nigeria
- Chamber of Commerce, Industry, Mines and Agriculture of Port Harcourt, Tel.: (234-84) 330394 - International Trade Center of Lagos, Tel.: (234-1) 2635276, Email: wtcn@linkserve.com - Nigeria Export Promotion Council (NEPC), Tel.: (234-9) 5230932; web: www.nepc.gov.ng

Senegal

- Centre international du commerce extérieur du Sénégal (CICES), Tel: (221) 8275266; Email: cices@cices.sn - Chambre de commerce, d'industrie et d'agriculture de Dakar (CCIA); Tel.: (221) 8237189; Email: cciad@Telecomplus.sn - Fondation trade point Sénégal, Tel.: (221) 8397373,

Email: tpdakar@tpsnet.org; web: www.tpsnet.org (FR) - Organisation nationale des producteurs/exportateurs de fruits et légumes du Sénégal (ONAPES), Tel.: (221) 8227853/7854; Email: onapes@infocom.sn

Sierra Leone

-Ministry of Trade and Industry Tel.: (232-22) 222706/ 222640 -Sierra Leone Export Development and Investment Corporation (SLEDIC), Tel.: (232-22)229216/227604

Togo
- Chambre de commerce, d'agriculture et de l'industrie du Togo, Tel: (228) 212 068/217 065, Fax : (228) 214 730 - Ministère du commerce, de l'industrie et de l'artisanat, Tel.: (228) 2212971/2212025, Fax: (228) 2210572

16

PART 2
VOLUNTARY CERTIFICATION
The first part of this manual described important technical norms and import regulations of the United States, the European Union and Japan. They are compulsory for exporters or producers who want to sell their products into these markets. he second part of the manual deals with voluntary private

T
found.

certification. The objective of this part is to provide producers and exporters with general information on some of the major voluntary agricultural certification programmes, available in

private

Western Africa, including contacts where more information can be

17

1. QUESTIONS ABOUT CERTIFICATION
What is voluntary certification?
certificate is a written guarantee by an independent certification agency that the production process or the product complies with certain standards established by different private organizations or countries. These standards can focus on environmental issues (such as soil conservation, water protection, pesticide use, or waste management), or social issues (such as producer income, worker rights, occupational health and safety) or on other aspects of production like food safety.

A

Why do these programmes exist?
ertification brings opportunities to producers such as market access, protection of local resources, improvement of workers' health and living conditions of rural communities. It may also ensure consumer health. Consumers are increasingly aware of the social and environmental problems associated with the production and trade of the food they consume.

C

In response to these concerns, different types of certification programmes have been developed by private organizations or governments in order to solve these problems.

18

Why certify?

helpful to promote the product in the market. Certification can also help improve market access, and in some cases, result in higher producer prices. Certification is mainly used when the producer and the consumer are not in direct contact, in the international market where for instance the consumer cannot easily verify that the product was produced in the manner described by the producer.
Producers can choose among many

C

ertification is used to demonstrate that a product has been produced in a certain way or has certain characteristics. It can help differentiate the product from other products, which can be

different types of certification. Decisions to obtain certification as well as the type of certification chosen are important decisions that influence farm management, investments However, programme and since has marketing every different strategies. certification objectives,

requirements differ.

Cost?
he cost of meeting a standard and getting certified depends on the kind of changes the producer will have to make on his/her farm and on the type of certification program chosen. In general, the cost of certification depends on the time spent doing the farm inspection (farm audit) and on the travel expenses of the inspector (s).

T

19

2. ENVIRONMENTAL CERTIFICATIONS

ORGANIC AGRICULTURE
rganic agriculture is based on the rejection of synthetic chemicals or genetically modified inputs. It promotes sustainable traditional farming practices that maintain soil fertility such as fallow. In organic farming, soil fertilisation requires organic substance (animal or vegetable origin) and small quantities of minerals.

O

In West Africa, organic farming is expanding notably for crops such as cotton, bananas, mangoes, pineapples, shea butter, papayas, cashew nuts and avocadoes.

Main requirements?

T

here are specific requirements for most organically certified crops as well as livestock, fish farming, bee keeping, forestry and the harvesting of wild products. Organic standards require that there is a conversion period (or time that a farm has to use organic production methods before it can be certified, usually 2-3 years).

20

Some organic farming criteria
Crop production requirements apply to:
selection of seeds and plant

Animal production requirements apply to:
animal health feeding and bree