The Growing Global Obesity Problem: Some Policy Options to Address It

Abstract The last few decades have seen fundamental changes in food consumption patterns around the world. These changes were characterized not only by an increase in overall calorie intakes but also by a shift in the composition of the diet towards more meat, eggs, dairy products as well as more fats and oils, i.e. a shift towards high calorie diets that are also much richer in saturated fats and cholesterol. The main drivers of this transition include factors such as: (i) rapidly falling real prices for food; (ii) urbanization with the development of new marketing channels and the spread of supermarkets into developing countries; (iii) and freer trade and globalization with the emergence of large, trans-nationally operating food companies. This diet transition also brought about a rapid increase in the prevalence of overweight, obesity and related non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Initially, these problems were limited to developed countries, but more recently, there are growing concerns that the adverse effects of a rapid nutrition transition could even be more severe in developing countries. The growing health concerns have also given rise to a intense debate about possible remedies to stop and reverse the obesity epidemic in developed countries, and, perhaps even more importantly, to prevent similar developments in developing countries. Some of these policy options are being examined in this paper. The instruments analysed include price interventions, both at the level of primary commodities and final consumer goods (tax on fat food), direct incentives to reduce and disincentives to maintain an excess body weight; finally the paper also presents some experience gathered with a combination of various measures in integrated nutrition programmes. Keywords: Nutrition transition, obesity, NCDs, policy options

1. Introduction
The last two centuries have seen a fundamental transformation of diets in essentially all affluent countries. At the beginning of this transformation was the agro-industrial revolution of the nineteenth century which provided people with the expertise to produce more, the income to consume more, and increasingly sophisticated food products. The modernization of agriculture has played a pivotal role in bringing about change. The rigorous application of scientific advances to traditional agriculture, mechanization, genetic improvements and the development of fertilizers and pesticides enabled a doubling and redoubling of food production within the time span of a few decades. In fact, productivity growth was so strong that growth in production comfortably exceeded growth in demand and afforded a rapidly growing population more and better food at declining real prices. Agricultural productivity growth also promoted the industrialization of the then largely agrarian societies. It helped accumulate capital, free up labour and provide ever more and more nutritious food. Eventually, a virtuous circle was created where productivity growth, rising incomes and better nutrition became mutually supportive and thus spurred overall economic development.2 At least for the nineteenth century, however, these developments remained largely limited to industrial countries. It took more than a century before the agro-industrial revolution started to reach the first developing countries. With the beginning of the 1960s, the same factors that had initiated the agroindustrial revolution in the developed world in the previous century got a foothold in the food and agricultural sectors of parts of the developing world. The combination of modern varieties, expansion of irrigation, more and improved input supplies and the widespread mechanization of production made more food available to consumers in developing countries. Since the early 1960s, the average calorie availability in the developing world has increased from about 1 950 to 2 680 kcals/person/day while protein availability nearly doubled from about 40 to 70 g/person/day. The prevalence of undernourishment declined from 37 percent in 1970 to 17 percent in 2000 and, while more than 840 million of people (FAO 2003) are still food insecure, this is more often the result of adverse local production conditions, war and civil strife, a lack of income and of access to food rather than the inability of the world as a whole to produce and provide enough food. As in the industrial world of the nineteenth century, consumers in developing countries have benefited the most from advances in agricultural productivity. In real terms, food prices have declined to the lowest levels in history and, together with gains in broader economic growth, have enabled consumers today to eat better while spending less and less of their budget on food. However, not all countries and regions have benefited from these advances. In parts of the developing word, notably in sub-Saharan Africa, these advances have not even started to yield a meaningful impact. But in many developing countries, the progress in access to providing more, better and cheaper food has been impressive.3 The rapid decline in real food prices has allowed consumers in developing countries to embark on food consumption patterns that were reserved for consumers in industrialized countries at much higher gross domestic product (GDP) levels. Today, a consumer in a developing country can purchase more calories than ever before and more than consumers in industrialized countries ever could at comparable income levels. In China, for instance, consumers today have about 3 000 kcals/day and 50 kg of meat per year (FAO 2004) at their disposal ­ at less than US$1 000 nominal income per year (World Bank 2002). In addition to falling real prices of food, rapid urbanization has affected and will continue to affect consumption patterns. Essentially the entire population growth over the next 30 years will be urban. Urbanization creates a new and improved marketing and distribution infrastructure; attracts supermarkets and their sophisticated food handling systems (cold chains, etc.); makes for better roads and ports, thus improving the access of foreign suppliers and the importance of imports in the overall food supply; and, all in all, will promote a globalization of dietary patterns. Most important from a nutrition perspective, these changes include not only a shift towards higher food energy supplies but also a shift towards more fats and oils and more animal-based foodstuffs, and thus higher intakes of saturated fat and cholesterol. The shifts in consumption patterns and lifestyles have resulted in a rapid increase in the prevalence of obesity and related non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in developed countries.
2 Fogel (1994) estimates that half of the overall economic growth in France and England in the nineteenth century was a result of better nutrition. 3 While not all developing countries have benefited from rapid income growth and nor have they experienced the same rapid socio-economic transformations that come with rapid industrialization and urbanization, the number of countries that are in the process of a profound transformation of their food economies is steadily increasing. As population giants such as China, India, Indonesia, Brazil and Mexico are among the most rapid transformers, the nutrition transition affects a large and growing share of the developing world's population.
Many developing countries are in the process of undergoing a similar nutrition transition (see WHO 2003), with probably even more adverse health impacts. The main compounding factor of these nutritional changes is a phenotypic and genotypic predisposition towards developing obesity and NCDs. The phenotypic predisposition is the result of rapid transition from hunger and undernourishment towards overnutrition and affluence. There is ample empirical evidence that hunger and malnutrition "programme" the next generation to develop a more efficient energy metabolism and thus to have a higher propensity to develop obesity and related NCDs (see Delisle 2002 for a comprehensive discussion). In addition, populations of developing countries have on average a genetic predisposition towards developing obesity and NCDs (thrifty genotype, Miller and Colagiuri 1994). The combination of: (i) the rapid nutrition transition with a rapidly declining share of expenditure on food as a percentage of total expenditure/income; (ii) urbanization; (iii) the shift in diet towards more animal products; and (iv) the phenotypic and genotypic predisposition towards a more efficient metabolism and NCDs could spark a rapid increase in the prevalence of obesity and NCDs in developing countries over the next generations. The human and economic toll could be dramatic and, for many, the exit out of food poverty may be associated with a straight entry into health poverty. This means that, while fewer people will suffer from hunger and chronic undernourishment, more will have health problems related to obesity and NCDs. The impacts will be felt more strongly than in developed countries as fewer consumers in developing countries will be able to afford the needed medical treatment even if they can afford more food. Many NCDs have a lethal impact if left untreated. The rapid increase of NCDs also suggests that some of these concerns have already become a reality, at least in developed countries. Phenotypic and genotypic predisposition for obesity and NCDs in developing countries, in conjunction with the rapid nutrition transition towards higher calorie availabilities in general and more livestock products in particular, suggests that their populations may have to cope with an even bigger problem in a shorter period of transition. The policy messages emerging from these links are straightforward. First, all efforts that help fight hunger today and improve the nutritional situation of women of child-bearing age have the potential to yield an extra dividend for coming generations. Second, nutritional education and supplementary feeding programmes for pregnant women that ensure a balanced and healthy diet are even more important than hitherto assumed.4 Third, policy-makers in developed and developing countries alike have to think about possible policy measures that can help contain a growing obesity problem without thwarting progress in fighting hunger. As far as the fight against hunger is concerned, there is no shortage of programmes and projects that could provide or at least promise success. But policy approaches that could help contain or reverse the global obesity problem are rather new. The various proposals and their pros and cons are being discussed at the moment in many developed countries (for example, Australia, the United States and the United Kingdom).5 The remainder of this paper aims to shed some light on the various proposals and will also try to assess possible interactions and incompatibilities with other policy measures. It will first look at the effects of price interventions, both at the level of primary commodities and final consumer goods (tax on fat food), then examine the possibilities of tax on excess body weight (tax on fat people), and finally present some experience gathered with a combination of various measures in integrated nutritional programmes. The discussion of the various policy options includes an examination of their effectiveness and efficiency, and an evaluation of their pros and cons and their compatibility with other policies. However, the presentation and discussion of possible policy measures will be limited to a few instruments; the focus will be placed on policy measures that have received particular prominence in the current public discussion in developed countries and in developing countries in rapid economic and nutrition transition; no claim is being made that the selection of instruments is comprehensive or representative.
4 They could be of critical importance in those developing countries where the prospects for a rapid increase in calorie availability combined with a more efficiently "programmed" metabolism could result in a disproportionate increase in obesity and related NCDs. 5 For the United Kingdom, see for instance: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/2988314.stm; for the United States: http://www.usatoday.com/life/2002/2002-02-19-diet.htm; for Australia: http://www.consumerfreedom.com/headline_detail.cfm?HEADLINE_ID=1960

2. Food Price Interventions
One of the most popular proposals to come to grips with the growing obesity epidemic and associated public health costs has been the proposal of a tax on energy-rich foodstuffs.6 These proposals are now being discussed by health officials and public policy-makers with a view to identifying their effectiveness in reaching their stated objectives, their efficiency relative to other measures, and their shortfalls and side-effects. In principle, interventions could take place at two different levels. The first would be to influence producer prices for food, i.e. interventions at the agricultural producer level. There is a long history of such interventions in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries and an equally long debate about the effects and problems that have emerged with such interventions on agriculture, but relatively little has been said about consumers and food consumption. The second entry-point for price interventions would be at the consumer price level. These interventions are currently largely limited to surcharges in the form of value added tax (VAT) and total or partial exemptions from such VAT surcharges. The following will try to shed some light on possible impacts of the two types of interventions and will try to provide answers that arise in the context of policy interventions. The case for food price interventions The basic case for food price interventions rests on the notion that higher prices could provide a means to reduce excess food consumption, which is in turn associated with significant societal externalities. Put differently, the price of food energy set by a free market reflects the cost of producing the food rather than true cost (which is the production cost plus the external costs of treating NCDs such as coronary heart disease (CHD) or non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)). If food markets fail to capture the full costs of excess consumption, a tax ­ set at the level where production cost plus tax will equal the production cost plus external costs ­ would provide an economically efficient solution. But there may be important rejoinders to the tax argument. For instance, that a tax on excess food consumption could be a regressive tax as it creates an extra burden on people with higher calorie needs or lower incomes. Moreover, interventions on food prices in a system of increasingly freer trade in food and agriculture are likely to create incompatibilities with commitments taken elsewhere, notably those taken within the World Trade Organization (WTO). Not liberalizing trade means foregoing efficiency gains to be had from a better allocation of production, which would need to be taken into account in the overall cost­benefit analysis of such a tax. How effective and efficient these taxes are in practice, and how compatible they are with other policy reforms will be discussed in the following section. Price interventions at the producer level: "a tax on primary products" As already mentioned, producer price interventions for food products are a commonly used tool of agricultural policies in developing and developed countries alike. Numerous studies have analysed their impacts on agriculture, farm households, incomes, the environment or rural development. But relatively little is known about their impacts on consumers and food consumption patterns. In fact, many analyses simply assume that changes in producer prices are fully transmitted to the consumer level or that consumers are implicitly assumed to change their consumption patterns according to a change in producer prices. Interventions at the producer level have been subject to controversial policy debates, particularly those associated with higher border protection, intervention price systems and export subsidies. Any suggestion to increase such measures for the sake of possible health benefits would
6 For details of a recent debate at governmental level on a tax on fatty foods in the United Kingdom, see for example: http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/02/19/1077072753005.html?from=storyrhs or http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/3502053.stm

therefore add to an already contentious debate and should be most carefully vetted before any inference is drawn. Much of the rationale put forward by the proponents of agricultural price interventions rests on the observations that countries with massive support to agriculture, high producer prices and high border protection are benefiting from relatively moderate prevalence levels for obesity. This relationship is depicted in Figure 1, which in fact suggests that the OECD countries with the highest Producer Support Estimate (PSE) rates (Japan, the Republic of Korea, Norway and Switzerland) have the lowest prevalence rates of obesity, while Australia, New Zealand and the United States, all with low or middling levels of protection, are burdened with relatively high prevalence rates of obesity. The question that arises in this context is whether this relationship is of a causal nature, i.e. whether it is a matter of correlation or causation. A necessary condition for a causal relationship is that a price increase at the level of the protected agricultural product has a substantial impact on final consumer prices. The question therefore is how and to what extent prices are transmitted along the food chain and to what extent the value share of farm products affects the final consumer price. A number of empirical studies help to find an answer to this question (e.g. Wohlgenant). These studies show that: (i) the value share of primary products in the final consumer good has been declining over time (with rising value share of services included in the product); and (ii) that there are considerable differences across commodities (for example, very low for wheat/bread and high for eggs). The high service element in the differences also means that the margins between producer and consumer prices are typically much higher in developed than in developing countries. For some products at least, an increase in the producer price in a developed country (regardless of whether through higher border protection, higher support prices or a combination of the two) may therefore not create a sizeable increase in consumer prices. This suggests that a change (increase) in producer prices for food would in general be a rather blunt tool to change food prices at the consumer level and thus have little influence on food demand. Figure 2 should help explain the channels that affect the transmission of prices from producers to consumers. Figure 1: Support for agriculture and the prevalence of obesity

Obesity: is protectionism the antidote?

Prevalence of obesity and producer support to agriculture


Figure 2: Examples of the agricultural price formation at support levels and processing margins The impact of a tax/tariff with high margins (OECD country)

The impact of a tax/tariff with low margins (developing country)

The upper pane of Figure 2 depicts the main factors that affect the horizontal and vertical price transmission for food products in a developed country (Schmidhuber and Britz 2002). What is referred to as the horizontal transmission is essentially the transmission of primary product prices across the border from international markets to the domestic commodity market. In many OECD countries, this process is often heavily affected by agricultural policy measures. In this process, the internal price formation starts from a (low) border price that is raised, e.g. through a tariff, to the level of the domestic market price. For producers, this market price is further increased (e.g. through a direct transfer) to the level of the farm incentive price, which drives the level of input applications and allocated area. The domestic market price is where the vertical price transmission process starts. It starts with a wholesale operation (cooperative), pooling supplies from farmers; the primary products (cereals) are then further processed at various stages (flour, bran, etc.); intermediate products are further refined (different types of flour), added to other products and eventually sold as the final consumer good (bread, breakfast cereals, etc.) by a retailer (supermarket, bakery). In this multistage process, the various agents often add considerable margins for the processing or marketing services they provide. As a result, the value share of primary good (wheat) eventually accounts for only a small share of the final value of consumer good (bread)7,8. The situation is quite different where primary products account for a larger value share in the final consumer good (Figure 2, lower pane); not an atypical case for the price formation in many d e v e l o p i n g countries. Any price increase at the producer level would translate into a more substantial increase in consumer prices and, where consumers are price responsive, result in a reduction of consumption. Higher consumer prices for food in developing countries, however, may also mean that ­ other things being equal ­ undernourishment may increase. It also explains, although does not justify, why many developing countries have chosen to tax their agriculture to the benefit of (urban) consumers rather than protecting it. From the consumer point of view, the impacts of low shares on the final product is in effect described by Marshall's theory of derived demand (Marshall 1920), i.e. that demand is typically fairly inelastic where the primary commodity forms only a small component of the final good. It may therefore be more efficient to levy a tax directly at the consumer level, again distinguishing the impacts of low and high price elasticities of demand. Price interventions at the consumer level: a tax on "fat food" A similar, although in its impacts somewhat different, approach to address the growing obesity problem is the proposal to levy a tax directly on consumer prices of food. Particularly in developed countries, the discussion has recently advanced from the theoretical proposition to examining actual and operational issues. Public health officials9 in particular have been proposing concrete measures to increase the costs of energy-dense and "saturated fat rich" foods by adding an extra tax on energy-rich food or reducing the food VAT exemptions that are still in place in many countries. While enthusiasm among public health advisors for such a tax is understandable, issues pertaining to the economic effectiveness and the operational efficiency of such measures in reducing obesity are less clear. Again, the effectiveness of such a measure depends crucially on how responsive consumers of these foods are to price changes induced by (higher) taxes. The elasticities used in the FAO@2030 model10 in Figure 3 give an idea of the general link between income levels and the responsiveness of demand with respect to income levels. They show a clear and strong decline of income elasticities with rising incomes and thus suggest that rich consumers are likely to react much less to a tax on certain foods than poor consumers.
7 Notable consumer price impacts are only likely if tariffs are extraordinarily high and/or processing and marketing margins are very small. Rice in Japan could be a case for more significant impacts on consumer prices, except that consumers in Japan have shown little responsiveness in their consumption of rice. 8 In Figure 2 (upper pane), the margin between producer and consumer prices is assumed to be 100 percent. For cereals, the margin may exceed 500 percent and more, while it should be less than 100 percent for eggs. 9 Dr Martin Breach, spokesperson for the British Medical Association, for instance, proposed a 17.5 percent VAT on highfat foods. The Australian Medical Association is promoting similar measures. 10 A description of the model is available in Schmidhuber and Britz 2002.

Figure 3: Income elasticities at different income levels
Income elasticities of food demand for milk and dairy products
0.8

0.6

0.4

Ey 0.2

0 0 -0.2 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

-0.4
GDP in USD

Figure 4: Price elasticities for food across income ranges

Source: Regmi et al. 2001

Assuming the basic relationships between food demand, incomes and prices, the principal impacts of a change in food prices, e.g. through a tax, can be examined. Figure 5 depicts the demand response to a tax on excess calories with price elastic (right pane) and price inelastic (left pane) demand. Where demand is inelastic (rich consumers, left pane of Figure 5), a tax on fat food will bring about only a small reduction in demand, thus only providing a small contribution to reducing food intakes and possibly obesity. In fact, the impact of the tax on demand will decline with the elasticity, while the tax revenues will increase. This low-responsiveness situation characterizes many food markets in developed countries, particularly where income differences within an economy are relatively small. The effect could be quite different in middle-income developing countries or in developed countries where incomes are less evenly distributed. Here a tax on excess calorie consumption ­ applied uniformly across all income strata ­ would do little to reduce obesity in the high-income-low elasticity strata but could have a consumption-contracting effect on poor elastically reacting consumers. Figure 5: Impacts of a tax on food with elastic and inelastic demand

There is empirical work that ­ by and large ­ confirms these theoretical expectations. In China, for instance, Guo et al. (1999) documented the possible reactions of consumers to price changes in various food items across a range of income strata. They found that: (i) consumers in low-income strata are more responsive to price changes for certain food items than rich consumers. For example, pork consumers in the poorest strata are reacting three times as elastically as consumers in the richest strata; and (ii) "an increase in the price of a food tends to drive consumption away towards its substitutes". They finally conclude that "increases in food prices have much less favourable effects for the poor" (Guo et al. 1999). Where income elasticities are low but substitutability between the various foodstuffs is high, a price-induced reduction of consumption in a given good is associated with higher consumption of its substitutes. In such a situation, taxes may well help to direct consumption of single food components in the desired direction, but the impacts on overall energy intake are likely to be limited. If, for instance, calories from animal fats are being taxed, consumption of vegetable oils and fats is likely to increase.11 Numerous other side-effects could result.
11 As King (2002) puts it: "If the government regulates the content of, say, fast food, people will find fat elsewhere".

A tax on animal fats, for instance, should promote the production and consumption of so-called "light" products (light yoghurts, low fat milk, etc.), while consumers would tend to reduce foodstuffs with high calorie contents. But the excess fat is likely to surface elsewhere in the food chain either domestically or abroad. One vent for surplus in many developed markets is the fast food and snack food industry that adds extra fat and sugar to many of its products, including ice cream, hamburgers and French fries. If these "junk" foods were to be taxed, the fat and sugar added currently to ice creams and hamburgers would occur elsewhere in the food chain. If not domestically, the high calorie parts of a foodstuff could be exported and end up in developing countries. A case in point is poultry meat, where rich economies already consume predominantly the lean parts (breasts), while the fattier parts (leg quarters, wings) are primarily exported, with possible adverse effects on the food consumption patterns and agricultural economies of those countries that import them. Another problem with a tax on excess calorie consumption is that in practice such a tax would have to be imposed on food items rather than on nutrients (energy) directly. As food items typically contain a group of different nutrients, a tax on a food item rather than on a nutritional component could bring about undesired side-effects. Guo et al. (1999), for instance, found that higher pork prices in China may indeed help reduce the intake of energy and saturated fatty acids of rich consumers but may cause an undesired fall in protein consumption by the poor. A look at excess body weights and dietary energy supply (DES) levels across countries seems to confirm the described impacts of a food tax on overweight and obesity. The left pane of Figure 6 depicts the DES levels and male overweight12,13 in those countries for which OECD and the International Obesity Task Force (IOTF) provide information. It may help to illustrate a number of different issues that characterize the relationship between dietary energy supplies and excess body weight across different populations. First, it suggests that a considerable overweight/obesity problem can exist even where food supply levels are low on average. Second, the prevalence of excess body weight increases with the average food availability. Third, once the DES exceeds a certain level (about 3 300 kcals/person/day), there is no more increase in the prevalence of overweight. In fact, if obesity estimates were included, the curve would be flatter. The latter reflects the fact that a large share of calories above 3 300 calories is likely to be wasted. All in all, the relationship between food availability and excess body weight resembles a typical input­output function (agricultural production function, diminishing production increments per unit of additional applications of an input, e.g. fertilizer, beyond a certain level). The tax on fat food (input) ­ in the context of an input­output function ­ helps to illustrate the possible impact of a change in input prices (tax on fat food) on the level of output (excess body weight). The right pane of Figure 6 combines the impacts of a tax on excess food energy intake in the input market with the likely effects on the output market (excess body weight). It underlines that the small impacts of the tax on actual food availability are even further reduced as the tax is effective in the flat part of the food energy/body weight curve. The flat part of the curve reflects the fact that a high DES is associated with high levels of waste; societies with more than 3 300 kcals also waste a lot more food and may thus not experience such a rapid increase in the prevalence of excess body weight. Waste is in fact usually the most elastic form of utilization and may therefore be the first to be reduced when prices rise (through tax). Again, this buffer is likely to be more (less) pronounced where incomes and food availability are high (low). As DES levels climb above the 3 300 kcals threshold, the largest part of the incremental food availability is likely to be wasted. This means that a tax on excess calorie consumption (e.g. on calorie-rich foods) may primarily reduce the level of waste in rich countries/for rich consumers while it may affect more directly the poorer consumers with lower waste levels. In the worst case (elastic poor and inelastic rich consumers and large income disparities), a tax on food may do little about obesity and increase undernourishment. In the best case (high level of equality, low food demand responsiveness), it will have a small impact on obesity, reduce waste to a certain extent and be an effective means to collect money that could be used to finance programmes for nutrition education.
12 Male overweight was chosen because of the larger sample size, which also included low-income countries. 13 A look at the prevalence of excess body weight across different income strata within a country would have been preferable, but was ­ in the absence of data - impossible.

As shown above, the link between calorie availability and excess body weight of Figure 6 is based on a cross-country (intercountry) analysis of available data. It was also mentioned that an intracountry analysis of 