RAP PUBLICATION 2006/08

Regional workshop

One year later ­ The rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in coastal communities of tsunami affected countries in Asia

Wor ldFish
C E N T E R

RAP PUBLICATION 2006/08

Wor ldFish
C E N T E R

Regional workshop One year later ­ The rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in coastal communities of tsunami affected countries in Asia
30 - 31 March 2006 Bangkok, Thailand

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 2006

i

The designation and presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

 FAO 2006

NOTICE OF COPYRIGHT All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Senior Fishery Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.

For copies write to:

The Senior Fishery Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road Bangkok 10200 THAILAND Tel: (+66) 2 697 4000 Fax: (+66) 2 697 4445 E-mail: FAO-RAP@fao.org

ii

FOREWORD
Following the disaster caused by the tsunami waves following the earthquake on 26 December 2004, regional fishery organizations in the region quickly joined together to form a Consortium to Restore Shattered Livelihoods in Tsunami-devastated Nations (CONSRN). CONSRN organized a regional workshop on the rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in coastal communities of tsunami affected countries in Asia that was held in Bangkok, Thailand from 29 February to 1 March 2005. The workshop developed and adopted a Regional Strategic Framework for the rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in tsunami affected countries in Asia. A year has passed since the Regional Strategic Framework was finalized and it was deemed timely to review progress against the strategy, re-assess needs and help coordinate the longerterm rehabilitation that is now needed in affected countries. A second regional workshop was therefore organized whose objectives were to (i) review progress against the regional strategy, (ii) share and discuss national strategies for rehabilitation, and (iii) plan how CONSRN partners can assist countries implement these strategies. This document presents a report of the meeting including a review of progress against the activities recommended in the Regional Strategic Framework, summary of country strategies, and recommendations for future work for the affected countries and CONSRN partners. The recommendations for action in tsunami rehabilitation emphasized the need for coordination and the importance of capacity building within communities, particularly in enabling them to access and manage the financial resources they need to effectively rebuild their livelihoods. The meeting also stressed the importance of ensuring that rehabilitation within the fishery sector was undertaken with due care and consideration of the fisheries resources and the livelihoods of those who depend upon them.

He Changchui Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific

iii

Table of Contents
Page Foreword ................................................................................................................................. List of Acronyms .................................................................................................................... 1. 2. 3. 4. Opening Session of the meeting.................................................................................. Election of Chairperson .............................................................................................. Introduction to workshop and regional strategic framework ............................... Session I ­ What has been done including lessons learnt and constraints? and Session III ­ What is needed from now? ........................................................... 4.1 India ­ country presentation ................................................................................ 4.2 Indonesia ­ country presentation ......................................................................... 4.3 Malaysia ­ country presentation.......................................................................... 4.4 Maldives ­ country presentation ......................................................................... 4.5 Myanmar ­ country presentation ......................................................................... 4.6 Sri Lanka ­ country presentation ........................................................................ 4.7 Thailand ­ country presentation .......................................................................... Session II ­ What are the outstanding issues? ......................................................... 5. 6. Session IV ­ Future actions and recommendations for countries and CONSRN partners ......................................................................................................................... Conclusion and adoption of the workshop recommendations ............................... iii vi 1 1 1 4 4 5 7 8 9 10 13 14 18 19 20 21 26 27 29

APPENDIX A ­ Workshop Agenda ..................................................................................... APPENDIX B ­ List of Participants ................................................................................... APPENDIX C ­ List of Documents ..................................................................................... APPENDIX D ­ Opening statement by the ADG/RR, FAO/RAP ................................... APPENDIX E ­ Working Group outputs: Country priorities, issues and solutions ....

v

List of Acronyms
APFIC BOBP-IGO CBO's CONSRN CRM DOF FAO FRP GOM IDP's IUU fishing MCS scheme MFAR NACA/STREAM RSF SEAFDEC WorldFish Asia Pacific Fishery Commission Bay of Bengal Programme Inter-Governmental Organization Community Based Organizations Consortium to Restore Shattered Livelihoods in Tsunami-devastated Nations Coastal Resource Management Department of Fisheries Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fibre Reinforced Plastic Government of the Maldives Internally Displaced Persons Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported fishing Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Ministry of Fishery and Aquatic Resources Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific/STREAM initiative CONSRN Regional Strategic Framework The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center WorldFish Center

vi

1.

Opening Session of the meeting

The regional workshop One year later ­ The rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in coastal communities of tsunami affected countries in Asia was organised by a consortium of regional fisheries/aquaculture bodies (CONSRN1 ) and was hosted by FAO at its Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand from 30 to 31 March 2006. The meeting was attended by 40 participants including representatives from seven of the tsunami affected countries and representatives from the CONSRN consortium, donor agencies and NGOs. A full list of participants is attached as Appendix B. The workshop was opened by Mr He Changchui, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok. Firstly he reviewed the background and purpose of the formation of the CONSRN Consortium. He stated that this CONSRN workshop would review the issues that have emerged through the tsunami rehabilitation process and the outstanding needs for action. The workshop would be an opportunity to outline national strategies that had been put in place and how they would be implemented. The report of the workshop would outline progress towards rehabilitation as it related to the major elements of the CONSRN strategic framework for tsunami rehabilitation and offer the opportunity to communicate to the international community the needs for further work in the longer-term rehabilitation of tsunami affected communities. Mr He noted the continuing importance of coordination and planning for longer-term rehabilitation and development despite the great progress made in the year following the tsunami. FAO stressed t h e need for a continued shared vision of a sustainable approach to reconstruction. Mr He asserted that those involved in tsunami rehabilitation must make sure that in restoring the livelihoods of those affected, the sustainable development of the fishery and aquaculture sectors and sound management of the natural resource base, such as coral reefs and mangrove forests, was assured. The opening statement is attached in Appendix D.

2.

Election of Chairperson

Mr Andin Taryoto, Secretary General, Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, Indonesia, was elected chairperson of the meeting.

3.

Introduction to workshop and regional strategic framework

Mr Derek Staples, Senior Fishery Officer of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific presented the objectives of the workshop. He emphasized that the workshop would be looking for a clear and frank review of the issues that faced tsunami rehabilitation and the future needs in this respect.

1

Consortium to restore shattered livelihoods of communities in tsunami affected nations (CONSRN). The consortium comprises of the Bay of Bengal Programme Inter-Governmental Organization (BOP-IGO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) and the WorldFish Center (WorldFish).

1

Mr Staples continued with a short review of the six strategic elements of the CONSRN Regional Strategic Framework. The CONSRN consortium was founded with the view to providing support to tsunami affected countries with a focus on the fishery sector. The vision of the consortium was to assist in rehabilitation which would:
s

Contribute to poverty reduction, sustainable livelihoods and food security; Be based on good management and governance; Recognize sustainable limits of harvesting natural resources; Take a holistic view of coastal ecosystems; Would emphasize a well integrated supply chain; harvest ­ consumer.

s

s

s

s

The six elements within the CONSRN rehabilitation strategy are: 1. Improving policy and institutions; 2. Providing appropriate physical assets; 3. Restoring the environment (while ensuring equitable access); 4. Providing appropriate financial support; 5. Improving capacity in support of community livelihoods, responsible coastal resource management; 6. Rebuilding of social assets. Mr Staples informed the participants that the purpose of the CONSRN regional workshop One year later ­ The rehabilitation of fisheries and aquaculture in coastal communities of tsunami affected countries in Asia was to review progress against these elements and recommend future directions for addressing outstanding needs and achievement of national strategic policies. Reviewing the progress against the strategic elements from the perspective of the CONSRN Consortium, Mr Staples summarized how the countries with CONSRN partners assistance had contributed to policy direction and strengthening of institutions, regarding tsunami rehabilitation. Capacity building and the strengthening of fisheries management institutions has now started to emerge as on the ground action and would be the basis for much future work. Regarding the promotion of integrated costal planning and management, Mr Staples noted that several countries had such approaches as part of their rehabilitation activities but that there was still much to do in this respect. Systematic damage and needs assessments have been carried out, however, there were issues concerning the value and use of these assessments outside of the organizations that carried them out. There was also a general lack of coordination between different assessments of needs. In addition, the assessments had also been over-focussed on replacement of assets and inputs and less on rehabilitation needs. The strategic element regarding the provision of appropriate physical assets has been the focus of debate in the fishery sector and, in particular, the extent to which fishing vessels had been replaced in excess of reported losses. The appropriateness of replaced assets has also been commented on, for example, instances where the assets replaced have been of limited immediate use to the beneficiaries, or had not been addressed to immediate needs. He also noted that there has been limited evaluation of the impact and effect of the asset replacement to date. Restoration of the natural environment focussed on ensuring sustainable management and equitable access to inputs. Mr Staples commented that this appears to have been partially successful in some focussed interventions. The issues of movement or relocation of fishers and communities

2

and establishment of buffer zones had been contentious. However, many of the decisions that relate to this issue lie outside the mandate of the fisheries institutions involved in rehabilitation. Ecosystem restoration has had less attention as there appeared to have been relatively limited direct impact of the tsunami on ecosystems.
s

There have been some activities carried out with the objective of restoration of habitats in s o m e locations. The cleaning of coral reefs or replanting of mangrove trees and establishment of buffer zones is probably the most significant activity in this regard. There are currently ongoing discussions as to how appropriate and useful this may be in regard to coastal protection from tsunami. There have been technical issues raised, which relate to the selection of restoration sites and the use of inappropriate species. Assessment of the impact of the tsunami on fisheries stocks, indicates that changes in fish distribution may have occurred, but that overall, the stocks are intact and species composition remains relatively unchanged. In order to ensure that seed and broodstock for aquaculture come from sustainable sources, hatcheries have been restored to production, although the practice of sourcing broodstock from the wild does not appear to have changed significantly.

s

s

Ensuring that appropriate financial mechanisms are made available during rehabilitation is an ongoing effort. The review of existing financial mechanisms has yet to be undertaken in a comprehensive manner. The control of loans for large scale vessels appears to have occurred in some countries and there has been little large vessel construction as a result. There have been difficulties in accessing finance and loans for those who lost assets and lacked collateral to take out loans. The establishment of an enabling environment for the financial/credit sector has yet to be systematically addressed, but is occurring at local level in community strengthening activities. The provision of financial support to harvesting operations has occurred whilst support to other links in the supply and value chains has been limited. Building capacity for livelihoods and sustainable management of resources has been undertaken and the strengthening of communities through participatory and holistic approaches has occurred in some projects. Ensuring that communities are empowered and involved in the planning of rehabilitation has been a fundamental part of the implementation approach of many agencies. However, there has been a lack of general coordination between organizations regarding geographic areas and approaches. Coverage of relief has not been comprehensive with some areas receiving relatively more attention than others. The CONSRN agencies response in support of implementation of the regional strategic framework has seen extensive collaboration and sharing of information between the partners. Collaborative work to ensure coherent rehabilitation plans has been quite successful in terms of idea sharing and development of best practices. However, collective mobilization of resources has been limited by the nature of funding agency priorities and delivery approaches. Joint implementation of plans has been partially successful and field activities have depended on the approach of the different partners. A flagship programme has been developed but has yet to find donor support. In summary, Mr Staples concluded there had been good progress made over the past year and that the CONSRN partners have provided significant support to governments both collectively or individually, but that much remains to be done. He concluded that the workshop would enable the discussion and sharing of opinion over what remains to be done along with prioritisation. In particular, the workshop should look at how rehabilitation could proceed now that the emergency is over and how CONSRN could facilitate action on this.

3

4.

Session I ­ What has been done including lessons learnt and constraints? and Session III ­ What is needed from now?

4.1 India ­ country presentation
India presented an overview of the impact of the tsunami and subsequent relief and rehabilitation efforts. The tsunami had a major impact on coastal communities and the fisheries sector with losses to craft and gear, housing and lives. Immediately following the tsunami, all agencies (including NGOs, government and private sector) pulled together with the communities to support the emergency and rehabilitation efforts. The most heavily impacted state was Tamil Nadu but Kerala, Andra Pradesh, and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands also suffered significant damage. In total 635776 people were moved to safe areas. In the fisheries sector, 83 788 vessels were af ected. Fish production was impacted by f the tsunami and was lower than in previous years (for example, marine production during January to March in tsunami affected states 2004-2005 was 199 000 tonnes whilst for the same period in 2003-2004 it was 342 000 tonnes. The relief operation and institutional arrangements at national and state level were described (including the creation of emergency committees). In the fisheries sector, special packages for relief for small scale fishers were developed. In addition, replacement of gear, vessels and infrastructure (such as ice plants, harbours and landing facilities) and support to entrepreneurs have also been undertaken. The total value of the government rehabilitation programme for the special package was US$ 277 million, comprising grants and loans. Support for livelihood rehabilitation has five aspects which include provision of working capital, assistance for fresh water fish farmers, compensation for loss of special projects (such as pearl oyster and crabs), repair of ice plants and compensation for aquaculture losses. Constraints to rehabilitation efforts were outlined. These included: organization of communities, the large scale of the damage, the disproportionately large impact on subsistence fishers, lack of availability of materials, weak capacity of implementing agencies, inadequate infrastructure, lack of understanding of socio-economic and traditional practices, lack of alternative technologies, lack of awareness and a time lag in gearing up the response. The lessons learned during rehabilitation were outlined and included: the importance of transparency (the right to information), constitution of committees and accountability, use of local materials, gender sensitization, use of a holistic approach which emphasizes horizontal and vertical as well as a "forward backward" linking. The workshop discussion covered clarifications on the responses described and whether it had included the NGO sector. India explained that whilst many NGOs cooperated well and provided information, many others did not, which has resulted in coordination problems. The number of NGOs had proliferated hugely since the tsunami and there was concern that many may not be there for the longer term and would not be sustainable. Issues related to beneficiary selection were discussed and India explained that whilst this was a difficult area, assessments had been made at state level with village communities to identify beneficiaries and agree a master plan (developed with the agreement of beneficiaries). Overall, few complaints have been received by the government.

4

India ­ future strategy
India outlined the development and contents of their national tsunami rehabilitation strategy. India has a tsunami rehabilitation programme which was developed very quickly after the tsunami struck. A planning commission was set up involving all concerned departments. The programme coverage was described which included finances (US$ 2 220 million), time frame (four years) and budget. The budget for this is from the finance ministry. The key components of the plan included housing, infrastructure, livelihoods and social development. Total funding for the plan was described with US$ 235 million allocated to fisheries and livelihoods. The funds were sourced from the government of India and donors such as the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. Funds would be allocated to both state and national governments. The components of the fisheries plan included: activities relating to boats and gear (repair and replacement), infrastructure improvements (upgrading, repair and building of landing centres) and value adding to fishery products (improved handling, processing and strengthening of cooperative groups). Guiding principles had been developed for sector rehabilitation and included issues such as good environmental management, adoption of participatory approaches, involvement of privates sector and gender sensitivity. The institutional mechanisms and roles and responsibilities for delivery of the rehabilitation plan were described. These included the use of a core planning group, empowerment group (at Ministry level) and the Nodal agency concept. Monitoring of the programme would be carried out by state governments and reporting to the core groups on a quarterly basis. The programme monitoring mechanisms were outlined with civil society and NGOs to play a major role. O t h e r broad issues considered important to implementation included: commitment to implementation in a time bound manner; coordination, need based approaches, environmental issues, sustainability, information on boat builders, gender, value adding, transparency and accountability, credit, quality assurance and sea safety. A question was asked concerning the way environmental issues would be incorporated into the infrastructure rehabilitation components of the plan. India responded that they would be taken care of.

4.2 Indonesia ­ country presentation
The Indonesian presentation began by describing the efforts immediately after the tsunami. The first action was to establish a taskforce. This taskforce was very effective in coordination between Government and NGOs, since, within the taskforce, there were no requirements for formal agreements. The importance of fisheries and aquaculture in Aceh was emphasized. On the east coast coastal brackish water aquaculture of shrimp and milkfish are important. Aceh is an important source of good quality broodstock of shrimp and is third in volume of aquaculture production of shrimp in Indonesia. In marine fisheries, nets are more commonly used along the east coast whilst along the west coast, long lining is more common. The damage was described in the numbers of casualties, length of coastline affected, and the number of villages and towns damaged. Ten percent of the fishers died. These were mainly the fishers who were on land during the tsunami. Around 10 000 boats of various sizes and types were destroyed. The main organizations involved in rehabilitation were described; with the local fisher communities being typically represented by the traditional structure in Aceh, the Panglima Laut.

5

The main intervention methods: Cash for work at a daily wage of US$ 4/day. Replacement of tools, repair and replacement of fishing craft and rehabilitation of fish ponds. Major efforts were also made in the reconstruction of infrastructure, housing and roads. Livelihoods were recovered by assistance with the rehabilitation of fish processing tools for the drying and salting of fish. The replacement of small fishing vessels was a popular activity of donors since this gave a quick result (easy, fast, cheap and visible). Key issues: It was difficult to maintain quality, and sometimes the wrong approach was used. Lack of coordination on working areas resulted in the tendency to work in areas most easily reached. Oversupply of support caused conflicts in the community, while some difficult to reach areas received less support. Implementation of assistance was slower than expected. Looking forward: Future improvements in fisheries can be achieved through increased training efforts especially in improved aquaculture methods. Fisheries stock assessment can be improved by the service of a fisheries research vessel. More construction effort is needed for rehabilitation of landing centres, irrigation systems for coastal ponds and the replacement of cold storage facilities. Some examples of best practice: FAO produced guidelines of rehabilitation of coastal ponds and on good boat-building standards. Emphasis on rehabilitation through working through cooperatives and communities ensured greater chances of success. Value adding to livelihoods through rehabilitation of fish processing through fish processing groups was also encouraged. During plenary discussions it was queried whether support to entry to deep sea fishing is a request by the fisher community and whether the required infrastructure is in place. It was replied that deep sea fishing should be promoted, specifically on the island of Sabang, where the needed infrastructure is already available. It is suggested that it is actually the donor community who prefers to replace the small boats, while the fisher community also requests them to supply larger vessels. Strengthened disaster preparedness: the workshop was informed how better preparations are in place, with better networking, a large storage of rice and establishment of a cash fund available for emergencies through the Ministry of Social Affairs. An early warning system has also now been developed in each province. The workshop noted that is commendable that in Indonesia, after a detailed assessment, a maximum was set to the number of boats to be replaced. This will avoid oversupply and resultant over fishing.

Indonesia ­ Future strategy
The overall goal is to alleviate poverty and within this three approaches were identified: 1. Restore private goods such as fishing boats, restart aquaculture and introduce new technologies; 2. Restore public goods, fisheries infrastructure and support services; 3. Strengthen the communities with training and working capital. From 2005 to 2009 two phases are identified, which are characterized by different activities related to short-term rehabilitation and medium-term reconstruction. The amounts of funding were presented as well as the main sources of funds. Diagrams were presented in which the operational implementation and the mechanism of donor coordination were shown.

6

A map and graph were presented which showed distribution of funds over the districts of Aceh, by sector portfolio. These also showed the gap between funds available and those needed. It is clear that some sectors are receiving more funds than needed, while others receive less than required. The fisheries sector has a positive gap. The plans for the future were similar to the points already discussed in the previous session. Recommendations for the future were given that emphasized the need for sustainability, coordination and participation by local institutions.

4.3 Malaysia ­ country presentation
The states most affected by the tsunami, were Perlis, Kedah, Penang, Perak and Selangor, impacting more than 7 500 fishermen and around 300 aquaculturists. The estimated losses were estimated to be US$ 15.4 million. Both fisheries and the aquaculture sector were affected by the tsunami. The Malaysian Government, international organizations, donors, and NGOs have been doing a lot of work to get things back to normal. Data collection has been undertaken by the government coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Agro-Based Industry.

A number of initiatives have been started:
s

Cleaning and recovery of fishing communities; Establishment of a national disaster fund which is used to compensate the fishermen; Rebuilding of infrastructure related to fisheries and aquaculture; Motivation program for the affected fishermen/families. There was a need to rebuild the confidence and "heart" of many communities; Surveys and research have been done by Fisheries Research Institute In Malaysia; Financial assistance has been provided through Government, Bank of Malaysia, Fishermen Fund, Japanese grant, group projects.

s

s

s

s

s

The Malaysian government report that much progress has been made during the past year and that things are on the right track. However there have been constraints for implementing some of the initiatives due to mainly the educational level of fishermen, severe trauma suffered by the fishermen and families, shortage of local inputs and financial inputs. There has been good support from The Malaysian government. It was noted in the discussion that it was interesting that work was being done with the fishermen and their families to recover from the trauma experienced after the tsunami. Regarding the determination of levels of vessel distribution/replacement it was replied that the target is to achieve the same distribution as before the tsunami with small adjustments where suitable.

Malaysia ­ future strategy
Financial assistance for tsunami rehabilitation came from the Tsunami National Disaster Fund. A task force was formed at three levels, under the Prime Minister's Office, at ministry level and at ground level, with the following goals: Financial support to aquaculture: with promotion of industrial ventures in aquaculture and working with the Agriculture Bank of Malaysia (BPM). G o v e r n m e n t Policy on mangroves: Land management is controlled by the state governments. Mangroves will be protected by strict regulation of mangrove exploitation. The first 200 meters from the sea will not be utilized.

7

Relocation of coastal communities: New housing areas for fishers communities are set up. Tsunami Early warning system: An early warning system is being developed. Two buoy units have been installed. Awareness program: The confidence of fishers is to be built up so they will be able to restart fisheries activities. Development of traditional fishers: The fishers groups are giving training which will lead to restructuring of the groups into viable economic entities. Fisheries related businesses will be developed which will lead to alternative income generating activities and diversification of income, for example in fish processing and boat building. Through training, motivation and technical support, the fishers group will establish itself as a company in future with support in kind based on the group's business plan.

4.4 Maldives ­ country presentation
The constraints in tsunami rehabilitation were listed. In particular these covered issues relating to beneficiary identification, information validation and needs assessment.
s

Limitations on validation of damage assessment and beneficiary identification due to logistical difficulties; High cost of participatory needs assessment, lack of agreement within communities leading to delays in delivery; Disproportionately negative impact of such delays on most needy people; Defined methodologies need to developed and used consistently by all partners; Tough policy decisions needed to be taken immediately after disaster with regard to level of assistance and period of assistance; Need to ensure equity between affected communities and other communities in order to avo