RAP PUBLICATION 2006/15

Proceedings of the FAO/AFMA workshop on quality and safety in the traditional horticultural marketing chains of Asia

7 to 10 November 2005 Bangkok, Thailand

Edited by Elda B. Esguerra, Jean-Joseph Cadilhon and Andrew W. Shepherd

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD MARKETING ASSOCIATION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 2006

The designation and presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations or of the Agricultural and Food Marketing Association for Asia and the Pacific concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Marketing Officer (Quality Improvement), FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand or by e-mail to FAO-RAP@fao.org.

© FAO and AFMA 2006

Cover photos: O. Argenti and J.-J. Cadilhon.

Acknowledgements: This workshop and the publication of the proceedings were funded by the FAO programme on "Enhancing Food Quality and Safety by Strengthening Handling, Processing and Marketing in the Food Chain". Project MTF/RAS/212/FRA contributed in funding the editing of this publication.

For copies write to:

FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road Bangkok 10200 THAILAND Tel: (+66) 2 697 4000 Fax: (+66) 2 697 4445 E-mail: FAO-RAP@fao.org

Table of contents
Foreword .......................................................................................................................iii Introduction .................................................................................................................... 1 Conclusions and recommendations................................................................................3 Presentation summaries ................................................................................................. 7 Conclusions and questions from discussions of the case studies presented ................ 31 Working groups ........................................................................................................... 33 Annex 1 ­ Workshop daily agenda..............................................................................39 Annex 2 ­ List of participants......................................................................................43 Annex 3 ­ Workshop opening addresses ..................................................................... 51 Annex 4 ­ Food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain in India .............................................................................................. 55 Annex 5 ­ Study on quality and safety in the fresh produce marketing chain in Myanmar ...................................................................................................................... 63 Annex 6 ­ A study of food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain in Nepal ...................................................................................... 71 Annex 7 ­ Food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain in Pakistan ......................................................................................... 79 Annex 8 ­ Quality and safety issues in the fresh fruit and vegetable production and marketing chain in the Philippines...............................................................................87 Annex 9 ­ Quality and safety of fruits and vegetables in Thailand.............................97 Annex 10 ­ Food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain ­ the case of cabbage in Viet Nam.................................................105 Annex 11 ­ Fieldnotes on visit to Talaad Thai Market ............................................. 113

Introduction
The FAO/AFMA Workshop on Quality and Safety in the Traditional Horticultural Marketing Chains of Asia was convened in Bangkok, Thailand from 7 to 10 November 2005. The workshop was attended by 31 participants representing various fields of discipline. Participants included: representatives from AFMA member agencies from five countries; academics; researchers; representatives from government departments that are closely involved with horticulture and food safety issues; expert consultants from seven countries; representatives of private sector marketing entities such as fruits and vegetable traders associations; officers from FAO and AFMA. The workshop agenda and the list of participants are attached as Annexes 1 and 2. The workshop was opened by Andrew W. Shepherd, Senior marketing economist at FAO Rome, who briefly presented FAO's involvement in developing and strengthening the capacities of governments and farmers on quality and safety issues: Codex alimentarius, integrated pest management (IPM), good agricultural practices (GAP), etc. This workshop was the first attempt by FAO to approach quality and safety issues through a marketing system perspective. What are the constraints faced by farmers and traders in the traditional horticultural supply chains to bring safe and quality produce to markets? This was the main issue to be discussed during the workshop.2 A second introductory speech was given by Nelson C. Buenaflor, Chairperson of AFMA, who suggested government departments that are members of AFMA identify the issues and topics deemed of importance by agribusinesses in their respective country. This would enable AFMA to organize its next international seminar in line with the needs of the industry, which would hopefully encourage private companies to join the association. Altogether, 21 presentations were submitted for discussion: Seven case studies carried out by expert consultants from India, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. These dealt with quality and safety issues in traditional horticultural marketing chains of Asia.3 A review of the country case studies and a case study of collaborative lettuce trading in Ho Chi Minh City by two FAO experts. Steps taken by Bangkok's Talaad Thai wholesale market to improve fruits and vegetable quality and safety, presented by an executive of the market authority. Nine country papers from Cambodia, India, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Pakistan, the People's Republic of China, the
2 3

The two complete opening addresses are published as Annex 3. The complete case studies are published as Annexes 4 to 10.

1

Republic of Korea and Sri Lanka. These papers reviewed problems with quality and safety in the respective country's horticulture sector. A study on consumer perceptions of quality by a Filipino expert. A case study on improving quality in the Indian apple trade by the Chairperson of the Apple Trading Association. A trader's perspective of improving quality and safety in the Thai fruit and vegetable trade by a Thai expert. A field visit was made to Talaad Thai ­ the largest fruit and vegetable wholesale market in Thailand, privately owned by the Thai Agro Exchange Co. Ltd. This field trip was organized for workshop participants to observe overall market management practices and discuss steps taken to improve the quality and safety of the product on sale. An account of this visit is published as Annex 11.

2

Conclusions and recommendations
Andrew W. Shepherd, FAO, Rome Jean-Joseph Cadilhon, FAORAP, Bangkok

Conclusions
There are many ways in which quality and safety of fresh produce can be negatively affected, ranging from the soil used to cultivate the crop to the handling by consumers and retailers at the time of sale. At the production level, soils can contain excess heavy metals, while water used for irrigation and for washing harvested produce can be, and frequently is, polluted. The choice of variety can affect the attractiveness of a product to consumers and can also have an impact on the shelf life of the product. Use of untreated manure can spread pathogens. Harvesting practices can have a major impact on both quality and safety, with fruits and vegetables often being harvested immature, too soon after pesticide application, or at the wrong time of the day. Diseases and pests are widespread and can have a major impact on quality. However, countering such problems by using pesticides has major implications for food safety, particularly when they are not applied in accordance with recommendations or when banned chemicals continue to be used. Problems relating to quality and safety do not, however, stop at the farm. Poor packaging and the tendency to squeeze too much produce into a container or vehicle can have a significant impact on quality. Exposure to the elements while awaiting transport can reduce quality, as can poor handling. Dirty packaging materials and dirty vehicles can introduce physical and microbial contamination as can washing during marketing or the watering of leafy vegetables using dirty water. Poor storage practices may damage produce and reduce its shelf life. Chemicals used for ripening and for surface decontamination, often not recommended for that purpose, can affect safety of fruits and vegetables, as can the use of some waxes, colouring agents and insecticides applied during the marketing process. Marketing infrastructure is often inadequate and unhygienic; produce is frequently exposed to ambient conditions and stored, trimmed and sold while placed on bare earth. Finally, produce quality can be seriously affected by the practice of allowing consumers to pick their own fruits and vegetables from a retail display and microbial contamination can also result from this. Several countries have quality standards for fruits and vegetables but these are usually voluntary and not applied by marketing channels, which set their own standards normally on the basis of size grades. All countries have pesticide legislation and agencies responsible for registering and controlling the use of agrochemicals. However, in many countries enforcement remains inadequate. Controls appear to be largely ineffective due to poor coordination between the agencies involved with food safety and quality and those charged with controlling pesticide use and other aspects of production, combined with a lack of resources and a general lack of compliance with laws and regulations, which makes enforcement of regulations next to impossible. Many countries report significant illnesses and deaths resulting from consumption of

3

fruits and vegetables contaminated with either microbes or pesticide residues and these reports possibly understate the true picture. Local agencies are generally illequipped to monitor microbial contamination and little advice appears to be available for farmers and traders about ways of avoiding such contamination. Farmers rarely undertake actions to improve quality or safety. Factors explaining this are market-related, socio-economic, and awareness-related. For many consumers in Asia price is seen as the most important factor influencing a purchasing decision, followed by the location of the retailer. There is a reluctance to pay more for quality and a general lack of awareness of safety issues. Where there is a perception of quality it is largely related to the physical appearance of the produce, with the result that traders put pressure on farmers to produce blemish-free fruits and vegetables, which may involve using large amounts of pesticide. Increased demand for fruits and vegetables, together with land and labour shortages, has led to intensification, involving higher levels of pesticide use, as has the growing demand for out-of-season production. Although traders do reject produce as unacceptable, fruits and vegetables meeting minimum standards are generally purchased at the same price regardless of quality or safety characteristics. Farmers thus have no incentive to improve quality beyond the minimum necessary to make a sale. There may be a disincentive to reduce pesticide usage if, as a consequence, fruits and vegetables become blemished and fail to meet minimum standards. Unreliable marketing channels and uncertainty about the price similarly discourage investment. Marketing channel practices, such as buying the field or orchard or providing finance to farmers in advance of the harvest, may also have implications for produce quality. Seeking to maximize their income, farmers often sell unripe produce in order to take advantage of higher prices. Where marketing channels are unreliable farmers may sell immature produce because they cannot be sure that a trader will be buying when the produce is ready. Risk-averse farmers frequently believe that reducing use of pesticides would significantly reduce their yields. In some countries this propensity to use agrochemicals is enhanced by policies that exempt pesticides from taxes or duties or by credit programmes that include the cost of pesticides as part of a loan package. Banned chemicals continue to be used, in part because farmers are unaware that they are illegal but also because they are cheaper. Concern to maximize income often leads farmers to sell produce that has only recently been sprayed, ignoring recommended pre-harvest intervals. Use of pesticides is also promoted by social pressure: no farmer wants to be seen as the cause of a local infestation. Overuse and misuse is promoted by some agrochemical retailers, often the only source of information available to farmers, and by illiterate farmers not knowing when to apply pesticide, and being unaware of the correct product or dose. Knowledge at farm level of factors contributing to microbial contamination is negligible. Traders seeking to improve produce quality are constrained by the purchasing power of consumers. In general, consumers make quality choices within an affordable price range. Limited surveys indicate a willingness to pay slightly more for "safe" food but the premium consumers are willing to pay may not compensate for the higher production costs. Amongst the middle class there is an increasing demand for better quality and safety but traditional marketing channels face problems in supplying such

4

demand as they seem to have limited capacity to handle more than one quality grade of a particular fruit or vegetable. Some sorting of produce does take place in marketing channels but this is usually on the basis of size, or to remove unsaleable items. Traders are further constrained by poor market infrastructure, poor storage facilities, an inability to control the quality of transport and handling, and a lack of knowledge of post-harvest techniques. Several countries have introduced programmes to promote "safe" vegetable production, most notably the People's Republic of China, Thailand and Viet Nam. Progress is reportedly fairly slow and the case studies reported that most produce sold still fails to meet minimum standards. Lack of resources for implementation appears to be a major constraint. Nevertheless, the programmes do suggest future developmental approaches. Similarly, several countries have introduced IPM programmes but these are only slowly expanding their coverage due to constraints in funding and available extension staff.

Working group recommendations
During the workshop, participants divided into three working groups. The working group dealing with health hazards acknowledged that the efforts of governments to introduce and implement quality and safety regulations for horticultural products were not being followed by industry stakeholders. The proposed scenario described how consumers would continue to rely on identified private traders whom they trusted to provide them with quality produce. The working group recommended that FAO should be the lead agent to create and raise awareness on food quality and safety issues in order to correct certain existing misconceptions; indeed many consumers still think that washing produce will eliminate pesticide residues and microbiological contaminants, some consumers also believe that buying produce from supermarkets guarantees safe quality. FAO and other donors also had a leading role to play in building capacity in the public and private sectors on food safety and quality. It was also suggested that an inventory be compiled of country programmes dealing with food quality and safety. The working group tackling the issue of production structure envisaged a relatively pessimistic scenario whereby over the next decade the majority of producers in the region would stay isolated, uninformed and vulnerable to strong market instability. General recommendations were made to improve quality and safety in the fruit and vegetable supply chains in the region; the generalization of good agricultural practices (GAP) initiatives was particularly recommended so that all supply chain stakeholders could be covered. The working group discussing capacity building of stakeholders proposed a development scenario emphasizing the leading role of public-private partnerships in building stakeholders' capacities on food safety and quality. An appropriate policy environment first needed to be devised by governments in consultation with the industry. FAO could play a role in identifying existing food laws that are being implemented with success in the region and help in harmonizing laws and monitoring systems in the region. Greater cooperation was recommended between public and private sectors in order to break down wariness currently existing between the two.

5

FAO could play a supportive role to these public-private partnerships in suggesting appropriate market infrastructure, finance and information systems.

6

Presentation summaries
Food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain in India
G.H. Dhankar, Agricultural Marketing Consultant, Pune Fruits and vegetables have become an integral part of food security in India due to their nutritional and functional properties. As such, fruits and vegetables should be of good quality and safe. Microbial contamination of the produce may come from improperly treated or undecomposed manure, ground water used for irrigation and cleaning fresh produce, and unhygienic practices of workers. Chemical contaminants include pesticide residues, dyes used in the textile or printing industries, which find their way in the irrigation water. Equipment, tools, packaging materials, storage rooms and transport vehicles are other sources of contamination. Poor handling practices during and after harvest lead to quality decline. The constraints to improving produce safety are the decline in production and income, the lack of marketing credit, long marketing channels, inadequate infrastructure, the absence of any price premium for quality and safe produce, and the lack of awareness of the hazards and their sources. Multiple agencies implement existing standards with little coordination. Quality and safety risks can be minimized if good agricultural practices are promoted and religiously observed. Moreover, integrated pest management (IPM) should be popularized to reach the grass roots level. The implementation of the Insecticide Act and Prevention of Food Adulteration Act should be streamlined with effective communication between agencies involved by these acts. An Integrated Food Law, which harmonizes and rationalizes the existing food laws, should make it easier for the industry to comply. Produce marketing legislation should promote the integrated marketing chain with regular market-matching of producers and buyers to increase awareness of consumers' quality and safety needs. For international and donor organizations, it is recommended that funding should be provided for infrastructure support projects. Discussions on Mr Dhankar's presentation focused on the extent of farmers' adoption of GAP and the strategies to promote GAP considering their limited resources. Adoption of GAP at the farmers' level in India is nil. Currently, it is popularized at the university level and is slowly being introduced in extension agencies. Another strategy is the establishment of agriclinic and agribusiness centres, of which 300 are operational and financially viable. These centres provide soil and water testing services as well as technical advice to farmers. A sound recommendation which the workshop should consider is the privatization of extension services. At the farming level, the trend towards contract farming is seen as one way of assuring safety. The cooperative and state-implemented marketing systems which were introduced to

7

compete with the traditional marketing system are heavily subsidized and may not be that effective.

Quality and safety in the fresh produce marketing chain in Myanmar
Kyaw Mint, Myanmar Agricultural Service, Yangon Several factors constrain the supply of safe produce, such as lack of awareness, inadequate infrastructure (cold storage, transport and laboratory facilities for testing) and the capability of consumers to pay a higher price for safe produce. Moreover, farmers are not organized; hence their knowledge of GAP is almost non-existent. Use of unprocessed animal manure and misuse of pesticides are common. Banned pesticides proliferate due to availability of large stocks at low prices. Farmers do not consider the high residue level to be their marketing problem. Post-harvest practices that contribute to quality decline include harvesting immature produce to take advantage of high prices, use of dirty containers, tight packing and stacking of containers in vehicles. Most farmers are resource-poor, hence interventions to ensure safety that will entail added cost are not within their reach. In the survey of consumers in Myanmar, most (68 percent) responded that if tomatoes were priced higher to reflect quality and safety they could not afford to purchase them for daily consumption. Consumers' choice of fresh produce was highly related to size, shape, maturity, absence of blemish and freshness. Suppliers therefore do not endeavour to supply safe produce. Also, consumers cannot identify safe produce. The government should pursue vigorous training and extension activities as well as enhanced consumer awareness on food safety. Technical assistance on GAP and IPM should be provided to farmers, traders and agrochemical suppliers to reduce chemical hazards. The country's Pesticide Registration Board, formed in 1992 should control the marketing of illegal pesticides. The National Food Law of 1997 covered regulations on food additives, licensing, quality assurance, labelling and laboratory analyses. Together with this law and the food safety certification programme, the National Food and Drug Administration is expected to play a vital role in promoting food safety. Since the proliferation of banned pesticides was also a problem in other countries, workshop participants asked how Myanmar enforces regulations regarding pesticide usage. While rules have been established, banned pesticides can readily cross the borders, which are difficult to control. Moreover, with the banning of monocrotophos, large stocks are still available and are sold at low price hence enforcement is still a problem. In relation to consumers' willingness to pay a higher price for safe food, questions were raised as to whether a new marketing channel is required for this produce to reach the consumer, and how the benefit of higher prices can filter down to the farmers. With changing lifestyles, some consumers buy at supermarkets. However, wholesalers supply the supermarkets and traditional marketing channels are still used. The farmers do not get any benefit from this increased price of produce in supermarkets. The ASEAN GAP for fruits and vegetables, which will be implemented in 2006, will compliment the national standards which are not yet fully established.

8

A study of food quality and safety issues in the fresh produce production and marketing chain in Nepal
Rajendra P. Singh, Consultant, Kathmandu In Nepal, the culture of standards is in a very early stage and fruits and vegetables are not included in the list of food items covered by the Bureau of Standards. Few controls are currently exercised and contaminants have been found in food sold in markets. Consumers are concerned about the safety of both imported and locally produced food. The lack of standards results in complaints relating to food safety being transferred to the production system. Moreover, existing standards do not embody developments in international standards. Certification as an assurance of safety is beset by the lack of inspectors and the absence of a certifying agency. Since the country is in transition from traditional to commercial agriculture, production practices that lead to biological, chemical and physical contamination are still prevalent. These include heavy reliance on pesticides as farmers cannot afford crop loss or market rejection. Use of agro-chemicals as a post-harvest technique to enhance consumer appeal, rough handling, poor packaging and storage environments all contribute to create safety risks. Consumers' perception of quality is based primarily on visual appearance and physical condition, with safety ranking second. Traders are concerned only with supplying what their consumers want. Most consumers in Nepal think that fresh fruits and vegetables are safe since they are grown locally and they are not familiar with signs of unsafe food. Other factors that constrain the supply of safe produce are the predominance of small farms and resource-poor farmers. Traders provide loans, hence farmers need to follow their requirements. While there are many assembly markets, marketing facilities and road networks are limited. Marketing channels are not organized and the lack of designated retail market places for fruits and vegetables forces consumers to make purchases in unhygienic retail shops or from hawkers. There appears to be a serious gap between enforcement mechanisms and the need for immediate intervention. Relevant policies related to food safety such as the Pesticide Act, the Food Act, the Consumer Protection Act and the Nepal Standards need to be reviewed. In the enactment of GAP, integrated efforts of agricultural, commercial, health, educational and development agencies are essential. In response to questions regarding the dissemination of information on safety and quality, Mr Singh indicated that extension people are aware of the issues but the problem is the strict enforcement of existing rules.

9

Innovating on quality: the Case of Mr. Van's lettuce supply chain to Ho Chi Minh City (Viet Nam)
Jean-Joseph Cadilhon, FAORAP, Bangkok A case study was presented as to how traditional traders like the wholesaler Mr Van in Viet Nam can help in improving quality by becoming market-oriented. For Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) consumers, a good quality butterhead lettuce possesses the following qualities: small and round like a bud, with no spots or marks, inside leaves are clear-coloured and thin. For them, fresh lettuce is also a source of vitamins and fibers. As to usage quality, lettuce must be very fresh to be eaten raw together with cooked foods at every meal. Hygienic quality of lettuce, however, is taken for granted. Mr Van, a trader who specializes in butterhead lettuce, supplies five tonnes per day in one of HCMC's wholesale markets at higher prices, also achieving less waste, and higher profits than competitors. To realize this, Mr Van collaborates with several collectors. Knowing the requirements of the consumers, the collectors train the farmers on how to grow, harvest and pack lettuce as per Mr Van's specifications of a good quality lettuce. The collectors pay the farmers 15 days in advance. Mr Van carefully coordinates his distribution activities with his collectors and orders lettuce five days in advance of the expected delivery, hence the collectors can look for the required quality, unlike the other traders who order only on the same day. Lessons learned from this case study showed that traditional traders can help improve quality in the fruit and vegetable supply chain through the following strategies: market orientation, quality focus, supplier training, specific investments, collaboration and joint planning. In return, the following advantages to all supply chain stakeholders can be obtained: better quality produce, higher value of sales, lower waste, higher profits, increased interdependency of stakeholders and increased satisfaction. Several questions were raised in discussions relating to price information, price differences, benefits to farmers, and strategies to retain the collectors. In the case of Mr Van, there is a vertical flow of price information where collectors share their information with farmers and other wholesalers. The farmers' network is dense so they can compare farm prices. Mr Van invests in his collectors, lends them money without interest to purchase motorbikes, and closely collaborates with them. He is thus able to retain them. Mr Van distributes the value throughout the supply chain while still making a profit himself. As commented, the benefit of this scheme to the farmers may not be direct in terms of price but in terms of an assured market.

10

Regarding the involvement of extension workers, the case of Mr Van is an example of a private-driven supply chain without government involvement and also an example of privatization of extension.

Quality and safety in the traditional horticultural marketing chains of Pakistan
Muhammad Iqbal, Pakistan Horticulture Development and Export Board, Karachi Factors affecting food quality and safety start during production and continue throughout the marketing chain. During production, use of contaminated water and raw farmyard manure, indiscriminate use of pesticides brought about by the strong marketing campaign of pesticide companies, and poor crop sanitation result in chemical and microbial contamination. While IPM has been successfully demonstrated through farmers' field schools (FFS), slow adoption has been due to farmers' perception of lower yields, lack of access to alternative control measures, lack of financial resources, weak extension services and lack of coordination among research and extension institutions. Harvesting and post-harvest practices leading to unsafe food include use of contaminated harvesting and trimming aids, washing in contaminated water, surface decontamination with unregistered chemicals, use of non-food grade waxes, improper use of calcium carbide for ripening and unhygienic conditions. Other practices that affect quality and safety are poor packaging, absence of official standards, contaminated and inefficient transport carriers, poor on-farm storage structures and poor level of technology when it comes to cold storage. Wholesale and retail markets are poorly designed and maintained. Pesticide residue testing facilities are lacking and cost of analysis is high. Legislation related to food safety is inadequate since existing laws focus on adulteration of food. The traditional marketing system hardly offers incentives for safe produce. For the consumers, good quality is what they can see. Hence for them, maturity and ripeness, appearance (shape, size and colour), absence of mechanical damage and good flavour constitute quality. Safety appears not to be a prime consideration. Public monitoring of food safety law implementation, increased tariffs on pesticides, a vigorous pesticide monitoring system, strengthening the national IPM programme, promoting GAP, good manufacturing practices (GMP) and hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP), and improving marketing infrastructure are the programmes that need to be implemented in coordination with different institutions. During discussions, the point was raised that increased tariffs on pesticides may precipitate increased smuggling. As to the question on the role of the private sect