RAP PUBLICATION 2006/14

HOME GARDENS KEY TO IMPROVED NUTRITIONAL WELL-BEING

RAP PUBLICATION 2006/14

HOME GARDENS KEY TO IMPROVED NUTRITIONAL WELL-BEING

REPORT OF PILOT PROJECT TCP/LAO/2902 (A) "Promotion of home gardens for improved nutritional well-being"

L. Bhattacharjee, S. Phithayaphone and B.K. Nandi in collaboration with the Project Team

Department of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Lao People's Democratic Republic Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, 2006 i

The FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) Project Promotion of home gardens for improved nutritional well-being TCP/LAO/2902 (A)

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes a r e authorized without any prior written permission from the c o p y r i g h t holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of t h e copyright holders. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to Senior Food and Nutrition Officer, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.

For copies write to: Biplab K. Nandi Senior Food and Nutrition Officer Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand

 FAO 2006 ii

Foreword
A c h i e v i n g food security and nutritional well-being is central to the achievement of the M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals (MDGs) and the World Food Summit (WFS) targets. Commitment towards and achievement of these goals and targets remain a major challenge for the world's community and Asia in particular. Amidst these challenges, it is encouraging that analysis of recent trends in FAO's flagship publication The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2005 shows a reduction in the number of undernourished in Asia and the Pacific, although at a pace too slow to meet the target of halving hunger by 2015. FAO recognizes that healthy, well-nourished people are both the outcome of successful social and economic development and constitute an essential input into the development process. Achieving the WFS nutrition-related goals requires that national and sectoral development policies and p r o g r a m m e s are complemented by effective community-based action aimed at improving household food security and promoting the year-round consumption of nutritionally adequate diets. These actions need to occur within the framework of promoting sustainable livelihoods and need to address the variety of relevant local issues leading to various forms of poverty and malnutrition, including problems of chronic and seasonal food shortages, lack of dietary diversity, inadequate family care and feeding practices, and poor living conditions. Emphasis is also being p l a c e d on interdisciplinary activities to assist national and district level stakeholders and communities to identify and implement intersectoral strategies and actions that lead to sustainable reductions in malnutrition. These activities are being actively pursued by the FAO regional office for Asia and the Pacific as part of its regular field programme. FAO is providing technical assistance to national governments and related stakeholders to better plan, target and monitor food security and programmes. In collaboration with the FAO Representation in the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the FAO regional office has undertaken an initiative to promote integrated home gardening in selected villages of central Lao PDR targeting vulnerable groups of rural farmer households. This report provides an account of a technical assistance project implemented under the Technical Cooperation Project (TCP) on "Promotion of home gardens for improved nutritional well-being". The pilot project, which commenced operations in February 2003 and concluded in August 2004, has developed and fine-tuned a suitable approach to household food security and nutrition improvement capable of replication at the national level. A significant outcome of the project was the development of provincial, district and community-level capacities for implementation and management of home gardening and nutrition improvement programmes. Post-project evaluations found increased production of vegetables, fruits, poultry and fish among the target households and awareness of the need for greater consumption of home-grown produce. The decline in rates of undernutrition in children under five years of age in the areas covered by the project demonstrates the project's impact on nutrition. The project serves as a pilot field-based example contributing t o w a r d s achieving the objectives of the World Food Summit and the first Millennium Development Goal. I trust this document is a useful output of FAO's collaborative activities in agriculture and nutrition working towards household food security and nutrition improvement initiatives in the Asia-Pacific region.

He Changchui Assistant Director-General and FAO Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific

iii

iv

Contents
Page Foreword ...................................................................................................................... 1. 2. 3. 4. Introduction .......................................................................................................... Project objectives ................................................................................................. Expected outcomes ............................................................................................... Materials and methods ........................................................................................ 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5. Project sites ................................................................................................... Criteria for site selection............................................................................... Selection of households ................................................................................ Targeting households .................................................................................... Development strategy ................................................................................... Institutional arrangements ............................................................................ Working strategy at provincial and district levels ........................................ Promoting community participation ............................................................. Group formation ........................................................................................... iii 1 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 7 7 7 9 9 10 10 11

Project outputs and findings ............................................................................... 5.1 5.2 5.3 Establishment and/or improvement of home gardens (including fruits, vegetables, small animals and fish in target households) ............................. Increased amount and variety of nutritious food available for target families and communities ............................................................................. I n t e n s i v e nutrition education campaign aimed at improving and diversifying family food consumption with special emphasis on children under five and women of reproductive age .................................................. Improved knowledge of nutrition, home gardening and health among MAF and MOH staff and target families ............................................................... Improved food consumption, feeding practices and care of children under five years and women of reproductive age ................................................... Establishment of collaborative networks at national, provincial, district and community levels ................................................................................... Project results and impact evaluated: model home gardens including poultry, pigs and fish ponds for improved nutritional well-being, adopted for national implementation..........................................................................

25 26 28 37

5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7

41 42 43

6. 7.

Conclusions ........................................................................................................... Recommendations ................................................................................................

v

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being

1. INTRODUCTION
The Lao People's Democratic Republic is a landlocked nation with Myanmar and China to the north, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the east, Cambodia to the south and Thailand to the west. An estimated 85 percent of the population is rural. There are at least 49 distinct ethno-cultural and linguistic groups. Ethnic minorities typically live in the highlands, where the transport network is limited, infrastructure is underdeveloped and access to social services is poor. M e m b e r s h i p in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) since 1997 is facilitating Lao PDR's linkage with the larger and more prosperous economies of the region. However, agriculture is still the main source of livelihood and food security, accounting for 52 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and about 90 percent of the workforce. The main crops are rice, corn, tubers and coffee with significantly large cultivation of peanuts. However, agricultural production is low and scattered. Vegetables are grown on about 31 000 ha comprising about 3.9 percent of the total cropped area, with a total output of 117 300 tonnes. The annual per capita vegetable availability of 23.5 kg is less than one-third of the minimum level of 73 kg1 required for nutritional well-being. Vegetables are traditionally grown in home gardens which vary in size, biodiversity and seasonal produce, being adapted to local resources and preferences. Vegetable cultivation is usually in pots or on roof tops and scattered across the courtyard. Only a few vegetables and fruit varieties are grown in traditional gardens which lack improved know-how and depend on limited means for their upkeep. Most households also raise chicken and some keep pigs for food and income. Year-round production is limited to the allium, cucurbits and some leafy vegetables. Most rural households grow vegetables mainly for self-consumption although the yield is often not enough for the family's needs. While plant foods are important sources of vitamin A and other micronutrients, it is now well known that the bioavailability of plant food in Lao PDR is lower than originally thought. Malnutrition rates are high in Lao PDR2 with 40 percent of children below five years of age reportedly underweight, 41 percent stunted and 15 percent wasted. The prevalence of chronic energy deficiency among adults is alarmingly high at 19 percent, even higher than reported in a previous survey3. With a high under-five mortality rate of 105 per 1 000 live births and a low life expectancy of 54.5 years in the year 2000, Lao PDR also has a significantly large proportion of young people, about half the population being less than 15 years old.

Ali M., Samson C.S. (1997). Micronutrient deficiency and vegetables: A neglected food frontier in Asia, Food Policy, 22(1): 15-38. 2 Report on National Health Survey: Health Status of the People in Lao PDR, Vientiane 2001. 3 FAO (1995). Diagnostic de la situation nutritionnel et consummation alimentaire au Laos. Rapport complet de l'etude sur l'etat nutritionnel de la population Laotienne. ESNA: TCP/LAO/2354. FAO Rome 1994, cited in FAO Nutrition Country Profiles Laos, July 2003.

1

1

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being Malnutrition not only results in increased mortality and health problems including infectious diseases, mental retardation and blindness, it is also responsible for loss of human capital and work productivity. About 39 percent of Lao PDR's population is below the national income poverty line and 22 percent are food insecure. The average per capita annual income of US$370 in 1997 instead of increasing towards the targeted US$500 in 2000, declined to US$350 and then further to US$331 by 2003 as a result of inflation. I m p r o v e d nutritional standards lead to improved health, well-being and development o p p o r t u n i t i e s . Evidence from Asian countries, particularly Viet Nam4 and some other countries5 in the region, shows that home gardens in combination with nutrition education can make a highly effective contribution towards nutrition improvement among rural poor households. Aware of the negative impact of high malnutrition levels on the national development potential, and in keeping with its commitment at the 1992 International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) and to the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the Government of Lao PDR is giving priority to diversifying food consumption to ensure a more balanced diet to its people. As this objective could not be achieved from local expertise and resources alone, the Government requested assistance from FAO. Under the US$332 000 Technical Cooperation Project (TCP) "Promotion of home gardens for i m p r o v e d nutritional well-being", TCP/LAO/2902 (A), FAO collaborated with the Government of Lao PDR to promote home gardens for improving nutritional well-being of rural communities in Lao PDR. The pilot project, which commenced operations in February 2003 and concluded in August 2004, has developed and fine-tuned a suitable approach for household food security and nutrition improvement capable of replication at national level. The project included a creative participatory planning and implementation process involving local communities, district-level authorities as well as technical experts and policy makers in the Department of Agriculture (DOA). It has provided an integrated package of home gardening inputs and nutrition education to target households and communities in four villages6 of Vientiane and Bolikhamxay Provinces as well as in Vientiane Municipality. A total of 204 home gardens and four community gardens have been established. The resulting diversified diet is expected to reduce malnutrition and improve health, especially of under-five-year-old children and women of reproductive age. The project also promoted 59 micronutrient-rich foods through the home gardening programme. Another project objective was additional income generation for rural families, not only through direct sale of home produce but also from indirect savings as a result of reduced health care expenditure. The project was implemented in close collaboration with the Ministry o f Health (MOH), Ministry of Education (MOE), Lao Women's Union (LWU) and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

FAO Project GCP/VIE/02/AUL (2000) Household Food Security for Nutrition Improvement, AusAID. Helen Keller International/Asia Pacific (2001) Homestead Food Production ­ A Strategy to combat Malnutrition and Poverty. Jakarta, Indonesia. 6 Ban Nakhoung; Ban Cheng; Ban Natham; Ban Somsaath.
5

4

2

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being A significant outcome of the project was the development of provincial, district and community-level capacities for implementation and management of home gardening and nutrition improvement programmes. This was done through training of trainers (TOTs) and in-service training (IST) by FAO experts on key modules of nutrition, horticulture, small livestock and fisheries for provincial and district officials of the Department of Agriculture (DOA). A post-project evaluation found increased production of vegetables, fruits, poultry and fish among the target households and awareness created for greater consumption of home-grown produce. Comparison with baseline estimates found that moderate and severe undernutrition rates for under-five-year-old children had declined from 23 to 15.9 percent and 9.5 to 2.3 percent respectively.

2. PROJECT OBJECTIVES
The objective of TCP/LAO/2902 (A) pilot project "Promotion of Hone Gardens for Improved Nutritional Well-Being" was to develop a model for household nutrition garden production, including small livestock and aquaculture. Covering a population of 1 000 people from about 200 households in four villages, the project especially targeted families with children less than five years old. The overall project objective was to reduce malnutrition and improve nutritional well-being of the Lao population through increased production and consumption of nutritious food with special emphasis on a micronutrient-rich diet. The immediate objective was to develop a nationally replicable model for increased and diversified household food production and consumption by rural families, in combination with nutrition education. The project had the following specific objectives:
q

Increase the amount and variety of nutritious food for project households with special emphasis on food rich in micronutrients. Carry out an intensive public nutrition education campaign aimed at improving and diversifying family food consumption with special emphasis on children under five years old and women of reproductive age. Establish a network for collaboration between the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), Ministry of Health (MOH), Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) team, FAO and relevant development partners. Evaluate the results and impact of the project and develop model home gardens for improved nutritional well-being and suitable for national implementation.

q

q

q

3

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being

3. EXPECTED OUTCOMES
q

Improved dietary diversification and increased consumption of micronutrient-rich food by target groups. Establishment of a collaborative network of all partners. S e t t i n g up of a model for household gardens including livestock/fisheries, and diversified food consumption.

q q

4. MATERIALS AND METHODS 4.1 Project sites
The project covered 204 households in four selected villages in four districts of three provinces in Lao PDR. The sites were chosen from among the highly food-insecure and m a l n o u r i s h e d areas of the country 7. The project activities were targeted at poor and food-insecure8 families with under-five-year-old children including those with moderate or severe undernourishment. The provinces of Vientiane and Bolikhamxay were selected on the recommendation of the Director-General, Department of Agriculture (DOA) of the MAF, Government of Lao PDR as well as other senior officials including those of the DOA and SPFS. The Head of Agriculture and Forestry Department, Vientiane Municipality suggested the inclusion of Vientiane Municipality (See Table 1 for project village, province and district name and number of households).
Table 1: Selected sites, households and population Province Vientiane Vientiane Municipality Bolikhamxay Total District Thourakhom Pakngnum Xaythany Thapabath Village Ban Cheng Ban Natham Ban Nakhoung Ban Somsaath No. households selected 50 50 50 50 200 No. households participated 52 47 54 51 204

4.2 Criteria for site selection
The criteria for site selection were discussed with the provincial heads at provincial level meetings and this was followed by discussions with heads of the Provincial Agricultural Office. Nutrition-linked criteria, in particular, were used as a basis for identifying the sites. The process of site selection was facilitated by subsequent meetings with the heads of the District Agricultural Office.

7 8

SPFS PRA and Socio-economic Baseline Survey 2002. Households rated food-insecure on the basis of rice insufficiency for 3-6 months.

4

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being The following criteria set forth in the SPFS guidelines were used for selecting the sites: (a) national food security importance; (b) replicability; (c) availability in province of sustainable demonstration technologies; (d) interest of local community; and (e) vulnerability to food insecurity9. The criteria linked with nutrition included: (a) poverty as assessed by household food security and nutrition; (b) high child malnutrition rate; and (c) willingness and commitment by community leaders to take action against malnutrition.

4.3 Selection of households
The project used a purposive sampling method to select households on the following criteria: (a) All households with children under five years of age. (b) Households with a malnourished10 child under five years old (manifested as moderate and severe underweight, wasting and stunting). (c) Households with limited capital assets (especially consumer items). (d) Households with limited production assets (especially land). (e) No regular employment income. Accordingly, 50 poor households were identified in each village and a total of 200 households were selected.

4.4 Targeting households
The targeting of households was an important part of the process of selecting the final population to be covered by the project. The identification of malnourished children was an essential step in selecting the villages. The children were screened for malnutrition (under-nutrition) using anthropometric criteria in collaboration with the Department of Health at the district level. Of the 200 targeted households, 132 households had children less than five years of age. The number of children who actually turned up for the anthropometric assessment was 196 (See Table 2).
Table 2: Children screened for targeting Village Ban Cheng Ban Natham Ban Nakhoung Ban Somsaath Total
9

Total population 1 707 1 650 1 771 379 5 507

No. of children weighed11 54 52 56 34 196

Rice insufficiency or rice production/capita used as indicator of vulnerability to food insecurity. Defined by anthropometric measurements using weight for age, weight for height and height for age; assessment in collaboration with DOH. 11 Children reporting for the weighing and weighed.
10

5

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being The children's age, weight and height measurements were taken. The growth chart used at the district health centres was used to record the data and the children were identified for varying grades of nutrition using weight for age, weight for height and height for age criteria as per NCHS12 standards. This was used to prepare the list of children to be targeted and they were followed through the project duration for anthropometric assessment. The weights and heights of all the children from 6 to 60 months were monitored every quarter for a period of 15 months. The anthropometric assessment was closely linked with complementary feeding activities. Figure 1 shows the locations of the four target villages in the provinces of Vientiane, Vientiane Municipality and Bolikhamxay.

Phongsaly

Luang Prabang

Houaphan

Ban Somsaath

Khammouane

Ban Cheng

Ban Natham Ban Nakhoung
Savannakhet

Bolikhamxay

Vientiane
Saravan Sekong

Vientiane Municipality

Champassak Attapeu

Figure 1: Map of project localities
12

National Centre for Health Statistics.

6

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being

4.5 Development strategy
T h e first step was liaising with government ministries (MAF and MOH) to promote awareness of the National Plan of Action for Nutrition for Lao PDR, especially the value of the collaborative programme on home gardens and nutrition education to improve nutritional well-being of Lao rural households. The project conducted a nutrition advocacy meeting with stakeholders and partners at national levels. This was done by the National Project Director and the International Consultant on Nutrition and Household Food Security. The stakeholders included the Deputy Director-General, national experts in horticulture, livestock, and fisheries from DOA as well as the Project Steering Committee13. This provided a forum to discuss programme planning at all levels from the community to the government, promote linkage of nutrition with home gardening and capacity building at provincial and district levels to facilitate project implementation. The action plan and definition of responsibilities for project implementation were shared and discussed with the national level team. The meeting outcomes included an overview of project activities, streamlining and coordination of the action plan, and strengthened collaboration among DOA and DOH partners. It was decided that growth monitoring and promotion activities for children under five years old would be conducted on a periodic basis. The liaising process led to each province and district being assigned a project coordinator responsible for supporting and facilitating project implementation.

4.6 Institutional arrangements
The project envisaged the development of provincial, district and community level capacities to implement and manage the nutrition improvement activities. Coordinators were assigned at provincial and district levels by the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office (PAFO) and the District Agriculture and Forestry Office (DAFO) to facilitate implementation of project activities in the areas of nutrition, horticulture, fisheries and small livestock. The NPD and Deputy NPD liaised with the district and provincial level team for smooth implementation of all project activities. Details of these arrangements were worked out and finalized as part of the Action Plan for Implementation. There was constant collaboration between provincial and district coordinators and project technical experts throughout the project's implementation. Other international consultants also worked with provincial and district teams during their missions. There were regular meetings and the provincial and district coordinators served as a Support Committee for the project.

4.7 Working strategy at provincial and district levels
The provincial coordinators facilitated the working plan of the district teams. A district level team leader was assigned to coordinate and manage the district team, prepare its activity plan and a summary of the district team's report on each project component. Each activity was discussed before implementation and clarifications, if any, were sought by the staff. District team leaders had to submit the working plan to the DAFO chief and/or the District Head/Cabinet for his agreement and permission for implementation. This was necessary
13

The Project Steering Committee was a key part of institutional arrangements.

7

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being because all village heads work under the management of the District Head. The team leader then directly contacted the village heads and explained all the activities to them who, in turn informed all target households/members in the village. This was done through a village meeting where the decision to implement the activities had to be approved and informed to community collaborators. The village head assigned one of the three village authorities to cooperate with the district team for the selection of target households in accordance with project criteria. The village committee and district team prepared the list of target households. The village committee also finalized the community collaborators who were selected through socio-gram process with the participation of all households. One community collaborator was responsible for mobilizing ten households (from her/his cluster of neighbouring households) to undertake project activities. The village heads were guided by the district team's working plan and reported both to the district team leader and the zone leader and/or the District Cabinet (See Figure 2 for administrative structure of the project implementation team from district level onwards).

DISTRICT (HEAD/DEPUTY HEAD) 1/DISTRICT DISTRICT (CHIEF/DEPUTY OF A & F) 1/DISTRICT

SUPPORT

DISTRICT

CO-ORDINATORS (1/DISTRICT) 4 ASSIGNED TO PROJECT (1/VILLAGE)

INTERFACE

VILLAGE HEADMAN

ACTION

DEPUTY HEADMEN

(2/VILLAGE)

COMMUNITY COLLABORATORS (5/VILLAGE AT A RATIO OF 1:10 HOUSEHOLD)

HOUSEHOLDS

Figure 2: Project implementation structure

Project activities and extension services for target families were implemented through a community-based network supported by the district team. As part of the community liaising process, meetings were held with the village development committee comprising the village h e a d m a n , community project leader assigned by the village headman and community collaborators.

8

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being

4.8 Promoting community participation
Community participation is crucial for the sustainability of project activities and the project implementation plan was developed in consultation with the community for selection of activities and identification of responsibilities. The project supported local community structures in initiating food-based actions for sustainable nutrition improvement through the district team. Local authorities and village committees consulted periodically with district team members for programme execution.

4.9 Group formation
Project activities were implemented through farmer and community groups, each group including ten households represented by the family head or a responsible family member. A total of ten households formed one cluster. Formation of community collaborators network: There were five groups in one village with a total of 20 farmer groups and 20 community collaborators. One community collaborator was responsible for 10 to 15 households Selection of community collaborators: A `sociogram' process was used to select community collaborators with the involvement of all households. In this, the village committee/headman questions the households to find out on whom they usually depend for information/advice/ assistance or for solving community problems. The criteria for the selection of community collaborators included interest in, willingness to cooperate and give time to community work, knowledge of cooking, household agriculture/household gardening and simple health care. A primary school education, ability to write and report, and community acceptance were other important considerations. The duties of community collaborators included:
q

Mobilization and ensuring active participation of households in establishing and maintaining home gardens. Promoting cultivation of seasonal vegetables in home gardens. Monthly cooking demonstrations using home garden produce. Group nutrition education. Organizing and mobilizing women for complementary feeding preparation using home-grown, micronutrient-rich vegetables/fruits Regularly visiting each household with a malnourished child and following up on dietary advice. Discussing problems in the food system and conceiving action plans to address these (link nutrition education with support for home gardens). Establishing a `community network of women' to promote concepts and practices for improving household food security appraisal and action plans, including farmers' priorities for technology transfer and other support needs.

q q q q

q

q

q

9

Home gardens key to improved nutritional well-being

5. PROJECT OUTPUTS AND FINDINGS Output 1.1 5.1 Establishment and/or improvement of home gardens (including fruits, vegetables, small animals and fish in target households)
The first major activity under this output was human resource development for project needs. The main aim was to develop provincial, district and community level capacity to implement an integrated home garden programme for household nutrition improvement. (a) Training of Trainers/In-service training A total of 28 participants, including provincial, district level specialists and technicians in crop, livestock, fisheries, health and education sectors as well as representatives from the Lao Women's Union completed the intensive five-day Training of Trainers/In-service training (TOT/IST) on the importance and establishment of home gardens (Table 3).
Table 3: Participation in TOT/IST for specific home gardening components T