WEST AFRICA BUSH MEAT CONFERENCE THEME: TACKLING THE BUSHMEAT CRISIS IN AFRICA 22-24TH FEBRUARY 2005 ERATA HOTEL, ACCRA -GHANA

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS

PREPARED BY GHANA WILDLIFE SOCIETY

ORGANISERS: SPONSORS:

FAO, GHANA WILDLIFE SOCIETY, CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL-GHANA WWF INTERNATIONAL & FAO

1

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO [2006]

2

CONTENT 1. 2. 3. 4. 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 CONFERENCE BACKGROUND OPENING SESSION AND GENERAL INTRODUCTION

PAGE 4 5 8 9 9 11 13 14

GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO VARIOUS ASPECTS OF BUSHMEAT FOCUSED TOPICS Bushmeat and Food Security Bushmeat Trade Socio-cultural aspects in Bushmeat Production and Trade Education and Awareness-Raising Identification and Elimination of Threatened Species from the Bushmeat Trade 16 18 18 18 19 21

5. 5.1 5.2 5.3

CLOSING SESSION Adoption of Action Plan The Way Forward and Implementation of Actions Concluding Remarks

ANNEXES

3

WEST AFRICA BUSH MEAT CONFERENCE 22-24TH FEBRUARY 2005 1. CONFERENCE BACKGROUND

Wild animals provide a significant proportion of the protein consumed by the people of most African sub-regions. However, the poorly managed and largely uncontrolled harvesting of wild animals threatens to exterminate this valuable resource. This extermination will deprive millions of people, particularly the rural poor, of vital source of animal protein. It will also end up depriving those people involved in the trade in wild meat, commonly known as bushmeat, of their livelihoods. Furthermore, in the longer term, it will cause the collapse of habitats, particularly forest ecosystems.

There have been many initiatives in Africa to address what has been commonly named the bushmeat crisis. Over the past four years, the FAO has published papers on this issue and organized consultations and workshops with various development partners and national stakeholders.

In order to bring a sub-regional focus on the bushmeat issue for West Africa and to produce effective solutions to this growing crisis, a conference was hosted in Ghana, and jointly organized by the FAO, WWF International, Ghana Wildlife Society and Conservation International-Ghana.

Holding a conference to discuss the impact of the bushmeat issue across the entire West African region was intended to focus attention on a regional problem and generate regional solutions. Representatives from government authorities, Local communities and Environmental organizations from 12 African countries namely, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo were brought together, to debate

4

a critical, common crisis and to produce action plans for lasting solutions. As part of the follow-up actions, task forces will be mobilized from across the region, to ensure that the bushmeat issue is simultaneously addressed in each country.

It was intended that the Conference would come up with Action plans and establish task forces to implement these action plans across the region. The cosponsors would further support these task forces in order to ensure that the action plans are effectively implemented in the field. WWF and Partners will also lobby the governments in the region to ensure that the bushmeat action plans receive the effective backing of all government departments. Hence, the ultimate objective of the conference was the development of long term programmes in each West African country that will effectively implement wildlife conservation strategies, enhance protected areas, significantly reduce illegal hunting activities and sustainably manage the harvesting of wild animals.

2.

OPENING SESSION AND GENERAL INTRODUCTION

1. The West Africa Bushmeat Conference was opened by the Professor D. Fobih, Minister of Lands, Forestry and Mines of Ghana after introductory statements made by the Chief Executive of the Ghana Forestry Commission, Mr A.S.K. Boachie-Dapaah, the Representative from WWF, Professor Yaa NtiamoaBaidu, acting FAO Representative to Ghana, Mr. Pape D. Koné and the Deputy Minister of Agriculture Mrs Hannah Nyamekye. The statements stressed the importance of bushmeat and its characteristics as an economic, social and ecological reality. It was recognised as a source of food, medicine, products for handicraft and cultural medium. It contributes to overall food production and eventually food security, and provides income for populations engaged in the exploitation of the resource.

5

2. Mr. Boachie-Dapaah recalled the objectives of the Conference of coming up with a set of appropriate recommendations and concrete action plans. He stressed the need to find long term sustainable solutions to the issues and problems relating to the resource base, the habitat of wildlife and their sustainable management.

3. Prof. Yaa Ntiamoa Baidu presented the three-pronged frame (Forests, Fresh water and marine and coastal ecosystems) from which WWF is considering their work in general and their action in relation to bushmeat issues and problems. She reviewed a number of operations through which WWF is supporting countries in West Africa and partnerships they are developing. She traced the origin of the Conference from the increased interest given to the subject these last years and more specifically the recommendations of the African Forestry Commission Working Party on the Management of Wildlife and Protected areas at its 15th session held in Accra, Ghana in February 2004.

4. Mr. Pape D. Koné dwelled on the important role of bushmeat in contributing to food and in particular protein intake in countries of the West African subregion. He emphasised that it is also an economic asset, generating an export market that brings between 150 and 160 million USD. He raised a number of challenges facing sustainable bushmeat production including policy, law and regulation frameworks, safe utilization of the products and related health risks. He highlighted aspects relating to FAO support to the subject mostly based on the potential contribution of bushmeat to food security and the sustainable management of the resource base.

5. The Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture of Ghana highlighted the linkages between food production and bushmeat production. She stressed 6

the need for a more productive agriculture and in particular the livestock performance to ease pressure from use of bushmeat as major source of protein. She pointed out the negative effects of some practices of bushmeat production on the overall management of forest resources (e.g. forest fires, poisoning of animals, etc). Consequently, she suggested positive alternative ways including domestication and husbandry of wild species, supporting grasscutter as well as ostrich farming.

6. Minister Dominic Fobih in his opening remarks welcomed the cooperation and partnership that has developed with regard to bushmeat issues and in particular, the holding of this conference. He reviewed the factors affecting bushmeat production and trade, including declining forests and loss of habitat, need and taste for bushmeat and increasing demand, economic importance, and dramatic development of the market up to the international level. He presented a number of elements and pathways to consider for developing policy and strategy, legislation, regulation and improving law enforcement.

7. He indicated that bushmeat in many cases, constitutes the most accessible source of protein. It generates income and thus constitutes a strong social and economic factor. He therefore suggested that approaches should include smoothening off concentration on a limited number of bushmeat species, finding sustainable alternative solutions including greater domestic animal production, involving communities, setting up community resource management areas, which Ghana is encouraging. He expressed satisfaction with the action-oriented format and goals of the Conference and strongly challenged participants to come up with the declared outputs, namely workable recommendations and plan of action. He committed himself to

7

consider with attention and facilitate follow-up to the outcome of the Conference.

8. The detailed speeches summarized above have been provided in the Annexes of the report.

3.

GENERAL

INTRODUCTION

TO

VARIOUS

ASPECTS

OF

BUSHMEAT 9. The Conference was further introduced to the themes of its agenda by three overview presentations, which explored many other aspects of bushmeat. The first of these presentations made by Dr P. J. Stephenson of WWF International, dealt with WWF's Perspectives on the bushmeat trade in Africa. It characterized the so-called crisis, which encompassed threat on some species, social, economic and cultural issues, an important market and pressure on the resources. It also reviewed approaches and strategic

elements towards long term, innovative and sustainable solutions. These would include i) the recognising the importance of bushmeat and the necessity to manage it and not ban it; ii) avoiding the killing of threatened species and securing overall sustainability of practices; iii) developing policy, legislation, education and capacity building; iv) developing partnerships among interested agencies (Traffic, CITES, FAO, WB, the private sector and NGOs).

10. A second communication entitled "The Bushmeat Crisis: In search of Action," was introduced by Douglas Williamson, wildlife and protected areas officer of FAO, covered a number of aspects characterizing and shedding more light on other relevant bushmeat issues. It emphasised the vast areas involved, the number of people interested, the strong economic contribution and the

8

definitely the unsustainable present harvesting models. It presented options for action including, i) rallying and building political support; ii) enlarging alliances around resource management and use with reference to logging companies; iii) building institutional frameworks; iv) defining policy, legislation and capacity.

11. A third communication introduced later by Dr Glyn Davies of London Zoological Society covered bushmeat trade options for West and Central Africa. He emphasised the need to i) label all forms of bushmeat to reflect the multi-species nature of the trade to ensure effective management; ii) recognise that wild animals involved in the are sometimes killed not only for food but as pest; iii) manage large species in the trade differently from small sized ones; and iv) consider the management of bushmeat exploitation driven by income

4.

FOCUSED TOPICS

12. The Conference further proceeded with the presentation and discussion of focused themes including bushmeat and food security, bushmeat trade, sociocultural aspects, education and awareness, the protection of threatened species. Issues of interest in each of the thematic areas were elaborated to elicit findings that would support recommendations for action and provide elements for a plan of action. 4.1 Bushmeat and Food Security

13. The theme was introduced by Ms. Lonneke Bakker wildlife and protected areas officer, FAO Regional Office for Africa, Accra. The essential focus of the presentation and the subsequent discussions addressed major considerations

9

and questions on how far bushmeat production, utilization and trade could contribute to food security, which is the adequate and sustained supply of food in appropriate quantity and quality. For bushmeat to become a

sustainable, healthy and pleasant, and readily available as food, the ultimate goal would be to secure sustained availability of the resource, to apply appropriate exploitation techniques and utilisation technologies.

14. If bushmeat is to be a sustainable source for food security, the following elements should be considered and acted upon: o Managing and conserving the resource base (maintaining the habitat; managing the resource; developing codes of conduct for multiple users, etc); o Maintaining the resource in a balanced system of rural development, with limited predation; o Devising and implementing appropriate exploitation models within the traditional and/or modern systems of resource management; o Tackling inappropriate hunting and trapping processes; o Developing alternatives to the primary use of natural resource through, rearing of wild species, ranching, advanced communitybased resource management and domestication; o Improvement of crop, livestock and fisheries production and access to their products.

15. Bushmeat as a healthy food also poses big challenges throughout the process including hunting, processing, transport and storage of the products. The Conference identified many types of action that would ensure sustainable management as follows:

10

o Identifying and monitoring health problems including interface wild/domesticated, human/animal health; o Defining and applying standards; o Assessing practices and improving hygiene throughout the production cycle; o Informing, advising and training operators in this cycle.

16. Trade aspects: increasing accessibility, enlarging the scope as new markets develop: o Reviewing local trading practices and improving them; o Assessing and organizing local and national markets; o Organising sub-regional and international trade; o Deriving income, fighting poverty; o Establishing enabling policies, legal and institutional environment taking account of the regional and sub regional setting; o Assessing capacity and capabilities; training for efficiency. 4.2 Bushmeat Trade

17. A presentation was made under the topic, "Bushmeat Trade from West Africa" by Julius Mbotiji. This well documented paper reviewed the major steps through which bushmeat meant for sale in the North American markets is handled. Transportation, handling and health issues, illegal practices for the introduction of the products were examined. The economic and financial aspects, consumer populations were also thoroughly reviewed. Discussions at plenary and in working groups stressed the need to consider trade at local, national and international levels; the mostly informal and often illegal nature of the trade circuits at the moment; the importance of distinguishing various types and interest of bushmeat as its market goes beyond its traditional

11

boundaries; the legal and regulatory background and most importantly the health and safety issues. The following finally emerged from the discussions:

18. Issues around a sustainable, legal supply of local, national and eventually international markets were reviewed and special reference was made to the issues below, including: o Studying the conditions of the legal access to resources and hunting permits and related needs to adapt/upgrade legislation and regulations; o Monitoring and tracking of products along the trade lines to identify and correct malpractices; o The importance of adequate statistics on the business and the need to find realistic solutions to the continued production of reliable information and data; o Identifying target species for more sustained supply; o Consideration of medium and long-term alternatives to primary killing such as domestication, rearing or game ranching as alternatives.

19. Health, Safety and Quality of the products are fundamental elements with due consideration to: o Health risks arising at local levels through sharing the broad ecosystem with target animals and through primary processing and use of products; o Feasibility of veterinary control at all levels; o Support to conservation of the produce: the refrigeration nexus; o Appropriate conditions for export and coping with trade barriers; o Definition and classification issues.

12

20. Growing market of bushmeat and other products from wildlife resources raise a number of concerns. They include, i) understanding markets and market channels; ii) Free, informal versus regulated sector; and iii) the need to consider definition and/or classification questions to face new challenges and needs.

21. Capturing bushmeat related social and economic opportunities o Valuing the employment potential of bushmeat; o Considering and ensuring equity and distribution of benefits along the lines of bushmeat trade; o Organizing key players to the extent possible. 4.3 Socio-cultural aspects in bushmeat production and trade

22. The subject was introduced by Conservation International-Ghana through a presentation on the use, significance and role of totems in social life and various value representations in Ghana and more generally in West Africa. Totems are understood here as the symbolic representation and partnership with animals whose values are shared by ethnic groups or individuals. The concerned groups generally have absolute taboo on any slaughtering or depredation of the selected animal species. This potent value can be used to further expand protection of the species or its habitat. From this apt

illustration plenary and working groups identified the following issues and recommendations for action:

23. Using socio-cultural values for conservation: A number of cultural values and practices make taboo of any destructive act regarding species or landmarks. These values can be used to enhance awareness and readiness for conservation of natural resources. The values related to totems are among

13

those that are used for wildlife conservation. The following should then be considered: o Developing further knowledge of totems through inventories and studies of local practices; o Strengthening local and traditional authorities and devolution of some prerogatives to them to buttress their ability for better husbandry of traditional values; o Flexible use of totems and related values for conservation causes: education, awareness-raising; symbols and fund raising, etc.

24. Recognising the modification and/or erosion of values and the need to revisit and regenerate them to the extent possible: Participants discussed the evolution of values and related distortions and the fact that all traditional values and practices are not bearers of good husbandry of natural resources. Activities should aim at keeping a watch on and monitoring situations in critical areas including: o Identification of values and practices which undermine

conservation and discourage their use; o Assessing evolution/erosion and pollution of values through immigration and intake of new populations; o Analysing the weakening processes of traditional authorities and their consequences on local resources management. 4.4 Education and Awareness-Raising

25. The theme was introduced by the Ghana Wildlife Society. It highlighted the need for an aggressive education programme. Discussions of the theme

narrowed down on the observations and recommendations below:

14

26. General education and awareness-raising are essential pillars in the conservation and development of wildlife resources. Target audience, key messages and the media used should be clearly defined. In the case of

bushmeat, participants agreed that targets are the major stakeholders including hunters and traders, restaurant owners, the youth, consumers, officers of National Parks, Forestry and Customs services, politicians and policy makers. Messages should address preoccupations; need to understand major issues, overall general education and culture about wildlife.

27. In principle all media are appropriate to serve education and awarenessraising on the issues of bushmeat. However those addressing the primary tier of the audience in rural areas should take into account affordable technologies and accessibility. Innovative approaches, tools and materials need to be devised and used so as to be able to reach all players in remote areas.

28. Education programmes should incorporate traditional values and practices conducive to better conservation of resources and in particular the wildlife and plant resources. Indeed the traditional, cultural and religious systems may have much to offer in reaching populations in rural and remote areas, in enriching messages targeting all the sections of the society.

29. In education and awareness-raising, it may be useful and efficient to mount and participate in campaigns and alliances in which sound and solid knowledge of the issues should be incorporated, sometimes to avoid generous and emotional assertions which do not provide right, realistic and effective solutions. This would help send the true and right messages on the bushmeat problems and opportunities within producer countries and conservation circles all over the world. 15

4.5

Identification and Elimnation of Threatened Species from Bushmeat

Hunting and Trade 30. Professor Chris Gordon of the University of Ghana, Legon, introduced the theme. He reviewed issues regarding threatened and endangered species and presented a number of specific cases. He gave very practical approaches to the assessment of situations and policies, strategies of action, which should be well targeted to address well-identified problems. He highlighted the need for a clear identification of objectives and well defined pathways to solutions envisaged.

31. The Conference abundantly discussed this important chapter and arrived at a number of observations and recommendations:

32. The knowledge of the Biology and systematics of species is essential to identify and monitor the level of threat affecting individual species. This knowledge is not adequate in many cases and the Conference has made a set of recommendations aiming at improving it in particular on what relates to species and their status and the establishment of continued systems of control and monitoring. Specifically the following are recommended: · Identification and monitoring of wildlife populations and characterisation of the conservation status of species; · Establishment and periodical review of data base and national lists of threatened and endangered species; · Improvement of the knowledge and expertise of the staff of agencies involved on species, their status and their products; · Involving and mobilizing research institutions and the world of learning in research programmes addressing above needs; 16

·

Appropriate management of protected areas and other wildlife resources including management plans implemented with effective practices.

33. The participants discussed the important role of updated legislation and regulation as well as a comprehensive policy for bushmeat sector. The lack of overall policy in the sector perpetrates low interest and low level of information on wildlife species. · Appropriate and in some cases urgent

activities should address the need for: Reviewing policy aspects of hunting and wildlife conservation and management, taking care of the need to protect threatened and endangered species; · Updating legislation and regulation to take into account the growing exploitation of bush meat, the necessary protective measures and considering dispositions taken to implement CITES; · Making specific legal and regulatory provisions which incorporate changes in status of species.

34. The Conference also discussed issues relating to overall documentation, information, sensitisation and awareness-raising. It noted the various needs linked to them and which managers and users should take into account. It stressed the need to take action on the following: · Training of officers of agencies involved so as to increase capacity in the recognition of endangered or threatened species and products derived from them; · Capacity building and sensitisation on laws and regulations for relevant staff, through focused training on and familiarization with, the specific laws and regulations protecting species and of the dispositions of CITES;

17

·

Appropriate dissemination of the information available to appropriate target populations in particular local communities and consumers at national level.

5. 5.1

CLOSING SESSION Adoption of Action Plan

35. At its final session the Conference reviewed and discussed its major conclusions and recommendations. It heard the presentation of a draft Action Plan prepared by the conference secretariat on the basis of the work of the Conference and in particular drawing from the reports of the various working groups, which discussed each theme further. incorporated major recommendations for action. The Action Plan

Participants largely

discussed the draft and adopted it in principle. The secretariat incorporated the additions and suggestions provided in these discussions in a final draft Action Plan attached to this report. 5.2 The Way Forward and Implementation of Actions

36. The Conference took a number of measures to finalise and follow up on its work, including the following: ·

Finalisation of the draft Action Plan by end March, and circulated for eventual last comments;

·

Setting up of a steering Group to follow-up on the recommendations and the implementation of the action plan. This would include the Ghanaian host Organisations, Ghana Wildlife Society, Conservation InternationalGhana, the Ghana Forestry Commission, FAO and WWF; 18

·

Establishment of an electronic Newsletter to disseminate information on follow-up and on events and activities of interest to the Group;

·

The participants to the Conference decided to form a network that would be opened to other persons to join. This network will exchange

information through the above electronic newsletter and any other opportunities. It will strive to follow up on their recommendations and the implementation of the Action Plan; · Adopting the final version of the Action plan for a 2005-2010 timeframe, with a mid term evaluation in 2010. · Opportunity of relevant meetings will be taken including the two-yearly sessions of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission Working Party on the Management of Wildlife and Protected Areas in 2006, 2008 and the following biennium. 5.3 Concluding Remarks

37. The Conference recognised that despite the great number of workshops and meetings that have previously discussed the issue of bush meat, it was very useful to hold this Conference. It reviewed issues discussed earlier but added a number of other considerations in an action-oriented spirit. It noted the strong support at the policy level through the strong presence of the Ghanaian Government at the opening session and their promise to assist in the implementation of the outcome of the Conference.

38. The presence of many West African countries, African and Non-African NGOs and of important regional and sub-regional Organisations, in particular the UEMOA and the Organization for Conservation of African Wildlife gave a flavour of appropriation of the bushmeat crisis within African institutions. This will probably lead to a stronger interest and political will, to 19

effectively move into action and open an era of concrete commitment to effectively tackle the now well documented bushmeat crisis in West Africa.

39. A number of Conference participants took the floor to thank the conveners and call for their continued support. There were specific calls to Wildlife Division of the Forestry Commission, Conservation International-Ghana, FAO and WWF to continue their support and promote the implementation of recommendations featured in the regional action plan. The Conference also recommended making good use of the readiness of the Ghanaian Government through the ministry of the Lands Forestry and Mines to support the Action Plan that would arise from its discussions.

40. The representatives of the sponsoring Organisations ­ FAO and WWF expressed satisfaction with the organisation of the Conference and indicated their readiness to continue and broaden the partnership. They expected that an effective team work, including efforts by interested countries to provide support and continuity in addressing the bushmeat crisis, could yield positive results as far as possible. OCAW and UEMOA reiterated their interest and commitment to continue their support in all elements within their capacity, in particular for UEMOA, the trade and regulation related issues. The

Conference requested the conveners and sponsors to rally further support from other players including UN Organizations (UNEP, UNDP, UNESCO, the CITES and CBD Secretariats, etc) and major NGOs (IUCN, Conseil International de la Chasse...) in the follow-up to this Conference and in particular the implementation of the Action Plan to tackle the Bushmeat Crisis in West Africa.

20

ANNEX I WEST AFRICAN BUSHMEAT CONFERENCE ­ WELCOME ADDRESS DELIVERED BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, FORESTRY COMMISSION, MR. A. S. K. BOACHIE-DAPAAH, ERATA HOTEL, FEBRUARY 22-23, 2005 Mr. Chairman, Honourable Ministers of State (MFLM, MOFA, MES), Representatives of FAO, WWF, CI, Participants from West African sub-region, Personnel from the media, Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is my singular honour to welcome all participants to this important West African Bushmeat Conference.

Mr. Chairman, indigenous people in West and Central Africa have used wild animals as part of their food items from time immemorial. Both rural and urban societies have come to accept bushmeat as a legitimate food item without questioning its source, species and sometimes the health aspects related to production and handling.

The market for bushmeat is very vibrant and ready to accept any amount that is produced. In countries like Ghana where other forms of meat are not readily available to rural dwellers, bushmeat may be the only animal protein source that is handy and affordable. Furthermore, with the migration of our friends and relatives to the developed countries in search of greener pastures, their taste for bushmeat has been carried along thus fostering a possible international bushmeat market. 21

Mr. Chairman, this conference is to discuss and come out with strategies to address one of the most daunting challenges facing the Forestry commission and the conservation fraternity ­ "Bushmeat consumption and its impact on wildlife conservation". It is the expectation of the Forestry Commission that the

conference deliberations would bring out appropriate recommendations and action plans to address some major challenges associated with bushmeat production, namely: a. b. c. d. e. f. unregulated harvesting of wild animals habitat destruction by hunters presence of endangered species in bushmeat production sustainability of bushmeat production itself understanding the full dynamics of the bushmeat trade un-coordinated multi-agency involvement in bushmeat trade (i.e. CEPS, Civil Aviation, Ghana Export Promotion Council, Police, DAs etc).

The Forestry Commission has limited number of staff on the ground, which hinders its ability to adequately regulate wild animal harvesting and the bushmeat trade. Effective collaboration with all stakeholders is, therefore, very essential. welcome. Any recommendations on how to achieve this would be most

Is the presence of endangered and fully protected species sometimes found in the bushmeat trade due to greed, ignorance or some other factors? The answer must be found to enable us tackle the issue effectively.

Mr. Chairman, the sustainability of bushmeat production itself is a matter of serious concern. From available records the resource base cannot satisfy the 22

current and future demands; a solution must therefore be found to increase production within the conservation measures that we put in place.

Mr. Chairman, on this note, I would like to warmly welcome all participants to this conference and wish you happy and fruitful deliberations.