Prospects for food, nutrition, agriculture and major commodity groups

World agriculture: towards 2030/2050
Interim report

Global Perspective Studies Unit Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, June 2006

World agriculture: towards 2030/2050
Interim report
Prospects for food, nutrition, agriculture and major commodity groups

Global Perspective Studies Unit Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, June 2006

This interim report presents an update, revision and extension to 2050 of Chapters 2 and 3 of the FAO Study World agriculture: towards 2015/2030, an FAO Perspective, published in 2003 (Bruinsma, 2003). It is mainly meant to disseminate interim results and to solicit comments, as an intermediate step in the preparation of a more complete report. Comments can be send to: Chief, Global Perspective Studies Unit Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome / Italy e-mail: AT2015@fao.org Further information on the work of the Unit can be found on the following website: http://www.fao.org/es/ESD/gstudies.htm

Acknowledgement: This report was prepared by Nikos Alexandratos in collaboration with Jelle Bruinsma, Gerold Bödeker, Josef Schmidhuber, Sumiter Broca, Prakash Shetty and Maria Grazia Ottaviani.

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. In the presentation of statistical material, countries are, where appropriate, aggregated in the following main economic groupings: "Developed countries" (including the developed market economies or `Industrial countries' and the Transition countries) and "Developing countries". The designation "developed" and "developing" economies is intended for statistical convenience and does not necessarily express a judgement about the stage of development reached by a particular country.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org © FAO 2006

ii

Contents

Chapter 1 Overview
  1.1 1.2 1.3

Why the new outlook to 2050 Mainfindings Conclusions

1 1 3 7 8 8 16 22 30 30 36 45 52 58 60 64 66 69

Chapter 2 Prospects for food and nutrition
   2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4

Thebroadpicture:historicaldevelopmentsandpresentsituation Theoutlookforfoodandnutritionto2015,2030and2050 Structuralchangesinthecommoditycompositionoffoodconsumption Concludingremarks

Chapter 3 Prospects for agriculture and major commodity groups
      3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 Aggregateagriculture:historicaltrendsandprospects Cereals Livestockcommodities Oilcrops,vegetableoilsandproducts Roots,tubersandplantains Sugar Concludingremarks

Appendix: Countriesandcommodities References

iii

List of Tables
Table2.1 Table2.2 Table2.3 Table2.4 Table2.5 Table2.6 Table2.7 Table2.8 Table3.1 Table3.2 Table3.3 Table3.4 Table3.5 Table3.6 Table3.7 Table3.8 Table3.9 Table3.10 Table3.11 Table3.12 Table3.13 Box2.1 Box2.2  Box2.3  Box3.1 Box3.2

Percapitafoodconsumption(kcal/person/day) Populationlivingincountrieswithgivenpercapitafoodconsumption Prevalenceofundernourishment,developingcountries Populationdataandprojections Incomegrowthassumptions Estimatesandprojectionsof$1poverty,WorldBank Changesinthecommoditycompositionoffoodconsumptionbymajorcountrygroups Changesinthecommoditycompositionoffoodconsumption,developingregions Growthratesofaggregatedemandandproduction Cerealbalances,worldandmajorcountrygroups Cerealbalances,developingregions Wheat,riceandcoarsegrains:Demandandproduction Wheat,riceandcoarsegrains:Nettradebalances Worldcerealstrade:Matchingnetbalancesofimportersandexporters Meat:Aggregateproductionanddemand Milkanddairyproducts Oilcrops,vegetableoilsandproducts,productionanddemand Sourcesofincreasesinworldproductionandconsumptionofoilcrops Nettradebalancesforoilseeds,oilsandproducts Majoroilcrops,worldproduction Sugar(rawsugarequivalent) Indianparadox:Nearstagnantaveragefoodconsumptioninmidstofrapideconomicgrowth Measuringtheprevalenceofundernourishment:thekeyroleoftheestimatesoffoodavailable fordirecthumanconsumption Countrieswithhighpopulationgrowthfor50yearsandlimitedagriculturalresources: Anuntenablecombination Measuringchangeinagriculturalaggregates UncertaintiesconcerningChina'scerealsconsumptionandstocks Percapitafoodconsumption,developingcountrieswithover100millionpopulationin2000. Evolutionofapparentfoodconsumption/capitainrelationtoincomepercapita:three countrytypologies Developingcountrieswithunder2200kcalin1999/01.Highestandlowest5-yearaverage kcalrecordedduring1961-2001 GrowthratesofpercapitaGDP,1980s,1990sand2001-15 Countrieswithundernourishedover40percentin1999/01 Netagriculturaltradebalance:Developingcountries,1961-2004 DevelopingcountriesexcludingBrazil,nettradebalancesbymajorcommoditygroups, 1984-2004 Developingcountries,netexportsofcoffee Worldcerealsproduction:Growthratesinsuccessive10-,20-,30-,and40-yearperiods China:Production,stocksandtwoviewsonconsumption;aggregateofwheat,maize, riceandbarley Percapitaconsumption(alluses)ofindividualcereals Coarsegrains:Foodandnon-fooduse Cereals:Importersandexporters Meat:Nettrade,majorimporter/exportercountrygroups Dairynettrade:DevelopingcountriesandEU15 Sugar:Nettradepositions,1970-2002 Industrialuseofsugar(Brazilandrestofworld)and(Brazilonly)alcoholproduction

8 10 14 16 17 19 25 26 33 39 40 41 44 44 47 50 53 54 55 56 62 11 14 17 31 38 9 9 13 18 22 32 34 35 37 38 42 42 45 48 49 60 61

List of Boxes

List of Figures
Figure2.1 Figure2.2  Figure2.3  Figure2.4 Figure2.5 Figure3.1 Figure3.2  Figure3.3 Figure3.4 Figure3.5  Figure3.6 Figure3.7 Figure3.8 Figure3.9 Figure3.10 Figure3.11 Figure3.12

iv

CHAPTER

Overview

1

1.1 Why the new outlook to 2050
Thisisanupdatedversion,withextensionofprojections to2050,oftwoofthekeychapters(Chapters2and3)of thestudyWorld Agriculture: Towards 2015/30completed in 2002 and published in 2003 (Bruinsma, 2003). Chapter 2 presents prospective developments in food demand and consumption and possible implications for nutrition and undernourishment. Chapter 3 deals with production,consumptionandtrade,intermsofthemain commoditysectorsandaggregateagriculture. This updating and extension is undertaken for a number of reasons, in addition to the need to take on board more recent data and historical ones that have beenrevised. The first has to do with demography. Future world population may be lower than the projections available atthetimeoftheearlierstudyindicated.Forthisreason, food requirements in the future may be lower than projected in the earlier study. In addition, longer-term projections suggest that the end of world population growthmaybewithinsightbythemiddleofthiscentury, as world population may peak at 9.2 billion around the year 20751. In practice, much of the increase between the 6.1 billion of 2000 and the peak will have occurred by2050whenworldpopulationmayreach8.9billion.It

followsthatoverthenext50yearsworldagriculturemay be transiting to a future when global population growth will no longer be the major driving force for further growth in world food demand and production. This has consequences for the rate at which further pressures on landandwaterresourcesandthewiderenvironmentwill bebuildingup. In this context, of particular interest is the question: will the eventual cessation of world population growth imply that the classical Malthusian concerns (the prospect that population growth will run ahead of the potential of agriculture to increase food production, and its corollary ­ food insecurity attributed predominantly toproductionconstraints),willnolongerberelevant?We attempttoestimatethemagnitudesinvolved,buttheshort answer is that these concerns will probably retain their fullrelevancewellbeyond2050,asexplainedinSection 1.2 below. The second reason is that the growing tightness of energy markets and associated rising oil prices may exert some important effects on food and agriculture that have to be taken into account. At the time of the earlier projections, the World Bank's price outlook for oil was that it could decline from the US$ 28/barrel of 2000 to US$ 21/barrel in 2015 in current dollars and even more in constant dollars of 19902. The outlook is

1 UN (2004), medium variant projection. 2 From US$ 29 to US$ 17, World Bank (2002): Tables A2.12-A2.13.

1

quitedifferentintheBank'slatestassessmentinviewof the recent sharp price rises ­ to a 2005 average of US$ 53.4/barrel. Thus, "the World Bank has adopted a technical assumption for the future path of oil prices based on a slow decline toward US$ 40 per barrel by 2010"3. High energy prices affect the food and agriculture sector in several ways. Besides the classical ones (via macroeconomic effects affecting all aspects of production, consumption and trade, and the more direct onesonproductionagricultureviatheeffectsonthecosts of the energy-intensive inputs like fertilizer and fuel) they can impact agriculture by creating new markets for thoseproductswhichcanbeusedasbiomassfeedstocks for the production of biofuels as substitutes for the petroleum-based fuels (petrol, diesel) in transport4. The caseofBrazilwhich,afteraperiodofshrinkageduring the1990swhenoilpriceswerelow,hasnowrevertedto usingsome50percentofitssugarcaneoutputtoproduce fuelethanol,bothfordomesticuseandexport,istelling. EthanolinBrazilisconsideredtobecompetitivevis-à-vis traditional fossil fuels at oil prices of US$ 35-40/barrel, although this figure will vary with the dollar exchange rate.Alsowellknownisthegrowinguseofmaizeinthe USA(inthiscasewithsubsidies)toproducefuelethanol. The renewable fuel provisions in the Energy PolicyAct of 2005 will further promote such use: by 2015, it may become more important than exports and could account forsome23percentofthecountry'smaizeoutput5,with importantimpactsonworldmarkets. Again with subsidies, the use of vegetable oils to produce biodiesel is expanding in certain EU countries, whiletheEUhasatargetofa5.75percentmarketshareof biofuelsinthepetrolanddieselmarketin2010.Thelatest projections of the European Commission foresee that 1.5milliontonnes6ofgrainandsome10milliontonnesof oilseedsmaybeusedtoproducebioenergyin2012.There is growing interest in the countries with abundant, or potentiallyso,productionpotentialofsuitablefeedstocks (like palm oil for biodiesel in Malaysia and Indonesia, cassavaandsugarcaneforethanolinThailand)forgoing the way of producing biofuels, both for domestic use andexport.

Althoughatpresentthepromotionofbiofuelsisoften usedinseveralindustrializedcountriesasameanstorelax the demand constraints facing agriculture, in the future it can have far-reaching effects on world agriculture as it can offer novel development opportunities for countries with significant agricultural resources, if barriers to trade of biofuels were eased or removed. Africa, with its significant sugar cane production potential,isoftencitedasaregionthatcouldprofitfrom Brazil's experience and technology7, though obstacles to realizing it (infrastructure, institutional, etc.) should not be underestimated. Eventually, the competitiveness of biofuels may be further enhanced if the savings of greenhouse gas emissions resulting from substituting ethanolforgasolineweretobemonetizedintheformof tradable carbon credits (Certified Emission Reductions of greenhouse gases) through the Clean Development MechanismundertheprovisionsoftheKyotoProtocol. Itistooearlytodealfullywiththisimportantsubject, giventheuncertaintiesaboutfutureoilprices.However, the issue of alternative energy sources is very alive and questions are increasingly asked about the potential of world agriculture to become a significant source of feedstocks and in particular the food security and environmental implications, e.g. further  deforestation fromtheeventualexpansionoflandunderthefeedstock crops (oil palm, soybeans, sugar cane, etc). Our conventionalprojectionsto2050areafirstandnecessary stepinaddressingthisissue:theycanhelpestablishhow much more food and related agricultural resources the world may need and in which countries ­ a valuable input into any evaluation of the potential for diverting agricultural resources to other uses and what this may implyforfoodsecurity.Theadvancementoftechnology inconvertinglignocellulosicbiomass(fromcropresidues, grasses and wood) to produce "cellulosic" ethanol may contribute to mitigating eventual pressures on the land withfoodcropproductionpotential. Athirdreasonisthatnearlytenyearsintotheperiod to 2015, the date by which the international community committed itself in the 1996 World Food Summit to halving hunger and undernutrition (halving the numbers undernourished), not much progress has been made

3 World Bank (2006):15. 4 They can also raise the competitiveness of agricultural products, e.g. cotton or natural rubber, that compete with oil-based synthetics whose cost rises with the price of oil. 5 USDA (2006). 6 Tonnes are metric tonnes throughout this paper; mt = million tonnes. 7 Feature story on the World Bank President's visit to Brazil, 20 December 2005 (http://web.worldbank.org/wbsite/external/news/ 0,,contentMDK:20764365~menuPK:34457~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitePK:4607,00.html).

.

2

Overview

and the prospects that the target will be attained are not encouraging. The significant progress made by some countriesisbeingcompensatedbyseveresetbackssuffered by other countries.The latter tend to be those with high population growth rates, hence failures to increase food consumption per capita are translated into increases of thenumbersundernourished.Forthoseamongthemwith pooragriculturalresourcesandhighdependenceonthem fortheirfoodsecurityandoveralldevelopment,thetask ofachievingintheforeseeablefuturethequantumjumps infoodconsumptionrequiredformeetingthetargetmay proveveryarduousindeed.Longertermprojectionscan help drive home the issue that even if the global target forreducingundernutritionwereachieved,therewillstill be several countries with unacceptably high incidence. The need to plan ahead interventions to cope with the persistence of high undernutrition will likely remain a liveissueformanyyearstocome.

In conclusion, zero population growth at the global level will not automatically translate into zero growth in demand and cessation of the building-up of pressures on resources and the wider environment. The need for production to keep growing in several countries will continue to condition their prospects for improved nutrition. In those among them that have limitedagriculturalpotential,theproblemofproductionconstrained food insecurity and significant incidence of undernourishment may persist, even in a world with stationary population and plentiful food supplies (or potential to increase production) at the global level. Nothing new here: this situation prevails at present and it will not go away simply because population stops growing at the global level. Projections to 2050 provide abasisforthinkingaboutthispossibleoutcome.

Food and nutrition
Thehistoricaltrendtowardsincreasedfoodconsumption per capita as a world average and particularly in the developing countries will likely continue, but at slower ratesthaninthepastasmoreandmorecountriesapproach medium-high levels. The average of the developing countries, that rose from 2110 kcal/person/day 30 years agotothepresent2650kcal,mayrisefurtherto2960kcal inthenext30yearsandonto3070kcalby2050.Bythe middle of the century the great bulk of their population (90 percent) may live in countries with over 2700 kcal, up from 51 percent at present and only 4 percent three decades ago. As in the past, the great improvements in China and a few other populous countries will continue tocarryasignificantweightinthesedevelopments.  However, not all countries may achieve food consumption levels consonant with requirements for good nutrition. This may be the case of some of the countries which start with very low consumption (under 2200 kcal/person/day in 1999/01), high rates of undernourishment, high population growth rates, poor prospects for rapid economic growth and often meagre agricultural resources. There are 32 countries in this category, with rates of undernourishment between 29 percent and 72 percent, an average of 42 percent, YemenandNigeramongthem.Theirpresentpopulation of 580 million is projected to grow to 1.39 billion by 2050, that of Yemen from 18 million to 84 million and

1.2 Main findings
Continued growth of world agriculture even after the end of world population growth
The main reason is that zero population growth at the globallevelwillbethenetresultofcontinuingincreases in some countries (e.g. by some 31 million annually in 2050 in Africa and South and Western Asia together) compensated by declines in others (e.g. by some 10 million annually in China, Japan and Europe together)8. Nearly all the further population increases will be occurringincountriesseveralofwhichevenin2050may still have inadequate food consumption levels, hence significant scope for further increases in demand. The pressures for further increases of food supplies in these countrieswillcontinue.Muchofitwillhavetobemetby growing local production or, as it happened in the past andisstillhappeningcurrently,itmaynotbefullymet­ a typical case of production-constrained food insecurity. The creation of slack in some countries with declining population (e.g. the transition economies, when growth ofaggregatedemandwillhavebeenreducedtoatrickle- .01percentp.a.inthefinaltwodecades2030-50)willnot necessarily be made available to meet the still growing demandincountrieswithrisingpopulation,e.g.demand growthat2.0percentp.a.insub-SaharanAfrica.

8 Other reasons include the likely continuation of changes in the structure of consumption towards more livestock products following growth in incomes and urbanization, particularly in the developing countries.

3

thatofNigerfrom11millionto53million.Theircurrent average food consumption of 2000 kcal/person/day is actually a little below that of 30 years ago. Despite the dismalhistoricalrecord,thepotentialexistsforseveralof thesecountriestomakegainsbyassigningprioritytothe developmentoflocalfoodproduction,asothercountries have done in the past. Under this fairly optimistic assumption, the average of the group may grow to 2450 kcal in the next 30 years, though this would still not be sufficient for good nutrition in several of them. Hence theconclusionthatreducingundernourishmentmaybea veryslowprocessinthesecountries. Notwithstanding the several countries with poor prospectsformakingsufficientprogress,thedeveloping countriesasawholewouldrecordsignificantreductions in the relative prevalence of undernourishment (percent of population affected). However, these will not be translated into commensurate declines in the numbers undernourishedbecauseofpopulationgrowth.Reduction in the absolute numbers is likely to be a slow process. Numbers could decline from the 810 million in 1999/01 to580millionin2015,to460millionin2030andtojust over290millionby2050.Thismeansthatthenumberof undernourished in developing countries, which stood at 823 million in 1990/92 (the 3-year average used as the basisfordefiningtheWorldFoodSummittarget),isnot likely to be halved by 2015. However, the proportion of the population undernourished could be halved by 2015 ­ from 20.3 percent in 1990/92 to 10.1 percent in 2015 andonto6.9in2030andto3.9by2050.Itisnotedthat the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDG) refer not to halving the numbers undernourished but rather to atargetto"halve,between1990and2015,theproportion of people who suffer from hunger". In this sense, the MDGgoalmaybeachieved. Despite this slow pace of progress in reducing the prevalenceofundernourishment,theprojectionsdoimply considerable overall improvement. In the developing countries the numbers well-fed (i.e. not classified as undernourishedaccordingtothecriteriausedhere)could increase from 3.9 billion in 1999/01 (83 percent of their population) to 5.2 billion in 2015 (90 percent of the population), to 6.2 billion (93 percent) in 2030 and to 7.2billion(96percent)by2050.Thatwouldbenomean achievement. Fewer countries than at present will have highincidenceofundernourishment,noneoftheminthe most populous class. The problem of undernourishment will tend to become smaller in terms of both absolute numbers affected and, even more, in relative terms (proportionofthepopulation),henceitwillbecomemore

tractable through policy interventions, both national andinternational. The progress in raising per capita food consumption to3000+kcal/person/dayinseveraldevelopingcountries is not always an unmixed blessing. The related diet transitions often imply changes towards energy-dense diets high in fat, particularly saturated fat, sugar and salt and low in unrefined carbohydrates. In combination with lifestyle changes, largely associated with rapid urbanization, such transitions, while beneficent in many countries with still inadequate diets, are often accompaniedbyacorrespondingincreaseindiet-related chronic Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs). In many countries undergoing this transition, obesity-related NCDs tend to appear when health problems related to undernutrition of significant parts of their populations arestillwidelyprevalent.Thetwoproblemsco-existand these countries are confronted with a "double burden of malnutrition"resultinginnovelchallengesandstrainsin theirhealthsystems.

Growth of agriculture and main commodity sectors
Aggregate agriculture: World agriculture (aggregate value of production, all food and non-food crop and livestock commodities) has been growing at rates of 2.1-2.3 percent p.a. in the last four decades, with much of the growth originating in the developing countries (3.4-3.8percentp.a.).Thehighgrowthratesofthelatter reflected, among other things, developments in some large countries - foremost among them China. Without China, the rest of the developing countries grew at 2.8-3.0percentp.a.Theyalsoreflectedtherisingshare ofhighvaluecommoditieslikelivestockproductsinthe totalvalueofproduction:intermsofquantities(whether measuredintonnageorcaloriecontent),thegrowthrates havebeenlower(seeBox3.1). The future may see some drastic decline in the growthofaggregateworldproduction,to1.5percentp.a. in the next three decades and on to 0.9 percent p.a. in the subsequent 20 years to 2050.The slowdown reflects the lower population growth and the gradual attainment of medium-high levels of per capita consumption in a growing number of countries. The latter factor restricts the scope for further growth in demand per capita in severalcountrieswhichhadveryhighgrowthinthepast, foremost among them China. In contrast, developing countries that experienced slow growth in the past (and asresultstillhavelowpercapitaconsumption-lessthan

4

Overview

2700 kcal/person/day) and potential for further growth, should not experience any slowdown but rather some acceleration. Increasingly, world agriculture will have to depend on non-food uses of commodities if growth rates are not to be sharply lower compared with the past. As noted, the biofuels sector may provide some scope,perhapsasignificantone,forrelaxingthedemand constraintsrepresentedbythedecliningratesofincrease inhumanconsumption. Cereals: All the major commodity sectors should participate in the deceleration of agricultural growth. Thecerealssector(sumofwheat,milledriceandcoarse grains) has already been in such downward trend for some time now, with the growth rate having fallen from 3.7percentp.a.insixties,to2.5percent,1.4percentand 1.1percentp.a.inthesubsequentthreedecadesto2001. Inthislatteryearworldproductionstoodatjustunder1.9 billiontonnes.Ithasgrownfurthersincethentosome2 billiontonnesin2005(preliminaryestimate).Weproject increasestosome3billiontonnesby2050andthiswould afford some increase in world per capita availability to around 340 kg (for all food and non-food uses), some 10percentoverpresentlevels.Itisnotedthatthecurrent level of per capita consumption (309 kg in 1999/01) is lower than what was achieved in the past mainly due to thesharpdeclinesinthetransitioneconomies(theformer socialist countries of the USSR and Eastern Europe) in the 1990s. Recovery in their consumption as well as continuedgrowthinthedevelopingcountriesshouldraise theworldaveragetolevelsithadattainedinthepast(in themid-80s).Agoodpartoftheincreaseinworldcereals consumption should be for animal feed (mostly coarse grains), with the bulk of such consumption increases originating in the developing countries to support the expansionoftheirlivestockproduction. The decline in the growth rate notwithstanding, the absoluteincreasesinvolvedshouldnotbeunderestimated: an increase of world production by another 1.1 billion tonnes annually will be required by 2050 over the 1.9 billion tonnes of 1999/01 (or 1 billion tonnes over the 2 billion of 2005).Achieving it should not be taken for granted, as land and water resources are now more stretchedthaninthepastandthepotentialforcontinued growthofyieldismorelimited. Not all countries will be able to increase cereals productionpari passuwiththeirconsumption.Therefore,

past trends of ever growing net cereal imports of the developing countries should continue and grow to some 300milliontonnes9by2050a2.7-foldincreaseoverthe 112milliontonnesof1999/01.Thisisamuchlowerrate ofincreasecomparedwiththepastwhentheyhadgrown more than 5-fold in 40 years. The novel element in the projectionsisthattransitioneconomiesaretransforming themselves from the large net importers of cereals they were up to the early 1990s (net imports of 43 million tonnes in 1993) to net exporters (18 million tonnes net exports annual average in 2002-04). Such net exports could increase further in the future and, therefore, the traditional cereal exporters (North America, Australia, the EU and the developing exporters) would not have to produce the full surplus needed to cover this growingdeficit. Livestock:Productionandconsumptionofmeatwillalso experienceagrowthdecelerationcomparedwiththehigh growth rates of the past, though the milk sector should accelerate, mainly because of growth in the developing countries demand. The growth of the meat sector had been decisively influenced upwards by the rapid growth of production and consumption in China, and to a smaller extent also Brazil.This upward influence on the world totals was counterbalanced in the 1990s by the drastic shrinkage of the livestock sector in the transition economies, leading to a growth rate in the decade of 2.1percentp.a.vs.3.1percentifthetransitioneconomies dataareexcludedfromtheworldtotals.Theseinfluences willnotbepresentwiththesameforceinthefuture-with theexceptionofcontinuedrapidgrowthofproductionin Brazil (mainly for export). The decline in the transition economieshasalreadybeenreversedwhilethegrowthof meat consumption in China, which grew from 9 kg per capitatomorethan50kginthelastthreedecades,cannot obviouslycontinueatthesamehighratesformuchlonger (see,however,Chapter3foruncertaintiesconcerningthe reliabilityofthelivestockdataofChina). Therestofthedevelopingcountriesstillhassignificant scopeforgrowth,giventhattheirannualpercapitameat consumptionisstillamodest16kg.Someofthisgrowth potential will materialize as effective demand and their percapitaconsumptioncoulddoubleby2050,i.e.faster thaninthepast.Itisunlikelythatothermajordeveloping countries will replicate the role played by China in the past in boosting the world meat sector. In particular,

9 To 380 million tonnes if we exclude from the developing countries the traditional exporters among them - Argentina, Thailand and Vietnam.

5

India'smeatconsumptiongrowthmaynotexertanything like the impact China had in the past, notwithstanding its huge population and good income growth prospects. The country may still have low levels of consumption (though significantly above the current 5 kg) for the foreseeablefuture. Vegetable oils:Thesectorhasbeeninrapidexpansion, fuelled by the growth of food consumption and imports ofthedevelopingcountries.Thegrowthofthenon-food uses (including in recent years for the production of biofuelsinsomecountries)wasalsoamajorfactorinthe buoyancy of the sector, as was the availability of ample expansionpotentialoflandsuitableforthemajoroilcrops - mainly soybeans in SouthAmerica and the oilpalm in South-EastAsia. Indeed, oilcrops have been responsible foragoodpartoftheincreasesintotalcultivatedlandin thedevelopingcountriesandtheworldasawhole.These trends are likely to continue as the food consumption levelsofthedevelopingcountriesarestillfairlylowand theincomeelasticityofdemandforvegetableoilsisstill high in most countries. In parallel, the growing interest inusingvegetableoilsintheproductionofbiofuelsmay provideasignificantboost.Inthisrespect,concernshave been expressed that the rapid expansion of land areas under oilcrops can have significant adverse impacts on the environment, mainly by favouring deforestation. This is just another example of the trade offs between different aspects of sustainability that often accompany development: benefits in terms of reduced emissions of greenhouse gases when biofuels substitute petroleumbased fuels in transport vs. the adverse impacts of landexpansion. Sugar: Thereareanumberoffeaturesthatcharacterize theevolutionofthesectoranddeterminefutureprospects: (a) rapidly rising food consumption in the developing countries (3.2 percent p.a. in the last 30 years); (b) the emergenceofseveralofthemasmajornetimporters(net imports of the deficit developing countries rose from 10 million tonnes to 29 million tonnes over the same period);(c)thegrowingdominanceofBrazilasthemajor low-cost producer and exporter (production rose from 7.5milliontonnesto32milliontonnes10andnetexports from1milliontonnesto11milliontonnesoverthesame period); (d) the growing use of sugar cane as feedstock fortheproductionofbiofuels(ethanol,mainlyinBrazil,

which now uses some 50 percent of cane production for thispurpose);and(e)theprospectthataftermanyyearsof heavyprotectionismofthesugarsectoranddecliningnet importsintheindustrialcountries(whichturnedintonet exportersfromthemid-80s,mainlyduetotheprotection ofthesectorintheEUandthesubstitutionofcorn-based sweeteners for sugar in the USA), the stage may be set forareversalofsuchtrendsandtheresumptionofgrowth intheirimports. Many developing countries, including China, have still low or very low sugar consumption per capita (28 countries have less than 10 kg p.a. and another 18 have 10-20 kg). Therefore, the potential exists for further growth in consumption, though it will not be as vigorousasinthepastwhen60developingcountrieshad less than 20 kg in 1969/71. Depending on the evolution of petroleum prices, sugar cane use as feedstock for the production of biofuels may keep growing in several producing countries (or those that have the resource potential to become major producers). Already several countries have plans to do so. It is possible that this developmentwouldcontributetokeepingthegrowthrate ofworldaggregatedemand(foralluses)andproduction fromdeclininginlinewiththedecelerationinthedemand forfooduses. Roots, Tubers and Plantains: These products play an important role in sustaining food consumption levels in themanycountriesthathaveahighdependenceonthem andlowfoodconsumptionlevelsoverall.Manyofthese countries are in sub-Saharan Africa. In some countries (e.g.Nigeria,Ghana,Benin,Malawi)gainsinproduction following the introduction of improved cultivars have been instrumental in raising the per capita food consumption levels. There is scope for other countries in similar conditions to replicate this experience. This prospect, together with the growing consumption of potatoes in many developing countries, should lead to a reversal of the trend for per capita food consumption of these products to decline ­ a trend that reflected largely the decline of food consumption of sweet potatoes in China. In addition, th