Putting Integrated Information in Context: Superimposing Conceptual Models with SPARCE
Abstract
A person working with diverse information sources--with 
possibly different formats and information models--may 
recognize and wish to express conceptual structures that 
are not explicitly present in those sources. Rather than 
replicate the portions of interest and recast them into a 
single, combined data source, we leave base information 
where it is and superimpose a conceptual model that is 
appropriate to the task at hand. This superimposed model 
can be distinct from the model(s) employed by the 
sources in the base layer.
An application that superimposes a new conceptual model 
over diverse sources, with varying capabilities, needs to 
accommodate the various types of information and differing
access protocols for the base information sources. 
The  Superimposed Pluggable Architecture for Contexts 
and Excerpts (SPARCE) defines a collection of architectural
abstractions, placed between superimposed and base 
applications, to demarcate and revisit information elements
inside base sources and provide access to content 
and context for elements inside these sources. SPARCE 
accommodates new base information types without altering
existing superimposed applications. In this paper, we 
briefly introduce several superimposed applications that 
we have built, and describe the conceptual model each 
superimposes. We then focus on the use of context in 
superimposed applications.  We describe how SPARCE 
supports context and excerpts.  We demonstrate how 
SPARCE facilitates building superimposed applications 
by describing its use in building our two, quite diverse 
applications.
Introduction
When a physician prepares for rounds in a hospital intensive
care unit, she often creates a quick synopsis of important
problems, with relevant lab tests or observations, 
for each patient, as shown in Figure 1.   The information

Copyright © 2004, Australian Computer Society, Inc.  This 
paper appeared at the 1st Asia-Pacific Conference on 
Conceptual Modelling (APCCM 2004), Dunedin, New Zealand.  
Conferences in Research and Practice in Information 
Technology, Vol. 31. Sven Hartmann and John Roddick, Eds. 
Reproduction for academic, not-for profit purposes permitted 
provided this text is included.

is largely copied from elsewhere, e.g., from the patient 
medical record, or the laboratory system.  Although the 
underlying data sources use various information 
structures, including dictated free text, tabular results and 
formatted reports, the physician may organize the 
selected information items into the simple cells or groups 
as shown in Figure 1 (without concern for the format or 
information model of the base sources).  Each row 
contains information about a single patient, with the four 
columns containing patient identifying information, (a 
subset of) the patient's current problems, (a subset of) 
recent lab results or other reports, and notes (including a 
"To Do" list for the patient). While the information 
elements selected for this synopsis will generally suffice 
for the task at hand (patient rounds), the physician may 
need to view an element (such as a problem or a lab 
result) in the original source [Gorman 2000, Ash 2001]. 
However, this paper artefact obviously provides no means 
of automatically returning to the original context of an 
information element.
In an ICU, we have observed a clinician actively working 
with a potentially diverse set of underlying information 
sources as she prepares to visit a patient, selecting bits of 
information from the various information sources, organizing
them to suit the current purpose, possibly 
elaborating them with highlighting or annotation, or mixing
them with new additional information, including new 
relationships among bits of information [Gorman 2000].
In our work [Delcambre 2001], we have put forth the 
notion of superimposed information for use in such scenarios
.  The superimposed layer contains marks, which 
are encapsulated addresses, to the information elements 
of interest in the base layer.  More than that, the superimposed
layer may contain additional information (beyond 
marks) and may be structured according to an appropriate 
conceptual model.  We are particularly interested in 
viewing and manipulating base information using tools 
appropriate for the information source (e.g., Microsoft 
Word for .doc files, Adobe Acrobat for .PDF files, and an 
electronic medical record system for patient data). We 
have built several superimposed applications that use 
conceptual models that are quite different from those of 
any of the underlying base information sources.
In past work we have implemented superimposed 
applications and models that rely solely on the ability of a 
base application to create a mark and to return to the 
marked region. In this paper, we explore the use of 
excerpts and context for marks in superimposed applica-71
tions.  An excerpt consists of the extracted content for a 
mark and the context contains additional descriptive information
(such as section heading and font 
characteristics) about the marked information.
In Section 2 we present two superimposed applications 
that superimpose a new conceptual model over the base 
information (which is largely text documents), and makes 
use of excerpt and mark capabilities. In Section 3 we 
describe the notion of excerpts and contexts in more 
detail and provide the rationale for using middleware to 
access them. The main contribution of this paper is our 
architecture for building superimposed applications called 
the  Superimposed Pluggable Architecture for Contexts 
and Excerpts (SPARCE), presented in Section 4.  This 
architecture makes it easy for a developer to build 
superimposed applications, including those that 
superimpose a conceptual model that is different from 
any of the base conceptual models.  The paper concludes  
with a discussion of how to structure and access context, 
a summary of related work, and conclusions and plans for 
future work, in Sections 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
Sample Applications
We present two superimposed applications built using 
SPARCE to demonstrate the ability to superimpose 
different conceptual models, over the same corpus of base 
information. These applications are designed for use in 
the Appeals Decision Process in the Forest Services of 
the US Department of Agriculture (USFS).
USFS routinely makes decisions to solve (or prevent) 
problems concerning forests. The public may appeal any 
USFS decision after it is announced. The appeal process 
begins with a set period of time during which an appellant 
can send in an appeal letter that raises one or more issue 
with a USFS decision or the decision-making process. A 
USFS editor processes all appeal letters pertaining to a 
decision and prepares an appeal packet for a reviewing 
officer. An appeal packet contains all documents a 
reviewing officer might need to consult while formulating 
a recommended decision about the complete set of issues 
raised in the appeals. This set of documents is called the 
Records, Information, and Documentation (RID) section
of the appeal packet.  This section contains a RID letter 
that lists the issues raised and a summary response for 
each issue. An Editor synthesizes a RID letter using 
documents in the RID such as the Decision Notice, the 
Environmental Assessment, the Finding of No Significant 
Impact (FONSI), and specialists' reports. In the RID 
letter, the editor presents information from other 
documents in a variety of forms such as excerpts, 
summaries, and commentaries. In addition, the editor 
documents the location and identity of the information 
sources referenced in the RID letter.
2.1  RIDPad
Composing a RID letter requires an editor to maintain a 
large working set of information. Since it is not unusual 
for an editor to be charged with preparing appeal packets 
for several decisions simultaneously, the editor may need 
to maintain several threads of organization. Though using 
documents in electronic form can be helpful, such use 
does not necessarily alleviate all problems. For example, 
the editor still needs to document the identity and location 
of information. In using electronic documents, the editor 
may have to cope with more than a dozen documents 
simultaneously.
RIDPad is a superimposed application for the USFS appeal
process. A USFS editor can use this application to 
collect and organize information needed to prepare a RID 
letter. A RIDPad instance is a collection of items and 
groups. An item is a superimposed information element 
associated with a mark. It has a name and a description. 
The name is user-defined and the description is the text 
excerpt from the associated mark. A group is a convenient
collection of items and other groups.
Figure 2 shows a RIDPad instance with information concerning
the "Road 18 Caves" decision (made in the 
Pacific Northwest Region of USFS). The instance shown 
has eight items (labeled Summary, Details, Comparison 
of Issues, Alternative A, Alternative B, Statement, 
Details, and FONSI) in four groups (labeled 
Environmental Assessment, Proposed Action, Other 
Alternatives, and Decision). The group labeled 
"Environmental Assessment" contains two other groups.
Figure 1:  (Hand-drawn) Information summary as prepared by a resident prior to conducting
rounds in a hospital intensive care unit (used with permission)
72
The information in the instance shown comes from three 
distinct base documents in two different base applications
. (The item labeled "Comparison of Issues" contains 
an MS Excel mark; all other items contain MS Word 
marks.) All items were created using base-layer support 
included in the current implementation of SPARCE.

Figure 2: A RIDPad Instance
RIDPad affords many operations on items and groups. A 
user can create new items and groups, and move items 
between groups. The user can also rename, resize, and 
change visual characteristics such as colour and font for 
items and groups. With the mark associated with an item, 
the user can navigate to the base layer if necessary, or 
browse the mark's context from within RIDPad via the 
Context Browser (as shown in Figure 3). Briefly, the 
Context Browser is a superimposed application window 
with information related to a mark. Figure 3 shows the 
Context Browser for the item labelled "FONSI". From 
the context elements listed on the left we see that this 
item has both content and presentation kinds of context 
elements. The browser displays the value of the selected 
context element to the right. The formatted text content is 
currently selected and displayed in the 
browser.

Figure 3: Context of a RIDPad Item
RIDPad superimposes a simple conceptual model over 
the selected base information with Group and Item as the 
only model constructors. A group contains a name, size,
location, and an ID. An item contains a name, 
description, size, location, and an ID. Items can occur 
within a Group and Groups can be nested within a Group.  
Figure 4 shows the model as a UML Class Diagram. The 
class RIDPadDoc represents the RIDPad instance which 
includes information that will likely be used to prepare 
the RIDPad document.

Figure 4: RIDPad Information Model (Simplified)
2.2  Schematics Browser
Appeal letters from different appellants in the USFS appeal
process tend to share features. They all contain 
appellant names and addresses, refer to a Decision 
Notice, and raise issues. Such similarities suggest a 
schema for appeal letters. A superimposed schematic is 
an E-R schema superimposed over base information 
[Bowers 2002]. The Schematics Browser (see Figure 5) is 
a superimposed application that demonstrates the use of 
superimposed schematics. It is meant to allow USFS 
personnel to consider a set of appeal decisions to look for 
important issues or trends.  The Schematics Browser 
might be used to support strategic planning activities.

Figure 5: Schematics Browser
Name
RIDPadDoc
ID
Name
Size
Location
Group

ID
Name
Description

Size
Location
Item
Belongs to

0..1
*
0..1
*
0..1

Contains

*
0..1
*
ID

Address
Mark
73
Figure 5 shows an instance of a USFS appeal decision 
schematic opened in the Schematics Browser. The upper 
left frame lists instances of the appeal decision schematic.  
The user can select one of these instances, and then use 
the large middle frame to browse through information 
associated with the decision.  The "1997 Ranch House 
Timber Sale" appeal decision is selected in Figure 5. This 
schematic allows the user to easily browse from a particular
issue to the appeal letter(s) where the issue was 
raised to the appellant who raised the issue, for example.
Marks into any number of base sources can be associated 
with entities, relationships, and attributes (but only one 
mark per entity and attribute). When an entity, 
relationship, or an attribute has an associated mark, a user 
can either visit the base layer or choose to view the 
excerpt from within the browser.
Figure 6 shows a simplified version of the information 
model the Schematics Browser uses in superimposing the 
E-R model over base information. The browser stores all 
superimposed information in a relational database.  This 
structure is a simple generic model that accommodates 
arbitrary Entity-Relationship style schematics.
Name
Schematic
ID
Name
Description
Entity
ID
Name
Value
Attribute
1
1..*
1
*
1
*
ID
Address
Mark
ID
Name
SchematicInst
ID
Address
Mark

Figure 6: Schematics Browser's Information Model
Figure 7 uses the Schematic Browser's meta model to 
show a partial superimposed schematic instance. It shows 
an instance of the "1997 Ranch House Timber Sale" appeal
decision schematic (also shown in Figure 5) and an 
Issue entity. It also shows the two attribute instances,
desc
and
number
, of the Issue entity. The
desc
attribute
is associated with a mark instance (ID 41).  In this 
simple implementation, the schematic instance data has 
its corresponding type information stored in the
Name

field.
2.3  Impact of Superimposed Information on
Conceptual Model(s)
Superimposed information introduces one significant 
modeling construct ­ the mark.  The mark spans between 
information at the superimposed layer and information in 
the various base layer sources.   The mark thus serves as a 
bridge between the conceptual model used in the superimposed
layer and the conceptual model used in a base 
information source.
Name = Appeal Decision
: Schematic
ID = 2
Name = 1997 Ranch House Timber Sale
: SchematicInst
ID = 1
Name = Issue
Description = Failed to meet Treaty and trust obligations
: Entity
ID = 1
Name = desc
Value = The Forest Service i...
: Attribute
ID = 2
Name = number
Value = 1
: Attribute
ID = 41
Address = Win1997.pdf|1|79|115
: Mark

Figure 7: Partial Superimposed Schematic Instance
In the RIDPad application, the superimposed model consists
of groups and items, where groups can be nested.  
This model is somewhat like a simplified XML model 
where groups are analogous to elements.  But one important
difference is that items contain marks, as opposed to 
PCDATA or other content.  In a similar manner, the 
Schematics Browser uses a superimposed model that is 
similar to an entity-relationship model, but marks may 
appear as attribute values.  In addition, each entity and 
relationship instance may be anchored, i.e., may be in 
one-to-one correspondence with a mark.
Any superimposed application, by definition, includes 
marks in the superimposed layer.  Thus, the conceptual 
model used in the superimposed layer must, necessarily, 
be extended to include marks in some manner.
The use of marks has no impact on the conceptual model 
of the base layer.  In fact, the use of marks, in general, 
requires no change to the base information or the base 
application.  Marks encapsulate an address to an information
element in the base source.  Thus, the use of 
marks requires an addressing scheme for each base source 
that participates in a superimposed application.  The addressing
scheme may exploit the data model of the base 
information source.  As an example, we could use XPath 
expressions to address information elements in an XML 
document.  It is also possible to use addressing schemes 
that are independent of the data model used in the base 
information source.  For example, a MS Word document 
could be converted to a PDF document and a user could 
create a mark using a bounding box where the interior of 
the box contains parts of individual characters. Regardless
of the addressing scheme used in a mark, the superimposed
layer is shielded from the details of the 
addressing scheme as well as the details of the conceptual 
model used in the base information source.
Excerpts and Contexts
Superimposed applications may want to incorporate contents
of base-layer elements in the superimposed layer. 
For example, an application might use the extracted base-layer
content as the label of a superimposed element. We 
call the contents of a base-layer element an excerpt. An 
excerpt can be of various types. For example it may be 
plain text, formatted text, or an image. An excerpt of one
74
type could also be transformed into other types. For example
, formatted text in a word processor could also be 
seen as plain text, or as a graphical image.
In addition to excerpts, applications may use other information
related to base-layer elements. For example, an 
application may group superimposed information by the 
section in which the base-layer elements reside. To do so, 
the application needs to retrieve the section heading (assuming
one exists) of each base-layer element. We call 
information concerning a base-layer element, retrieved 
from the base layer, its context. Presentation information 
such as font name and location information such as line 
number might be included in the context of a mark. The 
context of a base-layer element may contain more than 
one piece of information related to the base-layer element
. Each such piece of information is a context element 
(and context is a collection of context elements).

Figure 8: A Base-Layer Selection
Figure 8 shows a fragment of an HTML page as 
displayed by a web browser. The highlighted region of 
the fragment is the marked region. Table 1 shows an 
excerpt and a few context elements of this marked region. 
The column on the left lists names of context elements 
whereas the column on the right shows values of those 
context elements.
Name Value
Excerpt
Cheatgrass, Bromus tectorum, grows near many 
caves in this project area.
HTML
Cheatgrass,&nbsp; &lt;i&gt;Bromus tectorum &lt;/i&gt;, 
&nbsp; grows near many caves in this project 
area.
Font name 
(Inherited)
Times New Roman
Font size 
(Inherited)
12
Table 1: Sample Context Elements of an HTML Mark
Note that superimposed applications may access context 
information that a user might not explicitly access (or 
even be aware of). For example, consider the marked 
region shown in Figure 8. The HTML markup for this 
region (shown in Table 1) does not contain font 
information. If a superimposed application needs to 
display the mark's excerpt exactly as it is in the base 
layer, the application needs to examine the markup of the 
enclosing element, possibly traversing to the beginning of 
the document (because font characteristics can be 
inherited in HTML). The superimposed application may
also need to examine the configuration of the Web 
browser to retrieve some or all of the format 
specification.
Several kinds of context are possible for a mark. The 
following is a representative list of context kinds along 
with example context elements for each kind.  
·  Content: Text, graphics.
·  Presentation: Font name, color.
·  Placement: Line number, section.
·  Sub-structure: Rows, sentences.
·  Topology: Next sentence, next paragraph.
·  Container: Containing paragraph, document.
·  Application: Options, preferences.
Contexts can vary across base-layer types. For example, 
the context of a mark to a region in a graphics-format 
base layer might include background colour and foreground
colour, but not font name. However, the context 
of a mark to a selection in a web page might include all 
three elements. Contexts can also vary between marks of 
the same base-layer type. For example, an MS Word 
mark to text situated inside a table may have a "column 
heading" context element, but a mark to text not situated 
in a table does not include that context element. Lastly, 
the context of a mark itself may change with time. For 
example, the context of a mark to a figure inside a document
includes a "caption" context element only as long as 
a caption is attached to that figure.
Supporting excerpts and contexts for marks are a natural 
extension of our original notion of mark as an encapsulated
address. Because we use the same mechanism to 
support both contexts and excerpts, we will often use the 
term "context" broadly to refer to both kinds of information
about a base-layer element.
Accessing information inside diverse base-layer types 
requires superimposed applications to work with a variety 
of base information models, addressing mechanisms, and 
access protocols. In addition, base applications may have 
different capabilities. For example, base applications may 
vary in their support for navigation or querying, but users 
of superimposed applications may want to navigate 
through selected base information elements seamlessly 
and uniformly, e.g., using the Schematics Browser. We 
use  middleware to ease communication between the two 
layers and make up for deficiencies of base applications. 
And we want the middleware to allow independent evolution
of components in these layers.
By providing a uniform interface to base information and 
its context, the middleware reduces the complexity of 
superimposed applications and allows superimposed 
application developers to focus on the needs of their applications
such as the intricacies of the conceptual model 
they aim to superimpose.
SPARCE
The Superimposed Pluggable Architecture for Contexts 
and Excerpts (SPARCE) is a middleware for mark and 
context management [Murthy 2003]. It is designed to be 
extensible in terms of supporting new base-layer types
75
and contexts, without adversely affecting existing superimposed
applications.

Figure 9: SPARCE Reference Model
Figure 9 shows a reference model for SPARCE. The 
Mark Management module implements operations such 
as mark creation. It also maintains a repository of marks. 
The Context Management module is responsible for retrieving
context of base information. This module 
depends on the Mark Management module to locate information
inside base layers. The Clipboard module is 
modelled after the Clipboard object in operating systems 
such as Macintosh and MS Windows. The Superimposed 
Information Management module provides storage service
to superimposed applications. We have developed a 
generic representation for information, called the Uni-Level
Description [Bowers 2003], that can represent 
information (including superimposed information) structured
according to various data models or representation 
schemes, such as XML, RDF or database models, in a 
uniform way.  In this architecture, superimposed applications
can choose whether they use this module for 
storage, or another storage manager.
4.1  Key Abstractions
Table 2 provides a brief description of the classes and 
interfaces SPARCE uses for mark and context management
. SPARCE supports context for three classes of 
objects: marks, containers, and applications (using the 
classes Mark, Container, and Application respectively). A 
Container is an abstraction for a base document (or a 
portion of that document). An Application is an abstraction
for a base application. SPARCE also defines the 
interface Context-Aware Object to any base-layer element 
that supports context. The classes Mark, Container, and 
Application implement this interface. Superimposed 
applications use the class SPARCE Manager to create 
new marks and to retrieve existing marks. The SPARCE 
Manager maintains a repository of marks.
SPARCE treats context as a property set (a collection of 
name-value pairs). Context is the entire set of properties 
of a base-layer element and a context element is any one 
property. For example, the text excerpt and font name of 
a mark are context elements. Modelling context as a 
property set makes it possible to support a variety of 
contexts, both across and within base layers, without affecting
existing superimposed applications. This model 
also provides a uniform interface to context of any base-layer
element, for any base-layer type.
SPARCE uses the interface Context Agent to achieve its 
extensibility goal. A class that implements this interface 
takes a context-aware object and returns its context. That 
is, SPARCE does not access base-layer elements or their 
contexts directly. It uses external agents to do so on its 
behalf. However, SPARCE is responsible for associating 
a context-aware object with an appropriate context agent. 
The SPARCE Manager obtains the name of the class that 
will be the context agent for a mark from the description 
of the marks. The SPARCE Manager instantiates the 
context agent class by name whenever a superimposed 
application accesses the context of a context-aware object
. Typically, there is one implementation of the context 
agent interface per base-layer type. For example, a PDF 
Agent is an implementation of this interface for use with 
PDF documents. A context agent implementation determines
the constitution of context for its context-aware 
objects. SPARCE does not require an implementation to 
support particular context elements (nor does it prevent 
an implementation from defining any context element). 
However, we expect implementations to support kinds of 
context elements commonly expected (such as those 
listed in Section 3), and use meaningful names for context 
kinds and elements.
Class/Interface Description 
Mark
A mark to base-layer information.
Container
The base document (or a portion of it) 
in which a mark is made.
Application
The base application in which a mark is 
made.
Context-Aware 
Object (interface)
Interface to any base-layer element 
able to provide context. Classes Mark, 
Container, and Application implement 
this interface.
Context
Context of a context-aware object. It is 
a collection of context elements.
Context Element
A single piece of context information 
about a context-aware object.
Context Agent 
(interface)
Interface to any base-layer. An implementation
will retrieve context from a 
context-aware object.
SPARCE Manager
Creates, stores, and retrieves marks; 
associates context-aware objects with 
appropriate context agents.
Table 2: SPARCE Classes and Interfaces
4.2  Creating Marks
A user initiates mark creation after selecting some information
in a base application. The mark creation process 
consists of two steps: (1) generating the address of the 
selected base information, perhaps with other auxiliary 
information (collectively called mark fodder) and (2) 
creating a mark object in the mark repository. The address
contained in mark fodder uses the addressing 
mechanism appropriate for the base information source. 
For example, the address to information inside a PDF 
document contains the page number and the starting and 
ending word indexes; the address to a selection in a 
spreadsheet contains the row and column numbers for the 
first and last cell in the selection. (Other addressing 
schemes are possible for these base types.)
Superimposed
Application
Superimposed
Information
Management
Mark
Management
Context
Management
Clipboard
Base
Application
76
Figure 10 depicts two possible mark-creation scenarios as 
a UML Use Case Diagram. (The boxes in this figure 
denote system boundaries; the broken arrows denote 
object flows.) In both scenarios, a user starts mark 
creation in a base application and completes it in a 
superimposed application. In the first scenario, labelled 
"Copy", the user is able to use the normal copy operation, 
e.g., of a word processor, to create the mark fodder.  In 
the "Mark" use case, the user invokes a newly introduced 
function (such as the Mark menu item shown in Figure 
8). The superimposed application retrieves the mark 
fodder from the Clipboard, and passes it to the SPARCE 
Manager. The SPARCE Manager creates a mark object 
(from the fodder), assigns it a unique ID, stores it in the 
mark repository, and returns the new object to the 
superimposed application.
Copy
User
Mark
Base Application
Clipboard
Operating System
Complete
Superimposed
Application

Figure 10: Two Mark-creation Scenarios
The first scenario allows a user  to select base information 
in a preferred base application and copy it to the 
Clipboard without having to learn any new application, 
tool, or process to create marks. However, supporting this 
scenario requires cooperative base applications such as 
Microsoft Word and Excel.  Some base applications do 
not directly support Clipboard operations, but they 
provide mechanisms (such as plug-ins or add-ins) to 
extend their environments. A special mark creation tool 
or menu option can be inserted in to the user interface of 
such applications. The Mark use case in Figure 10 
demonstrates this scenario. Early versions of Adobe 
Acrobat and Netscape Navigator are examples of base 
applications in this category.
Figure 11 shows the internal representation of a mark. 
This mark corresponds to the selection in the HTML page 
shown in Figure 8. Superimposed applications do not 
have visibility of a mark's internal representation. They 
simply use the mark's interface to access its details.
4.3  Accessing Marks and Context
A superimposed application sends a mark ID to the 
SPARCE Manager to retrieve the corresponding mark 
object from the marks repository. The SPARCE Manager 
instantiates an implementation of the context agent interface
that is appropriate for the mark. The superimposed 
application can work with the mark object directly (for 
example, to navigate to the base layer) or can interact 
with the mark's context agent object (for example, to retrieve
mark context).
With a context object in hand, a superimposed application 
can find out what context elements are available. It can 
also retrieve values for context elements of interest. The 
superimposed application may use a context-element's
value in various ways. For example, it may use the text 
content of the mark as a label, or it may apply the font 
characteristics of the marked region to some 
superimposed information.
&lt;Mark ID=&quot;HTML2003Apr22065837YZXsmurthy&quot;&gt;
&lt;Agent&gt;HTMLAgents.IEAgent&lt;/Agent&gt;
&lt;Class&gt;HTMLMark&lt;/Class&gt;   
&lt;Address&gt;4398|4423&lt;/Address&gt; 
&lt;Description/&gt;Noxius Weeds in ea1.html 
&lt;/Description&gt;  
&lt;Excerpt&gt;Cheatgrass, Bromus tectorum, 
grows near many caves in this project 
area.&lt;/Excerpt&gt; 
&lt;Who&gt;smurthy&lt;/Who&gt;
&lt;Where&gt;YZX&lt;/Where&gt;  
&lt;When&gt;2003-04-22 06:58:37&lt;/When&gt;     
&lt;ContainerID&gt;cdocsea1html&lt;/ContainerID&gt;
&lt;/Mark&gt;

Figure 11: Internal Representation of a Mark
For ease of use, our design also allows the application to 
retrieve the value of a context element from the context-aware
object or even from the context-agent object. An 
application developer may choose the access path that is 
most convenient to his or her particular situation.
4.4  Implementation
We have implemented SPARCE for Microsoft-Windows 
operating systems using ActiveX technology [COM]. The 
current implementation includes support for the following 
base applications: MS Word, MS Excel, Adobe Acrobat 
(PDF files), and MS Windows Media Player (a variety of 
audio/video file types). The agents for these base applications
support the following kinds of context: content, 
presentation, containment, placement, sub-structure, 
topology, document, and application. (Some possible 
context elements of these kinds are listed in Section 3.)
We have implemented reusable view facilities such as the 
Context Browser to display the complete context of a 
context-aware object, and tabbed property pages to display
properties of context-aware objects. We have also 
implemented a few testing aids. For example, we have 
implemented a generic context agent with limited 
functionality (that can be used with any base-layer type) 
to test integration with new base-layer types. The Context 
Browser is also a good testing tool when suppo