A Taxonomy of Ambient Information Systems: Four Patterns of Design
ABSTRACT
Researchers  have  explored  the  design  of  ambient  information 
systems across  a wide range of physical and screen-based media. 
This work has yielded rich examples of design approaches to the 
problem of presenting information about a user's world in a way 
that is not distracting, but is aesthetically pleasing, and tangible to 
varying degrees. Despite these successes, accumulating theoretical 
and  craft  knowledge  has  been  stymied  by  the  lack  of  a  unified 
vocabulary  to  describe  these  systems  and  a  consequent  lack  of  a 
framework for understanding their design attributes. We argue that 
this  area  would  significantly  benefit  from  consensus  about  the 
design  space  of  ambient  information  systems  and  the  design 
attributes  that  define  and  distinguish  existing  approaches.  We 
present  a  definition  of  ambient  information  systems  and  a 
taxonomy  across  four  design  dimensions:  Information  Capacity, 
Notification  Level,  Representational  Fidelity,  and  Aesthetic 
Emphasis.  Our  analysis  has  uncovered  four  patterns  of  system 
design  and  points  to  unexplored  regions  of  the  design  space, 
which may motivate future work in the field.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Visual Interface Design, Tangible Interfaces


INTRODUCTION
From the very first formulation of Ubiquitous Computing, the
idea  of  a  calmer  and  more  environmentally  integrated  way  of 
displaying information has held intuitive appeal. Weiser called this 
"calm computing" [35] and described the area through an elegant 
example:  a  small,  tangible  representation  of  information  in  the 
world,  a  dangling  string  that  would  wiggle  based  on  network 
traffic.  When  information  can  be  conveyed  via  calm  changes  in 
the  environment,  users  are  more  able  to  focus  on  their  primary 
work  tasks  while  staying  aware  of  non-critical  information  that
affects them. Research in this sub-domain goes by various names 
including  "ambient  displays",  "peripheral  displays",  and 
"notification systems". The breadth of the systems in these broad  
categories  is quite  large. We  seek to disentangle  the terminology 
used to describe and categorize the wide array of systems in order 
to provide a common language for discussing research therein.
An  ambient  display  can  represent  many  types  of  data,  from
stock  prices,  to  weather  forecasts,  to  the  presence  or  absence  of 
colleagues. Maintaining awareness of co-located and distant work 
and social groups has been a long-term research thread in the area 
of  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW)  [5,  8].  The 
Tangible  Media  Group  at  the  MIT  Media  Lab,  directed  by  Ishii, 
also helped shape  the  field of ambient computation. They  coined 
the term "tangible media," citing inspiration from Weiser's vision 
[35] and  from Pederson  and Sokoler's AROMA  system [29] and 
developed  AmbientROOM  [17]  and  Ambient  Fixtures  [6,  18]. 
These systems use ambient displays to make people aware of both 
group  activity  and  other  information  such  as  network  traffic. 
Recent work in Ambient Intelligence has brought techniques from 
Artificial  Intelligence  to  ambient  systems,  spearheaded  by  the 
Disappearing  Computer  initiative  of  the  European  Union  [31]. 
This  research  thrust  seeks  to  imbue  ambient  systems  with 
contextual  knowledge  about  the  environment.  The  Roomware 
project  has  resulted  in  smart  architectural  spaces  that  support 
information conveyance (and group collaboration) [33].
Researchers have developed  systems  that use  a  multitude of
everyday  objects  to  display  information.  Examples  include  lights 
of various sorts [2, 17], sounds [25], shadows [8], artificial flowers 
[18],  mobiles  [24],  and  office-décor  water  fountains  [12,  16]. 
Further  research  has  sought  to  use  framed  photographs  [26]  and 
larger artistic pictures  to represent  information from  the world in 
an art-like manner [14, 30, 32]. There are  also peripheral display 
"modes"  of  a  user's  main  desktop,  including  screensavers  like 
What's Happening [36], information bars and menus such as those 
leveraged in Sideshow and Irwin [6,

22], and alternate panes, like
Apple's Dashboard [3]. As one can see, the design space is large.
All  these  systems  provide  a  rich  history  of  system  design
principles, approaches, and decisions, but accumulating theoretical 
and  craft  knowledge  has  been  stymied  by  the  lack  of  a  unified 
vocabulary to define and describe these systems. In this paper we 
propose  a  set  of  design  choices  that  developers  of  ambient 
information  systems  must  confront  to  build  successful  and 
compelling  systems.  First  we  set  out  a  definition  of  an  ambient 
information  system  that  is  a  synthesis  of  the  varied  definitions 
given  in  published  research.  We  hone  the  intuitive  set  of

Permission  to  make  digital or  hard  copies of  all  or  part of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
AVI '06, May 23-26, 2006, Venezia, Italy. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-353-0/06/0005. $5.00.
67


characteristics  that  distinguish  ambient  systems  from  other 
ubiquitous computing research systems. Next, we propose a set of 
design  dimensions  for  ambient  information  systems.  The  four 
dimensions  of  system  design  elucidate  the  main  decisions  one 
confronts when designing an effective ambient system. Finally, we 
explore  the  clusters  across  dimensions  to  uncover  four  coherent 
combinations of system designs, which work as design patterns for 
the  field.  The  results  also  identify  new  ways  of  combining  the 
design  attributes  to  explore  new  possibilities  for  ambient 
information systems.

AMBIENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Many different terms have been used to describe the types of
systems  we  discuss  in  this  paper.    Three  of  the  most  commonly 
used  terms  are  "ambient  display,"  "peripheral  display,"  and 
"notification  system."    But  how  does  one  differentiate  these 
terms?  Based on general understandings, we claim that:

all ambient displays are peripheral displays,

some  notification  systems  are  peripheral  displays 
(some notification systems  are not peripheral but are 
instead the object of focused work and attention)

The words of  researchers themselves  likely best explain  their
conceptions of the systems that they have built. Below, we present 
germane definitional quotes.
·

Ishii  et  al:  "[In  Ambient  Displays]  information  is  moved  off 
the  screen  into  the  physical  environment,  manifesting  itself  as 
subtle  changes  in  form,  movement,  sound,  color,  smell, 
temperature,  or  light.  Ambient  displays  are  well  suited  as  a 
means to keep users aware of people or general states of  large 
systems, like network traffic and weather." [17]
·

Matthews  et  al:  Peripheral  displays,  then,  are  displays  that 
show information that a person is aware of, but not focused on. 
[24]
·

Matthews  et  al:  "Ambient  displays  might  be  defined  as  those 
that  are  &quot;minimally  attended&quot;  (e.g.  just  salient  enough  for 
conscious  perception)  while  alerting  displays  are  &quot;maximally 
divided&quot; (e.g. slightly less salient than focal tasks). [24]
·

Stasko et al: Ambient displays typically communicate just one, 
or  perhaps  a  few  at  the  most,  pieces  of  information  and  the 
aesthetics  and  visual  appeal  of  the  display  is  often  paramount. 
Peripheral displays refer to systems that are out of a person's 
primary  focus  of  attention  and  may  communicate  one  or  more 
pieces of information." [32]
·

Mankoff  et  al:  "Ambient  displays  are  abstract  and  aesthetic 
peripheral  displays  portraying  non-critical  information  on  the 
periphery  of  a  user's  attention...  They  generally  support 
monitoring  of  non-critical  information."  "Ambient  displays 
have  the  ambitious  goal  of  presenting  information  without 
distracting or burdening the user." [20]
·

Rounding  and  Greenberg:  "The  [notification  collage]  is 
designed to present info[rmation] as lightweight and peripheral 
objects.  It does not demand the full attention of its users:  rather 
it can be attended to in passing, where people collaborate should 
the need or desire arise." [14]
·

McCrickard et al: "Often implemented as ubiquitous systems or 
within  a  small  portion  of  the  traditional  desktop,  notification 
systems  typically  deliver  information  of  interest  in  a  parallel, 
multitasking  approach,  extraneous  or  supplemental  to  a  user's 
attention priority." [21]
·

McCrickard  et  al:  Notification  systems  are  defined  as 
interfaces  that  are  typically  used  in  a  divided-attention, 
multitasking  situation,  attempting  to  deliver  current,  valued 
information  through  a  variety  of  platforms  and  modes  in  an 
efficient and effective manner [21].

The easiest way to explain the differences between systems is
to  look  at  the  design  motivations  that  informed  them.  Ambient 
displays are  those  that have pointed aesthetic goals  and present  a 
very  small number of  information elements. These systems  are  a 
proper subset of peripheral displays, which can appear either in the 
environment or on secondary or even primary computer displays. 
Notification  systems'  design  motivation  results  from  divided 
attention situations. As such, they can be equal to a primary work 
task in their attentional needs or be secondary. When notification 
systems  are  designed  to  be  secondary  to  a  primary  task,  the 
systems are appropriately defined as peripheral.

In this paper, we propose the term ambient information system
as  the  unit  of  study  and  define  the  behavioral  characteristics  of 
such as systems as follows:

·

Display information that is important but not critical.
·

Can move from the periphery to the focus of attention and 
back again.
·

Focus on the tangible; representations in the environment.
·

Provide  subtle  changes  to  reflect  updates  in  information 
(should not be distracting).
·

Are aesthetically pleasing and environmentally appropriate.
PREVIOUS TAXONOMIES
A  small  number  of  research  papers  that  describe  ambient
information  systems  also  include  extended  discussions  of  the 
design dimensions that motivate and contextualize their work. The 
authors provide dimensions to compare and contrast their systems 
to others in order to explain their design rationales.
Matthews  et  al  use  the  dimensions  notification  level,
transition,  and  abstraction  to  characterize  systems  in  this  space 
[24].  They  developed  the  Peripheral  Display  Toolkit  [23]  that 
helps people to develop ambient information displays more easily. 
Their concept of notification level means  the  relative  importance 
of  a  particular  data  stream.  Transitions  are  the  programmatic 
changes  to  the  display,  based  on  the  data.  Transitions  include 
fading,  scrolling, or animation effects. They define abstraction as 
the  mapping  that  takes  a  piece  of  numerical  or  ordinal  data  and 
turns it into something that the ambient display can use, something 
"more easily interpreted with less [user] attention."
Matthews  et  al  segregate  notification  level  into  five  levels:
Ignore,  Change  Blind,  Make  Aware,  Interrupt,  and  Demand 
Attention.  The  gradations  run  from  low,  a  system  ignoring  the 
change in the data, to high, a system demanding attention in a way 
that must also be explicitly dismissed. They propose categories of 
transition: interrupt, make aware, and change blind. Finally, they 
bifurcate abstraction into feature abstraction or degradation.
McCrickard et al introduce a different set of three dimensions
to  classify  notification  systems:  interruption,  reaction,  and 
comprehension  [21].  Interruption  is  defined  psychologically, 
similar to Matthews' notion, "as an event prompting transition and 
reallocation  of  attention  focus  from  a  [primary]  task  to  the 
notification." Reaction is defined as the rapid response to a given 
stimulus,  while  comprehension  is  the  long-term  notion  of 
remembering and sense-making.
68


McCrickard  et  al  then  plot  the  design  space  as  a  3-tuple  of
interaction, reaction, and comprehension (IRC). Each dimension is 
assigned a rating of high (1) or low (0), creating models like 0-1-0. 
They  label  these  models  with  meaningful  names  like    "Ambient 
Media,  0-0-1"  "Indicator,  0-1-0"  and  "Critical  Activity  Monitor, 
1-1-1." Eight models  serve as the  corners of  a design space. The 
resulting space, it should be noted, is larger than the design space 
of  ambient  information  systems  as  we  discuss  in  this  paper 
because it contains games, secondary displays, and critical activity 
monitors (which by our definition, are notification systems that are 
not also peripheral systems). McCrickard also classifies a set of 14 
extant systems in the design space on the three dimensions.
Both  of  these  taxonomies  deal  thoroughly  with  interruption
and detail some of the criteria for categorizing systems along this 
design dimension. We extend this analysis to other dimensions of 
data representation, flexibility,  and aesthetics.  This more holistic 
view points out design trade-offs between aesthetic emphasis and 
and  flexibility,  and  between  a  system's  information  display  style 
and display capacity.
Mankoff  et  al  proposed  a  set  of  heuristics  for  evaluating
ambient systems [20], which may also assist system builders. The 
heuristics attempt to give guidance for the formative evaluation of 
ambient systems, but they also can be viewed as high-level design 
guidelines,  such  as "The display  should be designed to give  `just 
enough'  information.  Too  much  information  cramps  the  display, 
and too little makes the display less useful."

DESIGN DIMENSIONS OF AMBIENT SYSTEMS
Designers  of  ambient  information  systems  make  decisions
about  how  much  information  to  display,  what  specific  aspects  to 
depict,  and  how  exactly  to  display  it,  transparently  or  abstractly, 
on a monitor or via a decorative sculpture. We present four design 
dimensions that capture the space of ambient information systems.  
The  dimensions  can  be  thought  of  as  design  choices  or  design 
questions that system builders must answer. The dimensions are:
·

information capacity
·

notification level
·

representational fidelity
·

aesthetic emphasis
We  rank  19  research  systems  and  three  consumer  ambient
information systems on each of the four axes. Each axis is divided 
into  5  bands,  from  low  to  high.  We  place  systems  into  groups 
based  on  information  from  published  conference  and  journal 
proceedings,  including  images  and  videos  of  systems  in  use  if 
available.  The  19  systems  we  chose  are  not  intended  to  be  an 
exhaustive list of all ambient information systems in the research 
literature. The 19 systems are representative of the breadth of the 
field  and  we  feel  that  attempting  an  exhaustive  list,  while 
amplifying completeness, would not significantly  alter the design 
dimensions.
Research systems that we analyzed include: Bus Mobile [24],
Dangling  String  [35],  Digital  Family  Portrait  [26],  InfoCanvas 
[33], Informative Art [30], Information Percolator [16], Irwin [22], 
Kandinsky [11], Kiumra [19], Lumitouch [5], Notification Collage 
[14], Scope [34], Sideshow [7], Table Fountain [12], Water Lamp 
[8],  and  What's  Happening  [36].  We  include  three  consumer
systems  that  fit  our  definition  of  ambient  information  systems, 
Ambient  Devices  Ambient  Orb  [2],  the  My  Yahoo!  web  portal 
[27] and Apple's Dashboard [3].

Figure  1  shows  the  four  dimensions  for  our  analysis,  and
each  of  the  19  systems  placed  into  a  group  along  each.  Thin 
colored lines trace the rankings of systems on each axis, similar to 
a  parallel  coordinates  plot.  Each  axis  has  values  that  range  from 
low  to  high  through  five  grades.  The  dimensions  of  notification 
level  and  representational  fidelity  have  more  descriptive  axis 
labels that will be explained in detail below.
4.1 Information Capacity
Ambient  information  systems  are  created  to  convey
information to users--information that typically is important  to a 
user's sense of wellbeing and general awareness, but not critical to 
their  work  or  personal  life.  Information  capacity  represents  the 
number  of  discrete  information  sources  that  a  system  can 
represent. Some  systems  are  capable of displaying a single piece 
of  data  such  as  the  current  price  of  a  stock  index.  Others  can 
display  the  value  of  20  (or  more)  different  information  elements 
on  one  screen.  We  rank  systems  from  "Low"  to  "High"  on  this 
design dimension.
Information elements are discrete information "nuggets". For
example, if a system monitors campus shuttle buses, each bus is a 
single  nugget.  If  the  system  can  represent  both  the  time  to  a 
location  and  a  direction  of  travel,  then  there  are  two  nuggets  of 
information for each bus that is monitored.
Information  capacity  makes  visible  the  design  trade-off
between space and time. A designer  can increase the information 
capacity of a display by increasing the space for information to be 
presented or by creating a display that transitions through a set of 
views  over  time.  If  a  system  is  designed  with  multiple  views  or 
uses scrolling, we rank it in the top tier, since the number of pieces 
of information that it could display is arbitrarily large.
A  further  caveat  about  information  capacity  is  necessary.
Some of the analyzed systems such as InfoCanvas, Sideshow, and 
Dashboard are user-configured and user-customizable. This means 
that these and other systems could potentially be made to display 
hundreds  of  elements.  Instead  of  attempting  to  calculate  a 
theoretical maximum throughput for the display in these cases, we 
use  the  system designer's naturalistic portrayal in  their published 
work  to  determine  the  "everyday  maximum."  Each  of  these 
systems is also in the top tier of information capacity.
The  design  dimension  of  information  capacity  has  a  barbell
distribution.  Five  of  the  19  systems  display  a  single  information 
element  and  are  ranked  "Low".  Conversely,  there  are  eight 
systems  that  display  from  ten  to  20  information  elements,  with 
some  systems  having  the  potential  to  display  more  and  these  are 
ranked  "High."  Only  a  few  systems  take  a  middle-ground 
approach, attempting to display a small number (from two to ten) 
of information elements.
The systems with low ratings on the attribute of information
conveyance  are  those  that  are  physical  displays.  Fountains, 
glowing  lights,  and  office-decoration  sculptures  afford  designers 
only so much flexibility for changes.
69



Figure 1: Parallel Coordinate plot of 19 existing ambient information systems across four design dimensions. Colored lines trace
each system's ranking along the design dimensions. Different colors are used to denote groups of systems which are similar as
explained more fully in Section 5.
Since the number of changes possible is small, the total number 
of  information  nuggets  that  can  be  represented  is 
correspondingly  small.  The  systems  with  high  information 
conveyance  are  those  that  are  presented  on  LCD  screens.  The 
systems that run at full screen (instead of as a small section of a 
focused main monitor) are ranked the highest.
4.2 Notification Level
Notification  level  is  the  degree  to  which  system  alerts  are
meant to interrupt a user. Notification level is a design attribute 
that is present in the two taxonomies of ambient and peripheral 
information  systems  we  reviewed  earlier.  Matthews  et  al 
subdivides notification level into five categories: ignore, change 
blind,  make  aware,  interrupt,  and  demand  attention.  For  our 
analysis  we  adopt  those  categories  but  replace  the  lowest  level 
of  system  alert  function,  ignore  (a  degenerate  case)  with  user 
poll. Systems such as Apple Dashboard and My Yahoo! do not 
always  appear  in  a  user's  environment  and  must  be  explicitly 
called to the fore.
Notification  level  can  be  thought  of  as  the  "ambience"  of
the systems in question. Some systems in the ambient space are 
quiet, and afford opportunistic glances to the information, while 
others  provide  more  strident  alerts  by  blinking,  flashing, 
beeping, or even opening dialog windows. Systems that provide 
unobtrusive change blind or make aware notifications to the user
are at the core of the ambient information system design space. 
Systems  that  interrupt  users  with  alarms  or  that  demand 
attention (by launching system dialog windows)  are not  subtle, 
so  are  further  from  the  core  concept  of  ambient  information 
systems, though, as Matthews et al argues, the smooth transition 
from  more  subtle  to  more  jarring  is  an  interesting  design 
direction for ambient system designers.
Notification  level  is  the  designer-intended  level  of  alert.
We  do  not  take  pains  to  distinguish  between  systems  that  are 
proven  to  be  "change  blind"  through  user  experimentation 
versus  those  that  merely  claim  change  blindness.  We  remain 
agnostic  here  about  the  techniques  used  for  ensuring  subtlety 
including  slow  animation,  scrolling,  and  fading  (these 
implementation details are at a lower level of design rationale). 
Once  the  decision  has  been  made  to  produce  a  system  with 
change blind transitions, the designer must then produce system 
transitions that meet the goal in the specifics of the system.  Our 
analysis  focuses  on  the  high  level  decision  on  the  part  of  the 
designer or design team.
The  distribution  of  systems  here  shows  a  good  fit  to  our
definition  of  ambient  information  systems.  It  is  apparent  that 
most  ambient  information  systems  adhere  to  the  central  notion 
of subtle visual or representational changes. The vast majority of 
ambient information systems fall into the change blind and make 
aware  transition  categories  (somewhat  low  and  medium).  Few 
systems  are  designed  to  interrupt  users  or  demand  attention.
70


Two that do however  are Scope and Sideshow. Note  that most 
systems  that  are  physical  displays  do  not  have  make-aware  or 
interruption-level alerts, much less demand attention alerts. The 
Bus  Mobile  does  enable  make-aware  transitions,  when,  for 
example, the last bus of the day approaches.
4.3 Representational Fidelity
Representational  fidelity  describes  a  system's  display
components  and  how  the  data  from  the  world  is  encoded  into 
patterns,  pictures,  words,  or  sounds.  Some  systems  reproduce 
the  information  being  monitored  in  a  very  direct  way,  while 
others are much more abstract in their representation. Matthews 
et al's taxonomy characterizes this design choice as abstraction, 
but  only  distinguishes  two  sub-types,  feature  degradation  and 
feature abstraction. We consider this design dimension to be rich 
and  complex,  so  we  will  try  to  tease  apart  the  many  different 
types of abstraction that appear in ambient information systems.
Representational  fidelity  can  be  described  in  the  language
of Semiotics, the branch of Philosophy that deals with signs, sign 
systems (such as natural languages) and their meanings. As such 
it  has  an  accepted  vocabulary  for  the  elements  of  a  symbolic 
representation.  Semiotics  can  help  analyze  the  way  that 
particular  signifiers--words,  pictures,  sounds,  and  other 
things--stand for the things they represent.
A semiotic sign is made up of three parts [28].  The object
is  called  the  signified;  it  is  the  physical  thing  or  idea  that  the 
sign stands for. The signifier is the representation of the object, 
which could be a word, a picture, or a a sound. The sense is the 
understanding that an observer gets from seeing or experiencing 
either the signified or its signifier. The signifier and the signified 
need  not  have  any  direct  relationship.  However,  both  the 
signified and the signifier create the same sense in the head of an 
observer; seeing a log aflame and seeing the word "fire" create 
the same meaning for a person.
Ambient  information  systems,  in  the  vocabulary  of
semiotics,  contain  one  or  more  signs.  Each  sign  has  its  object, 
information  in  the  world,  and  its  representation,  the  lights, 
pictures,  or  sounds  used  to  signify  that  information.  Many 
ambient  information  systems  contain  multiple  signs--each 
picture element standing for a different piece of information.
The  theory  of  Semiotics  also  helps  to  explain  the  notion
that  some  signs are transparent,  easily understood, while others 
are  metaphorical  and  still  others  are  abstract.  Signs  can  be 
symbolic, iconic, or indexical. Symbolic signs are those that are 
completely  arbitrary.  For  example  languages  are  arbitrary,  for 
the  word  "bachelor"  has  no  more  natural  relation  to  an 
unmarried  man  than  does  the  word  "foobar."  Symbolic  signs 
are those signs for which a  code, or  rule-following  convention, 
is required to understand. Language characters and numbers are 
all symbolic, as are abstract visual representations (the color red 
standing for "danger"). Iconic signs are those signs that have an 
intermediate  degree  of  transparency  to  the  signified  object. 
Iconic  signs  include  metaphors  as  well  as  doodles,  drawings, 
and  caricatures.  Icons  represent  their  objects  by  having  some 
similarity or resemblance to the object or to an essential aspects 
of  the  object.  Indexical  signs  are  those  that  are  directly 
connected  to  the  signified.  Examples  include  measuring 
instruments, maps, and photographs.
We  have  subdivided  the  three  main  categories  of
representational  fidelity  to  distinguish  between  ambient
information  systems.  We  propose  five  groups,  ranked  from 
indexical (high) to symbolic (low):


INDEXICAL: measuring instruments, maps, 
photographs


ICONIC: drawings, doodles, caricatures


ICONIC: Metaphors


SYMBOLIC: language symbols (letters and numbers)


SYMBOLIC: abstract symbols

Some  ambient  information  systems  have  displays  that  do
not afford representational flexibility, because of the constraints 
of  the  display.  For  example,  the  LiveWire  system  and  the 
Ambient  Orb  cannot  represent  language  symbols,  nor  can  they 
convey  indexical  forms  like  photographs.  However,  some 
flexibility is present. The systems might map information in an 
arbitrary  way,  remaining  fully  abstract  (representing  stock 
increases with the color green and losses with the color red), or 
it could map information more metaphorically, as would be the 
case  if  LiveWire  were  connected  to  information  from  a 
seismograph  or  ocean  tides.  As  one  can  see,  the  question 
concerning  representational  flexibility  requires  one  to  consider 
both the display and the information that is displayed.
The InfoCanvas is a very flexible system when considering
representational  fidelity.  The  InfoCanvas  uses  all  five  types  of 
representational  fidelity.  It  uses  abstract  symbols,  such  as  the 
color  red  standing  for  traffic  being  stopped,  metaphors,  like  a 
cartoon drawing of a cloud representing cloudy conditions, and 
also  photographs  and  words  of  news  stories,  which  are  fully 
indexical.  We show this ability for a system to straddle multiple 
representational  forms  by  duplicating  the  system  in  each 
category  and  noting  them  with  an  asterisk  (see  Figure  1). 
Systems which are designed to represent information at multiple 
levels  of  fidelity  are:  Apple's  Dashboard,  InfoCanvas, 
Informative  Art,  Notification  Collage,  Sideshow,  and  What's 
Happening. In these cases, we draw the parallel coordinate plot 
to the top-most tier of representational fidelity for each system.
The majority of systems however, only afford a single level
of representational fidelity. Many of the sculptural displays only 
afford symbolic, that is abstract, representations, while a smaller 
number afford text and photographic representations.
4.4 Aesthetic Emphasis
The final dimension concerns the relative importance of the
aesthetics of the display.  Some  system designers  seek to build 
displays and artifacts with sculptural or artistic conventions. For 
these  systems,  being  visually  pleasing  is  a  primary  objective.  
Others  however  place  relatively  little  focus  on  aesthetics  and 
typically  focus  more  on  information  communication  ability. 
Since aesthetic judgment is at its core a subjective phenomenon, 
we do not judge systems on their relative artistic merits.  Instead 
we  attempt  to  rank  ambient  information  systems  by  our 
perception of the importance given to aesthetics. There is often a 
tradeoff
made
between
communication
capacity,
representational  fidelity,  and  aesthetics,  a  relationship  that  we 
explore in this section.
Ambient  information  systems  are  intended  to  be  visible;
positioned  on  a  shelf,  hung  on  the  wall,  or  placed  as  a  small 
sculpture on a desk, the systems are seen not just by a user, but 
also by co-workers, colleagues, or family members. There are a
71


multitude of approaches when it comes to building aesthetically 
pleasing  devices.  One  approach  is  to  build  systems  that  mirror 
existing  artworks  by  a  particular  artist,  as  is  the  case  in 
Kandinsky and Informative Art. A second approach is to design 
a  display  that  is  representative  of  a  particular  style  or  art 
movement.  InfoCanvas,  through  its  use  of  themes,  allows  the 
display to take on characteristics of Asian water-color paintings, 
for example.
We  rank  systems  on  the  design  dimension  of  aesthetic
emphasis  as  low,  somewhat  low,  medium,  somewhat  high  and 
high. Note  again that we  are not  assessing the degree to which 
the systems are successful as art. We are providing a subjective 
measure  of  how  much  the  system  designers  focused  on 
aesthetics  and  how  much  they  emphasized  aesthetic 
considerations in their research and design decisions.
Most  systems  that  we  analyzed  had  medium  or  somewhat
high degrees of aesthetic emphasis (12 of 19). The decisions of 
designers to strive for visually pleasing displays is most clear in 
the cases where the display is intended to leverage the work of 
existing  artists.  The  physical  ambient  information  displays  are 
often  sculptural  in  their  design  decisions.  They  attempt  to  set 
themselves  off  from  the  rest  of  the  environment,  often  on 
pedestals or stands. Their capability to display much information 
(information capacity) is often limited by their design clarity and 
austerity. We consider this design trade-off in the next section.
Systems  that  we  ranked  at  the  middle  of  the  spectrum  of
aesthetic  emphasis  are  those  which  are  not  intended  by  their 
designers  to  be  art  worthy  of  contemplation  as  art  objects.  But 
they  are  explicitly  intended  to  be  viewed  as  calm  pleasing 
objects  and  displays.  Apple's  Dashboard  widgets  have  a  clean 
design  sense  about  them,  as  does  Kimura,  What's  Happening 
and the Information Percolator. The systems that are ranked low 
on aesthetic emphasis are Scope, Sideshow, Bus Mobile, Elvin, 
and My Yahoo!. These systems put information conveyance at a 
higher  priority  than  being